* 0208190
* Collaborative Research: Thermomechanical Models of Forearc Deformation at the Cascadia Subduction Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Sean Willett, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2006
* USD 83,600.00

There is much disagreement about the width of the actively deforming forearc
wedge at the Cascadia subduction zone. The narrow wedge interpretation maintains
that the continental shelf is underlain by a strong backstop that limits wedge
deformation to the ~50 km wide continental slope. This view is compatible with
the fact that the shelf is flat and appears to deform relatively slowly. The
strength of the shelf backstop is usually attributed to the more lithified
character of older accreted rocks within the back of the wedge. The alternative
interpretation is that actively deforming wedge is some 150 to 225 km wide, and
is delimited by a seaward-vergent deformation front at the Cascadia trench and a
landward-vergent deformation front at the east flank of the Oregon-Washington
Coast Ranges, the Olympics and the Vancouver Island Insular Range. The change in
topographic slope at the crest of this forearc high represents a reversal in
structural vergence in the wedge. In this model, the relatively strong
lithospheric mantle of the overriding plate represents a deep-seated flat-lying
backstop. The greater strength of the mantle backstop allows wedge deformation
to involve both accreted sedimentary rocks and the older crustal lid of the
subduction zone (e.g. Silitez and Crescent basalts). This model accounts for the
development of the forearc high along the entire length of the Cascadia margin
with remarkable uniformity irrespective of local crustal geology. Active
permanent uplift is recognized everywhere along the forearc high, with the
fastest rates (~0.8 km/m.y.) occurring in the Olympic Mountains. The PI's
propose a 2 year study that will use thermomechanical modeling to test the wide
wedge hypothesis at Cascadia. The timing is ideal for this work given recent
seismic and geodetic studies that provide detailed information about the
structure and short-term deformation of the forearc, and recent
thermochronologic, geomorphic, and geologic studies that provide local
information about long-term deformation and uplift across the Olympics and
Corvallis sectors of the margin. The proposed work will examine 3 issues where
the PI's hypothesis is most likely to fail: 1) How is the shelf able to remain
flat lying and relatively undeformed within an actively deformed wedge? In the
Olympics, the trench slope, shelf, and forearc high are all underlain by
accreted sedimentary rocks, so variations in wedge strength seems an unlikely
explanation. The PI's will test the idea that the shelf part of the wedge is
stabilized by deposition in shelf basins, which are 2 to 3 km thick. 2) What
causes the thick structural lid of the subduction zone to uplift and fold into
the forearc high observed today? Thermomechanical modeling will allow the PI's
to determine the role of ductile flow in controlling the growth of the forearc
high. They will also explore if uplift and folding of the lid can occur by
frontal accretion alone, or if underplating is required. 3) How is the pattern
of wedge deformation influenced by the distribution of rock strength? The
Cascadia margin includes soft accreted sediments, older lithified accreted
sediments, and a structural lid of older igneous rocks (e.g., Siletz, Crescent,
Wrangellia terranes). Using realistic constitutive relationships, the PI's will
determine how these units deform above and seaward of a much stronger mantle
backstop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These process-oriented studies will provide the
basis for building a full thermomechanical model to test if the long-term
evolution of a wide forearc wedge is consistent with the known tectonic
evolution of the Cascadia forearc. This will allow the PI's to test if the wedge
will retain a steady evolution in the face of large changes in sediment fluxes.
This research will contribute towards a more realistic understanding of the
thermal structure and long-term velocity field within the Cascadia forearc. This
information is essential for improving resolution of the width of the
seismogenic zone for the Cascadia subduction zone.&lt;br/&gt;