* 0208825
* Controlled Surfaces through Self-assembly and Patterning
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2005
* Christopher Ober, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 11/30/2005
* USD 366,000.00

The proposed studies are aimed at developing a fundamental understanding of the
way in which the self-assembly of fluoropolymers can be harnessed to form
periodic nm-length scale polymer structures, controlled by a variety of thermal
and optical methods. In the proposed research we will synthesize and study the
surface and bulk properties of semifluorinated (SF) LC-coil block copolymers in
which the SF group I a monodendron. The surface will be probed with a variety of
techniques, but in particular scanning force microscopy (SFM) and near edge
X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) measurements will be used to examine
surface topography and composition. A particular focus of the proposed research
derives from our recent observation that polymers with SF monodendron side
groups are capable of forming not only low energy surfaces, but may
spontaneously organize into arrays with periodic organization on the 20 nm
length scale that can span regions approaching millimeter dimensions. The SF
monodendrons will be produced with selected alkyl to fluorinated segment ratios,
arm number and end group in order to test the model predicting surface
curvature. A photoactive azobenzene group will also be used in mondendron
synthesis to both alter the packing structure and take advantage of its photo-
optical properties. By combining the known trans-cis isomerization behavior of
the azobenzene chromophore, we also plan to use photoprocessing to direct long-
range organization of these surface structures. In the production of small-scale
patterns needed for nanotechnology, there is no convenient process for building
structures or modifying surfaces in the 10 to 50 nm length regimes. Structures
that appear homogeneous over micron length scales can be extremely heterogeneous
at these smaller dimensions, thus making issues such as the control of surface
energy and composition extremely important. Fluoropolymers are ideal materials
for exploring many of these factors in surface and interface design. The low
surface energy of fluoropolymers has attracted interest in such diverse surface
control applications as the prevention of protein binding to biomedical
surfaces, as environmentally friendly fouling resistant marine coatings and for
self-cleaning architectural materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unusual
transparency of fluoropolymers at short optical wavelengths has lead to their
study as next generation photoresists for microelectronics manufacture while
their low dielectric constant and refractive index has made their use in
microelectronics and communications widespread. This program will harness self-
pattern surfaces. There exist immense possibilities for applications in
biotechnology, information science and advanced materials if patterning at these
length scales can be harnessed while simultaneously controlling surface
composition.&lt;br/&gt;