* 0208343
* BAC Library: Diversity of Teleost Fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Thomas Kocher, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/2004
* USD 150,000.00

0208343&lt;br/&gt;Kocher&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teleost fishes are dominant
components of aquatic ecosystems around the world, and are of tremendous
commercial importance as a major source of animal protein. Teleosts have
undergone a spectacular adaptive radiation over the last 200MY. The 25,000
species of teleost represent more than half of all living vertebrate taxa.
Fishes are important model systems across the spectrum of biological research,
from ecology, evolution and development to biomedicine.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The genomic tools developed to sequence the human genome are now
finding applications across many taxa. The genomes of three fish species (Danio,
Fugu and Tetraodon) are being completely sequenced. Genetic maps have been
constructed for a dozen other species, and physical maps are under construction
for a few of these. BAC &lt;br/&gt;libraries for additional species will further
research aimed at discovering the phylogenetic relationships among species, the
genetic basis for adaptive differences among taxa, and the patterns and
processes that regulate genome evolution.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to further stimulate comparative genomic studies of fishes by constructing
and distributing large-insert genomic DNA (BAC) libraries for two species
representing major teleost lineages. They are the blind cavefish (Astyanax
mexicanus), and the Lake Malawi zebra (Metriaclima zebra). These BAC libraries
will permanently &lt;br/&gt;archived and distributed through the UNH Hubbard
Center for Genome Studies, a new genome center focused on comparative and
environmental genomics. Each library will be distributed as clones in 384-well
plates and gridded filters suitable for hybridization screening. Extensive
quality control measures will ensure that each derived product (replica plate or
filter) can be traced back to the original clone.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
Hubbard Center is committed to the development of comparative genomic resources
for fishes. This proposal is the first step in a program to generate genomic and
cDNA libraries, genetic and physical maps, and comparative mapping databases for
fishes. The libraries proposed here will serve as a foundation for future
research in phylogenetics, genome evolution, development, evolution,
environmental biology and aquaculture.&lt;br/&gt;__&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;