* 0208595
* Kolmogorov Complexity and Its Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Ming Li, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 06/30/2006
* USD 201,430.00

Kolmogorov complexity is a modern theory of randomness and has many applications
in computer science and other fields. The investigator is enriching this theory
and its applications by doing research in two directions.

Analyzing the average-case complexity of an algorithm is at the heart of
practical algorithm analysis. It has been demonstrated over the past decade that
Kolmogorov complexity is a powerful tool to help analyzing the average-case
complexity and the lower bounds of algorithms. Examples are the average case
analysis of Shellsort and Heapsort. The PI plans to continue this work to
systematically develop the tool, the Incompressibility Method. This involves
comparative studies to understand why, how, and when the incompressibility
method works. In order to demonstrate, and to uncover, the power of this method,
this method will be used to solve other open questions. Samples of some open
questions include: improving Shellsort average-case lower bound analysis,
average height of balanced trees, and Stack sorting lower bound. The modern
information age and the post-genomic era raises a fundamental question: Given
two sequences (genomes or English documents), how much information do they
share? For example, given two genomes, can we measure their evolutionary
distance? The goal of this second part of the proposal is to understand this
fundamental question and develop tools. In the past, the PI and his coauthors
have partially answered this question by defining the concept of Information
Distance. Information Distance measures the absolute thermodynamic energy
required to convert one sequence to another. However, it does not measure
evolutionary distance because genomic evolution allows long segment
deletion/insertion, cheaply. A new theory suitable for such evolutionary
distance will be developed. To demonstrate the feasibility of this research,
some preliminary theory has been proposed and successfully applied to construct
whole genome and chain letter phylogenies when no other method applies. More
recently, this theory has also been applied to program plagiarism detection and
language classification.