* 0208963
* Path Creation with Digital Technologies: Networks of Innovation in Architectural Design and Construction
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2007
* Richard Boland, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2007
* USD 450,000.00

Increased computing power allows for three dimensional models to be represented
as digital images, which can be manipulated quite easily. Such advanced computer
imaging affects many professions, and is expected to result in fundamental
changes in the way those professions organize and conduct their work. This
research will study the way that Frank O. Gehry and his firm of architects uses
three-dimensional computer modeling in the design of buildings and the changes
that it creates in his architectural practice and in the construction companies
that participate with him in his building projects. It will study both the Frank
Gehry firm, Gehry Partners, as well as key contractors, consultants and
subcontractors involved in the construction of several of his most innovative
building designs. The objective is to understand how innovation in work
practices, technology use and organizational structures accompany the use of
advanced three-dimensional computer imaging in both the Gehry Partners' firm as
well as the contractors, consultants and subcontractors associated with his
projects. The objective is to determine whether or not his innovative designs
serve as a path creating event for his firm and companies working on his
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Path creating events are building projects that
require a firm to break from the standard routines established in its industry
and develop new approaches to doing its work. An hypothesis to be explored in
this research is that the designs by Gehry Partners require innovation in work
practices, technology use, and organization structures by those associated with
his building projects. Another hypothesis is that the path-creating behaviors
developed for work on his projects is carried over by the construction firms
into other subsequent projects that they work on, including those designed by
other architects. This is a different approach to the study of innovation, since
most prior studies have either followed the invention and development of a
particular technology over time, or have followed how a given technology is
adopted by a population of firms. Here, innovation is conceptualized as a
cascading wake that is initiated by path creating designs and is carried over in
multiple forms to other aspects of an industry (in this case the construction
industry). The benefit is a better understanding of how innovation takes place
across firms and the network of innovation that is spawned by the adoption of
advanced computer technologies in a profession such as
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;