* 0208536
* Innovative Programming Technology for Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Robert Constable, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 06/30/2005
* USD 300,000.00

Innovative Programming Technology for Embedded Systems

This is a proposal to provide innovative programming technology for designing
and implementing reliable distributed embedded systems. The proposal addresses a
critical generic problem and a major opportunity. The generic problem is that
the research community does not know how to scale logical methods that are known
to improve programs and small systems to the task of improving larger systems.
The opportunity is that new methods of factoring are possible for embedded
systems, and new kinds of specifications are important. This project approaches
the problem/opportunity by creating advanced logical methods and tools to
structure embedded systems in a new way and to draw on relevant formal knowledge
about them to accelerate both the design and coding process and to improve the
quality of the system code and its documentation.

The project will add extensive formal knowledge to a logical programming
environment (LPE) and use it to generate system components that are correct by
construction and to combine components based on semantic methods. The semantics
supports formal classes and aspect-oriented programming. One test case for the
new methods is a particular distributed embedded system called MediaNet -- a
system for processing various media (audio, video, text) over a distributed
computing network to adaptively respond to quality of service constraints.

The project will use mathematical knowledge about media streams and transition
systems to precisely formulate design requirements and component functionality.
Quality of service constraints will be incrementally added to the functional
specifications and used to automatically modify the proof and the extracted code
so that these requirements are met. This is a very high level example of formal
aspect-oriented programming and proof reuse.

The library of formal knowledge about the system will be organized as a
mathematical theory. That organization draws on concepts about stream
transformers, the distributed network of machines, quality of service properties
and communication services. An expressive logic will be used to state properties
of the system and keep track of logical dependencies among system components.

The project team has considerable experience working together building and
supporting distributed communications systems by specifying and verifying
communication protocols and optimizing them using formal methods.