* 0208983
* Collaborative Research: Formal Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Stuart Stubblebine, Stubblebine Research Labs, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 143,001.00

Growing pressure to collect information on the Internet has created a need for
more sophisticated ways to characterize privacy rights and balance them against
legitimate commercial and law enforcement objectives. A wide range of businesses
now rely on their ability to collect information about online customers as a
foundation of their added value in the market place. The use or potential use of
the Internet for purposes such as child pornography and planning of hate crimes
and terrorism have heighted interest in (and loosened regulations on) network
monitoring. Theft of intellectual property has led to the development of
numerous protection mechanisms; these often involve registrations and
involuntary monitoring of various kinds. In order to make security easier (and
explore a lucrative business model), a number of companies seek to act as third-
party caretakers of private information such as keys, authentication secrets,
and credit card numbers. Arrayed against these trends are many citizens incensed
by aggressive means used to collect information from them and a variety of
groups that champion privacy rights.

There have been many advances in technologies both to aid information gathering
and limit it. One important trend is toward more advanced systems for creating
and managing digital credentials and authorization databases. In current
practice credentials are sometimes `pushed' (like presenting a ticket to get
into a movie theater) sometimes `pulled' (like getting access to an airplane
seat with a `paperless' ticket) and sometimes both (like making a purchase at a
store with a credit card whose validity is confirmed online). These approaches
have Internet-based analogs, and technical advances have increased the range of
options considerably in recent years. For example, work on public key systems
has advanced techniques for delegation based on chains of `pushed' credentials
and increased the automation of credential collection. Another important trend
is toward more advanced systems for protecting privacy using anonymizing
techniques. Tools such as onion routers and anonymous web publication servers
provide some support but other techniques directly aid fine-grained mechanisms
for obtaining privileges without exposing information unnecessarily.

This work aims to develop formal support for characterizing privacy in the
context of these advances. Efforts to improve access control systems and
credential distribution have paid little attention to privacy mechanisms so far,
resulting in systems that are good at propagating credentials reliably, but not
tuned to do so within well-understood privacy constraints. This collaboration
will build on our work in credential distribution and anonymity to create an
integrated architecture and protocols to provide advanced access control within
the limitations of privacy constraints.