* 0208092
* Dynamical Systems Approach to Computer Simulation Accuracy and Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Timothy Sauer, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 72,146.00

Sauer&lt;br/&gt;0208092&lt;br/&gt; The investigator studies computational
aspects of nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems, emphasizing the role of
chaotic dynamics in&lt;br/&gt;the interpretation of long-time simulation
outcomes and data from&lt;br/&gt;complicated dynamical processes. The work on
simulation is an&lt;br/&gt;ongoing study of subtle biases occurring in
deterministic&lt;br/&gt;modeling that have macroscopic effects on outcomes. It
is an&lt;br/&gt;open question whether it is possible in principle for long-
term&lt;br/&gt;computer simulations of typical nonhyperbolic chaotic systems
to&lt;br/&gt;approximately match true system behavior. The second major
area&lt;br/&gt;is ongoing work on the interpretation of physical and
biological&lt;br/&gt;experiments that generate aperiodic data. There is a long
history&lt;br/&gt;of applying random modeling to time series and spike timing
data&lt;br/&gt;collected from laaboratory and natural processes.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigator syudies ways to use dynamical systems
techniques,&lt;br/&gt;including embedding theory and spike train reconstruction,
to&lt;br/&gt;extend the power of deterministic modeling for experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt; Computer simulation is a critical ingredient of
modern&lt;br/&gt;science. It is important to know whether solutions of
a&lt;br/&gt;mathematical model used for simulation can be expected to
be&lt;br/&gt;accurate qualitative and quantitative representations of
the&lt;br/&gt;natural phenomena being modeled, in the face of small
modeling&lt;br/&gt;errors, and whether computer solution of the model can
represent&lt;br/&gt;solutions of the model, in the face of small floating
point&lt;br/&gt;errors. This reseach builds a foundation for answering
questions&lt;br/&gt;like this for physically relevant models. In particular
the&lt;br/&gt;investigator is involved in isolating and quantifying
the&lt;br/&gt;limitations of deterministic representations, especially for
the&lt;br/&gt;purpose of long-term modeling. The second major focus of
the&lt;br/&gt;project is the interpretation of data collected from
experimental&lt;br/&gt;systems and nature when no first-principles mathematical
or&lt;br/&gt;computer model is available. If time traces of
physically&lt;br/&gt;relevant quantities can be measured from the process,
techniques&lt;br/&gt;exist to attempt to reconstruct the dynamical behavior of
the&lt;br/&gt;process, with potential to predict or control the
process.&lt;br/&gt;Complex deterministic time series are being identified
in&lt;br/&gt;physical, chemical, engineering and biological/medical
settings.&lt;br/&gt;The investigator has made previous progress on expanding
these&lt;br/&gt;conceptual foundations and developing related
computational&lt;br/&gt;implementations, and is working to increase their power
for the&lt;br/&gt;study of complex systems in scientific and engineering-
related&lt;br/&gt;contexts.&lt;br/&gt;