* 0208712
* Conservation of Total Synaptic Weights by Heterosynaptic Potentiation and Depression
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2007
* Denis Pare, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 06/30/2007
* USD 649,903.00

&lt;br/&gt;0208712&lt;br/&gt;Denis Pare &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
memory, that is, how the brain stores information, is a major challenge of
contemporary neuroscience. Indeed, the brain contains an astronomical number of
nerve cells that communicate by specialized structures called synapses. Most
neurons make synapses on hundreds to thousands of other neurons and
reciprocally. Much evidence suggests that memory depends on changes in the
strength or efficacy of individual synapses distributed across a large
population of synapses. It was shown that when a neuron contributes to excite
another nerve cell beyond a certain level, the synapse between these two cells
becomes more efficient (or stronger). However, when synapses with such
properties are introduced in computer models of neuronal networks, problems of
stability develop because the reinforcement of synapses increases the likelihood
that they will be further reinforced, leading the network into unchecked
excitation. Thus, the question is how does the brain prevent runaway increases
in the strength of synapses? This proposal tests the possibility that when
particular synapses are strengthened, other synapses to the same cells are
depressed. Thus, experience would modify the relative strength of synapses, but
the total strength of synapses to any given neuron would remain stable. The
proposed work will examine the intracellular mechanisms that allow the strength
of individual synapses to change while keeping the total impact of synapses to
target cells within normal bounds. This will be achieved by recording neurons in
brain slices kept alive in a dish. Understanding how the brain keeps the weight
of plastic synapses within normal bounds would have important implications for
artificial intelligence and robotics where adaptable computer programs
simulating neuronal networks constitute the most promising approach toward
progress&lt;br/&gt;