* 0208831
* Architecture for Efficient and Trusty Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Eric Feron, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 09/30/2005
* USD 200,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Feron, Eric&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0208831&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MIT
is developing ARETES, an 'Architecture for Efficient and Trusty Embedded
Systems', which is a unified framework to design the critical control and
communication infrastructure support for safe and efficient embedded systems.
ARETES has four components to it: development of a mathematical framework for
assessing safety and efficiency of the systems of interest, design of
computationally efficient algorithms, development of the necessary software
modules, and simulation case studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet the safety
and efficiency requirements, ARETES is adopting a control theoretic approach.
The idea is to use and innovate upon the existing theory via three-faceted
approach to account for the performance objective and resource constraints while
safeguarding against uncertainty in the environment, component level
imperfections, and faults in the inter-component communications. As the first
facet, the existing multiplier theory will be extended to guarantee the worst
case performance for resource constrained systems. To give some specific
examples, the best fit integral quadratic constraint (IQC) characterization will
be derived for the inherent uncertainties, and for the bandwidth saturation and
delay constraints imposed by the inter-component coordination. As the second
facet, a database of elementary blocks to approximate the hybrid models of such
systems will be compiled. Links between the multiplier theory and hybrid systems
analysis methods will be established via novel concepts such as a 'robust hybrid
automaton'. As the third key facet, a set of parameterized test problems will be
developed to characterize the impact of task scheduling and the above mentioned
imperfections on the online software complexity and the offline software
verification process. ARETES aims at deriving analytical performance bounds for
these canonical models and will develop a library of scalable software modules
to facilitate the simulation studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical
advances being pursued in ARETES include robust control theory since the best
fit IQC characterization facilitates the least conservative input-output
stability analysis. ARETES will also develop links between the input-output
hybrid system analysis approach and the multiplier theory approach. The
canonical models and the associated library of algorithms will be directly
useful in deriving analytical performance bounds for various scenarios of
interest. Besides its relevance to research organizations and industry, this
will have a significant technological value in academia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technology being developed in ARETES has immense utility
in providing the critical infrastructure support necessary in various
applications involving coordinated agents that are either fully or partially
autonomous. Examples of such applications include coordinated intrusion alert
systems, monitoring of hazardous terrains, air traffic control systems, slowdown
warning systems for intelligent vehicle highways, animation industry
applications employing teams of coordinated intelligent inanimate objects,
coordinated target tracking in scientific explorations, and educative projects
such as the complex trajectory planning of a team of mini-helicopters in a
laboratory setting, &lt;br/&gt;