* 0208900
* The Evolution of Social Ties in the Age of the Internet
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Robert Kraut, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2006
* USD 495,828.00

This research investigates the ways geographic mobility and communications,
including computer-mediated communication, influence the formation, maintenance,
and dissolution of personal and work relationships and the ways these factors
influence people's ability to extract social resources from them. Maintaining
personal relationships requires significant investment in time and money.
Physical proximity makes building personal relationships easier, while
geographic mobility puts relationships at risk. Large numbers of Americans are
now using the Internet, with electronic mail and other services for
interpersonal communication. The Internet can potentially reduce the constraints
that geography imposes on social relationships. It may also influence the
quality of relationships conducted online. This research examines whether use of
Internet communication changes the number and quality of social relationships
and the social support derived from them. By examining the content of
communication conducted over different modalities (visits, phone calls, email
and instant messaging), it will help identify the mechanisms through which
communication leads to social support. The research will simultaneously be of
interest to social scientists concerned with the basic processes underlying
social and work relationships and to more applied researchers and policy makers
interested in the impact of the Internet on social life.&lt;br/&gt;