* 0208709
* Analytic Information Theory, Combinatorics, and Algorithmics: The Precise Redundancy and Related Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Wojciech Szpankowski, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 07/31/2006
* USD 215,000.00

Information theory has enjoyed over fifty years of rigorous
research,&lt;br/&gt;development, and application.&lt;br/&gt;In spite of its
relative maturity,&lt;br/&gt;new challenges arise due to novel applications and
emerging theoretical&lt;br/&gt;developments (e.g., there is a resurgence of
interest in source&lt;br/&gt;coding in multimedia applications, molecular
biology, and security).&lt;br/&gt;In the 1997 Shannon Lecture Jacob
Ziv&lt;br/&gt;presented compelling arguments for ``backing off'' to a certain
extent&lt;br/&gt;from first-order asymptotic analysis of
information&lt;br/&gt;systems in order to predict the behavior of real systems
with&lt;br/&gt;finite (and often small) lengths (of sequences, files,
codes,&lt;br/&gt;databases, etc.) One way of overcoming these difficulties is
to&lt;br/&gt;increase accuracy of asymptotic analysis by replacing first-
order&lt;br/&gt;analyses (e.g., a leading term of the average code
length)&lt;br/&gt;by full asymptotic expansions and more&lt;br/&gt;accurate
analyses (e.g., large deviations, central limit laws).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research primarily focuses on an important aspect of&lt;br/&gt;source coding,
namely, the redundancy rate problem.&lt;br/&gt;Recent years have seen a
resurgence of interest in&lt;br/&gt;redundancy rates of lossless and lossy
coding.&lt;br/&gt;We describe analytic, combinatorial and algorithmic methods
that&lt;br/&gt;work hand in hand to solve this and other problems in information
theory.&lt;br/&gt;The redundancy rate problem for&lt;br/&gt;a class of sources
corresponds to determining the extent to which&lt;br/&gt;the actual code length
exceeds the optimal code length.&lt;br/&gt;This problem is an ideal
candidate&lt;br/&gt;for second-order asymptotics&lt;br/&gt;since one must look
beyond the leading term of the code length,&lt;br/&gt;which is known to be the
entropy of the source.&lt;br/&gt;Following Hadamard's precept we study these
problems using&lt;br/&gt;techniques of complex analysis such as generating
functions,&lt;br/&gt;Rice's formula, Mellin transform, Fourier
series,&lt;br/&gt;sequence distributed modulo 1, saddle point
methods,&lt;br/&gt;analytic poissonization and depoissonization,
and&lt;br/&gt;singularity analysis. We present new results for&lt;br/&gt;well-
studied problems (e.g., optimal codes for maximal
redundancy,&lt;br/&gt;memoryless and Markovian sources) as well as novel
formulations of old problems&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., redundancy of the class of mixing
sources, redundancy of&lt;br/&gt;arithmetic coding and the Lemepl-Ziv codes).
Furthermore,&lt;br/&gt;we apply the techniques developed as a part of this
study&lt;br/&gt;to related problems such as prediction (based on pattern
matching),&lt;br/&gt;random number generators, the average worst case
probability of&lt;br/&gt;undetected error in channel coding, pattern matching
approach to&lt;br/&gt;(exact and approximate) run length coding, and others.