* 0208769
* A Paradigm for Scalable Open Real-Time Computing Under Uncertainty
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Tarek Abdelzaher, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 03/31/2006
* USD 490,000.00

Abdelzaher &lt;br/&gt;CCR-0208769&lt;br/&gt;" A Paradigm for Scalable Open Real-
Time Computing Under Uncertainty"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key challenge for
embedded real-time computing is that of providing temporal performance
guarantees. Unfortunately, the wealth of knowledge developed to date in the area
of performance assurances in embedded&lt;br/&gt;systems has been confined to a
somewhat restrictive application domain where detailed knowledge is assumed of
both the available resource capacity in the system and the resource requirements
of individual tasks. These restrictions prevent many previous research results
from being applied to a wider scope of mainstream applications and services
where QoS guarantees are required, yet load and resource models are unavailable.
This research seeks a solution to the problem of providing performance
guarantees in the absence of detailed load and resource knowledge. The goal is
to establish that fine-grained guarantees are achievable with real-time system
performance even in the absence of fine-grained models of system load and
resource capacity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is approached through new
foundations for performance guarantees in embedded real-time systems operating
under uncertainty. The research centers on a new calculus aimed to counter
fundamental limitations on robustness and scalability in current approaches for
performance guarantees. There are two main elements: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) A
theory for robust schedulability analysis based on feasible regions: A feasible
region is a set of aggregate system states in which all timing constraints are
guaranteed to be met. This research is developing methods for deriving multi-
dimensional feasible regions in a continuous state space, where the dimensions
represent aggregate measurable quantities such as the overall utilization of
different system resources. Maintaining a system within feasible region
boundaries guarantees temporal correctness based on aggregates only. These
mechanisms will be more scalable and suitable for systems where detailed
information about the load and resources is unavailable.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Middleware components that enforce conformance of a
run-time system to its feasible region. The theoretical framework being
developed is incorporated into a middleware framework based on control theory,
which executes run-time performance monitoring and feedback control mechanisms
to ensure that system state converges to a feasible region. This condition is
enforced using admission control and QoS adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
two elements maintain guarantees on real-time behavior by linking applications
with the middleware, specifying desired QoS guarantees, and leveraging run-time
feasible region enforcement mechanisms to provide correct temporal behavior in
in open real-time systems. This increases the scope of embedded computing from
predominantly closed custom-designed systems to large distributed open systems
composed of commercial off-the-shelf components such as web servers, mainstream
operating systems, and standard protocols such as TCP/IP, where accurate load
and resource knowledge is unavailable. High impact is expected through the
ability to achieve predictable behavior in many important systems ranging from
large Web server farms and Internet routers to ubiquitous computing systems, and
smart spaces.&lt;br/&gt;