* 0208958
* Geometric Pattern Analysis and Mental Task Design for a Brain-Computer Interface
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2002,02/29/2012
* Charles Anderson, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2012
* USD 834,143.00

The goal of this project is to develop novel electroencephalogram (EEG)
classification methods that result in a practical, real-time brain-computer
interfaces (BCI) system. BCIs are hardware and software systems that sample EEG
signals from electrodes placed on the scalp and extract patterns from EEG that
indicate the mental activity being performed by the person. The long-term goal
of this line of research is a new mode of communication for victims of diseases
and injuries resulting in the loss of voluntary muscle control, such as
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), high-level spinal cord injuries or severe
cerebral palsy. The autonomic and intellectual functions of such subjects
continue to be active. This can result in a "locked-in" syndrome in which a
person is unable to communicate to the outside world. The interpretation of
information contained in EEG may lead to a new mode of communication with which
subjects can communicate with their care givers or directly control devices such
as televisions, wheel chairs, speech synthesizers and
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are the design
and testing of an EEG system for experimentation in real-time EEG pattern
analysis constructed of off-the-shelf components for under $5,000, development
of new techniques for a novel approach to studying the cognitive components of
mental tasks and how they vary in time and across subjects, demonstration that
real-time feedback to the subject will produce a biofeedback situation in which
the subject can learn to modify their EEG to increase classification accuracy,
proof by demonstration that accuracy and classification time will be sufficient
for two persons to interact over the net in a simple game controlled by two BCI
systems. The evaluation of the results of this project in light of these
objectives will be based on the accuracy of EEG classification, the speed with
which the classification can be performed, and the expense of the EEG system and
of its maintenance and extendibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most significant
impact of this project to the disabled community will be an easier to use,
affordable BCI system. The inclusion of a wide range of mental tasks will result
in a better understanding of which mental tasks are easiest for subjects to
consistently perform and for detection algorithms to reliably identify. Better
BCI systems will also be significant for other classes of users who can benefit
from augmented communication interfaces in applications that require extremely
fast commands. The significance of this project to the BCI research community is
the specification and testing of the inexpensive system for experimentation with
EEG signal analysis. The system based on off-the-shelf components and software
to be developed and made publicly available is expected to allow a number of
additional research groups to enter the BCI field. Also, this project's results
on the analysis of cognitive components in EEG measured during a wide range of
mental tasks will broaden the set of mental activities available to users of BCI
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;