* 0208219
* Collaborative Research:  Deformation Rates and Kinematics of Ancient and Active Displacement Transfer, Central Walker Lane, Western Great Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* John Oldow, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2006
* USD 180,611.00

Late Cenozoic deformation is broadly distributed across the North American
plate margin of the conterminous western United States and stretches from the
San Andreas fault system eastward across the Mojave Desert and into the Basin
and Range. The eastern California shear zone and Walker Lane of the western
Great Basin form an active belt of structures accommodating about 25% of the
relative motion between North America and the Pacific plate.&lt;br/&gt;From the
Mojave Desert, the displacement is carried north, east of the southern Sierra
Nevada, in a narrow zone of deformation bound on the west and east by the Owens
Valley and Furnace Creek fault systems. North from the latitude of the central
Sierra Nevada, the zone of deformation broadens to include the Walker Lane and
central Nevada seismic belt in the northwestern Great Basin. The Sierra Nevada
behaves as a coherent tectonic block with a northwest-directed motion of 10-14
mm/yr and forms the western boundary of the zone of distributed deformation in
the Great Basin. A complex pattern of active structures underlies west-central
Nevada where displacement is transferred from the eastern California shear zone
to the Walker Lane and the central Nevada seismic belt. Integrated geologic,
seismological, and GPS geodetic results indicate that the central Walker Lane
(CWL) serves as an displacement transfer system linking stepped northwest-
trending transcurrent faults. The displacement transfer system evolved over a
period of ~13 Ma and carried at least 50 km right-lateral motion from the
Furnace Creek fault system of eastern California to the right-lateral faults of
the CWL. Ancient displacement transfer was accompanied by exhumation of mid-
crustal rocks in the extensional stepover between transcurrent structures and
was accompanied by vertical axis rotation and tilt of both upper- and lower-
plate assemblages. The transfer system is still active and underlies a region 50
by 120 km immediately northwest of the ancient structures. Based on existing
work, the comparison of a geodetically determined velocity field for the CWL is
not easily reconciled with the current understanding of fault displacements in
the region and points out the difficulty in comparing geodetic and geologic
displacement fields. Furthermore, the continued activity of the displacement
transfer system since inception at ~13 Ma offers presents the opportunity to
assess ancient and active rates of deformation using geologic and geodetic
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;The PI's propose an integrated geodetic and geologic
investigation of the central Walker Lane to address two questions: (1) What is
the three-dimensional geometry and displacement history of extensional transfer
developed within a transcurrent fault system stepover?, and (2) Are displacement
rate and kinematic estimates comparable between geodetic, seismological, and
geologic investigation of ancient and active structures within the transfer
system? The central Walker Lane is ideally suited for this study for several
reasons: (1) the region is seismically active and well defined earthquake focal
mechanisms exist for the displacement transfer fault system, (2) the faults are
well exposed and have produced preliminary fault-slip estimates of deformation
kinematics, (3) a complex present-day displacement field with ~10 mm/yr of
differential slip is recorded by a GPS geodetic network, (4) the geologic
evolution of the displacement transfer system is preserved in the exhumation
history of well-exposed extensional turtleback structures, (5) synorogenic
volcanic and sedimentary rocks in the upper-plate assemblage of the extensional
complex record a history of progressive tilt associated with fault displacement,
(6) regionally extensive domains of differential tilt and vertical axis rotation
associated with displacement transfer are recognized in preliminary
paleomagnetic investigation, and (7) regional geologic compilation of the region
is mature and provides excellent control for displacement-history
reconstruction. These elements will allow characterization of the kinematics of
displacement transfer and offer the opportunity to directly compare deformation
kinematics and rates over geologic and geodetic time intervals. The PI's will
address the tasks listed above with an integrated study utilizing detailed
geologic mapping, structural analysis, GPS geodesy, paleomagnetic analysis,
geochronology, and thermobarometric investigation. The research team (Oldow,
Geissman, McClelland, McIntosh, and Selverstone) have the expertise to address
the various research topics and two of the researchers (Oldow and Geissman) have
substantial experience working in the area. By building on previous studies,
this integrated investigation will establish the areal limits of the
transtensional fault system, document variable geometric relations between major
and secondary fault systems, define the kinematic history of fault block motion,
and develop first-order estimates of recent and ancient displacement.
&lt;br/&gt;