* 0208007
* CRB: Subdivision versus Ranching:  Effects of Livestock Grazing and Exurban Development on the Biodiversity of a Southwestern Grassland/Savanna
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Carl Bock, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2006
* USD 293,979.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Across the interior American West,cattle ranches are
being converted to subdivisions,in order to&lt;br/&gt;accommodate exurban
population expansion.What are the biodiversity consequences of
this&lt;br/&gt;profound land use change?That is the core question addressed by
this proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;Conversion of rangelands to subdivisions may
negatively impact native biodiversity through&lt;br/&gt;direct habitat loss.It
has been argued that finding ways to keep ranchers from selling their
lands&lt;br/&gt;to developers is vital to conservation.On the other hand,most
western ranches include some&lt;br/&gt;public lands that cannot be sold,and even
on private lands the developments usually are
low&lt;br/&gt;density.Therefore,western exurban development often results in
relatively little direct habitat&lt;br/&gt;loss.If a landscape is converted by
scattered subdivisions,but simultaneously released from
the&lt;br/&gt;controlling influence of livestock grazing,will this result in net
gains or losses of regional&lt;br/&gt;biodiversity?So far,a volatile mixture of
prediction and passion has fueled this debate,but&lt;br/&gt;rarely has it been
informed by data.&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposed study is to quantify
components of native biodiversity in a&lt;br/&gt;grassland/savanna in the
Sonoita Valley of southeastern Arizona,where some cattle ranches
are&lt;br/&gt;being converted into subdivisions.This study will compare
flowering plant,grasshopper,&lt;br/&gt;butterfly,bird,and rodent populations in
landscapes that are being grazed,or subdivided,or&lt;br/&gt;both,or neither.It
also will quantify the demographics of three bird species known to
be&lt;br/&gt;particularly responsive to the effects of livestock grazing and/or
landscape conversion through&lt;br/&gt;subdivision.The data will be used to test
a series of hypotheses and predictions about the&lt;br/&gt;independent and
interactive effects of exurban development and livestock grazing on
1)species&lt;br/&gt;richness and evenness of native biotic
communities,2)invasions of exotic species into
those&lt;br/&gt;communities,3)population and community stability,and 4)avian
demographics.&lt;br/&gt;The centerpiece of this work will be the Appleton-
Whittell Research Sanctuary,a 3200 ha&lt;br/&gt;preserve that has been ungrazed
and otherwise undisturbed since 1968,and that has been the&lt;br/&gt;focus of
extensive fieldwork since the early 1970 's.Unlike many land use studies in the
West,&lt;br/&gt;this one will have a control,to the degree that 33 years
protection have permitted patterns of&lt;br/&gt;native biodiversity to express
themselves in the absence of either agriculture or
exurban&lt;br/&gt;development.&lt;br/&gt;Results of this study will address
basic and unanswered questions about the relative impacts of&lt;br/&gt;local
forces (livestock grazing)versus landscape conversion (subdivision)on
biodiversity in arid,&lt;br/&gt;non-forested western ecosystems,where 1)natural
landscape heterogeneity is high,2)&lt;br/&gt;development is distant from the
controlling influences of large urban centers,and
3)subdivision&lt;br/&gt;usually consists of scattered landscape intrusions
rather than fragmentation of the grassland into&lt;br/&gt;isolated patches.The
study will make societal contributions that are both timely and
urgent,&lt;br/&gt;given present rates of development in the rural West,and the
many uncertainties about its&lt;br/&gt;ecological consequences.