* 0208158
* Collaborative Research: Formation and Exhumation of UHP and HP Terranes in the Greenland Caledonides - Understanding Processes at the Base of Continental Collisions
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* William McClelland, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2006
* USD 162,310.00

Both the Greenland and Scandinavian Caledonides expose huge slabs of continental
crust that have experienced high-pressure (HP) metamorphism during the collision
between Laurentia and Baltica. An ultrahigh-pressure (UHP) terrane has been
recognized in western Norway for the past fifteen years, while the first
evidence for UHP metamorphism has just been found in Greenland a few months ago.
Taken together, these two coherent continental eclogite terranes comprise the
most extensive exposure of a deep, ancient mountain root on the planet - giving
us a view of mountain belt anatomy that is generally hidden at the base of
active orogens like the Himalayas. The ultimate goal of this project is to
understand how this thick or deep orogenic root formed, and how it was brought
back up to the earth's surface. Extensional collapse of overthickened crust,
whereby HP and UHP rocks are unroofed along listric normal faults, is an oft-
cited mechanism of exhumation; however, major extensional structures are not
exposed in the Geenland eclogite province. Gilotti's earlier NSF supported
research found that the peak pessure was attained approximately 410 to 370 Ma
ago; whereas, workers in the Fjord Region, to the south of the eclogite
province, are finding widespread evidence of synchronous melting, leucogranite
generation and extensional faulting that is 10-70 Ma older. Either the observed
extensional detachments in the south have nothing to do with eclogite
exhumation, or the PI's previous ages are recording cooling at the end of the
exhumation path instead of peak pressure conditions. The main objectives of the
proposed research are: 1) to identify the extent and timing of UHP metamorphism;
2) to test the robustness of our previous ages for HP metamorphism by comparing
zircon populations from the retrograde margins of eclogite pods to zircon
populations from the well-preserved centers; 3) to establish the pressure-
temperature-time history of this slab of eclogite-bearing crust as it returns to
the earth's surface; and 4) to determine the geometry and timing of
contractional and strike-slip fabrics that might be possible exhumation
structures. The PI's data set is essential for formulating an orogen-wide model
of eclogite formation and exhumation in this important continent-continent
collision. Although the necessary studies are underway in Norway, their results
cannot be put into context without the corresponding knowledge of HP and UHP
metamorphism in Greenland. The preliminary results also have the potential to
provide new insight on the behavior of U-Pb isotope systems during HP/UHP
metamorphism and subsequent decompression.