* 0208200
* GPS Measurements of Plate Interactions and Intra-Plate Deformation in the Western Mediterranean
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Robert Reilinger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2005
* USD 49,931.00

For the past three years, MIT, Cornell University, and their Moroccan partners
have developed and observed a network comprising 3 continuous (CGPS) and 22
survey-mode (SGPS) GPS sites in Morocco to determine more precisely Africa plate
motion, the interaction of the African and Eurasian plates in the western
Mediterranean, and deformation associated with present-day tectonics of the NW
part of the African plate (Morocco). This work is being facilitated by
complementary GPS studies being pursued by the PI's partners in Spain and
Portugal with whom they are collaborating within the framework of the AMIGO
Project (Atlantic and Mediterranean Interdisciplinary GPS Observations). Their
work in Morocco is providing new kinematic information on plate motions and
interactions that promise to constrain dynamic models for continental collision
processes as well as intra-plate deformation. In this proposal, they request
support to continue to monitor the Morocco GPS network for an additional 3
years, and to densify station coverage to determine better strain patterns in
the most actively deforming regions.

Preliminary GPS site velocities derived from three surveys over a 2 year period
(10/99 - 10/01) have been resolved to ~2 mm/yr (1 sigma, or 5 mm/yr 95%). These
uncertainties are on the order of the entire Africa-Eurasia convergence rate (~4
- 5 mm/yr in Morocco), and are not yet sufficient to provide reliable
constraints on Africa plate motion or intra- plate deformation. However, the
present velocity field does indicate overall WNW motion relative to Eurasia at
about 6 +or- 2 mm/yr (1 sigma) for sites located south of the Rif Mountains,
consistent within uncertainties with our new GPS estimates of Africa plate
motion derived from available GPS data for the entire African plate (~ 4.7 mm/yr
WNW). In contrast, sites located along the western Rif Mountains in NW Morocco
indicate significantly slower northward motion, and possibly southward motion,
suggesting present-day extension in the Alboran Sea. These two observations are
consistent with the continuing NW motion of the African plate, active extension
of the Alboran Sea (westernmost part of the Mediterranean between Morocco and
Spain), and left-lateral, strike slip deformation between the western and
eastern Rif. This overall, first-order pattern is consistent with deformation as
estimated from earthquakes and neotectonic field studies. The PI's request
continued support for 3 years to: 1) resolve better velocities on existing SGPS
sites with surveys in 2002, 2003, 2004, and 2005 (all field costs borne by the
Morocco side), and integrate the Morocco velocity field with GPS observations
from Iberia, 2) establish 10 new SGPS sites in the Rif Mountains to constrain
better apparent intra- late deformation (shortening and left lateral, strike-
slip), 3) develop and apply elastic block, and finite element models for active
deformation in the western Mediterranean, and, 4) further develop Moroccan in-
country capabilities in GPS-geodynamic applications. This last task will allow
the Moroccan partners (retaining the equipment provided by our joint project) to
carry out all future GPS observations on their own and with Moroccan support
beyond the requested grant period. We expect that future requests for support
from NSF for this work, if required, will be restricted to data integration,
modeling, and interpretation.