* 0208135
* CDMA/HMD (Hierarchical Multiuser Diversity) Access Schemes for Multimedia Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Junshan Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2006
* USD 279,926.00

This project aims at developing a suite of multiuser diversity driven algorithms
for packet scheduling and localized routing, and to obtain some overriding
principles in multimedia wireless systems. In particular, the issues of
hierarchical multiuser diversity (HMD) driven downlink and uplink access schemes
for multimedia traffic will be studied. The objective related to HMD driven
downlink access schemes is to devise efficient packet transmission schemes for
the downlink, exploiting multiuser diversity gain in a multiuser wireless
system. Specifically, the proposal addresses such an HMD scheme in which each
user can choose either a direct transmission mode or a relay transmission mode.
Treating delay tolerance as a network resource, the HMD-driven scheduling for
both direct trans-mission and relay transmission is then explored for both
single-cell setting and cellular networks. Also the localized routing algorithms
will be developed for both slowly fading channels and fast fading channels, due
to mobility. In the part of the project related to based on code division
multiple access (CDMA/HMD) uplink access schemes, the pro-ject will include
studies of access schemes taking into account explicitly the delay con-straints
of different multimedia traffic, with particular focus on the uplink. Since the
up-link is a multi-access channel, the multiuser diversity will be explored in
the context of CDMA. In particular, the number of simultaneous transmissions
will be optimized, based on the channel conditions across the users. The project
will also address the critical issues related to the buffering, jitter, fairness
and possible loss due to switching to a new relay. Finally, the trade-off
between HMD and CDMA will be studied, with the aim at develop-ing a hybrid
scheme that achieves multiuser diversity gain and guarantee the user's minimal
throughput requirement as the same time.