* 0208763
* Space-Time Coding for Optical MIMO Channels
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Stephen Wilson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 12/31/2005
* USD 288,526.00

Space-Time Coding for Optical MIMO ChannelsStephen G. Wilson and Maite Brandt-
PearceDept. of Electrical and Computer EngineeringUniversity of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA 22906Phone: (434) 924-6091,
(sgw,mb-p)@virginia.eduAbstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Free-space optical links
are an emerging technology for wideband access to networks because of the
tremendous bandwidth potential they offer. Outdoor atmospheric channels are
hampered by signal fading effects due to particulate scattering in a line-of-
sight path, clear-air turbulence, or merely static index-of-refraction
inhomogeneities. Similarly, indoor IR systems are faced with fading arising from
the intrinsic multipath environment. One powerful method of improving the
performance of wireless communication systems is through the use of transmit and
receive antennas, creating a so-called multiple-input/multiple-output (MIMO)
channel. MIMO channel models, provided by transmit and receive antenna arrays,
have attracted enormous attention for RF wireless systems in the past five
years, owing to the very large potential throughput in bits/second/Hertz and
increased protection against fading associated with single antenna designs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the design and performance
analysis of space-time codes that can be applied to MIMO channels for
application to the wireless optical communications environment. The research
focuses on several aspects of this problem: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;--development
of relevant MIMO models for outdoor line-of-sight optical channels, with
particular attention to modeling of source and detector physics; --examination
of the information-theoretic potential of this channel, particularly in the
context of growing array size, and the analysis of bounding techniques on error
probability to aid in the development of code design rules; --formulation and
evaluation of space-time coding approaches for the optical free-space regime
that are efficient in the channel capacity sense; &lt;br/&gt;--block-coded,
trellis-coded, and concatenated approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Also, the
application of space-time codes to the indoor wireless infrared channel and the
examination of their performance are addressed.&lt;br/&gt;