* 0208019
* RUI: Using an Elastic Dislocation Model to Test an Alternative Hypothesis Regarding the Cascadia Subduction Zone
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,10/31/2002
* David Verdonck, Keuka College
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 10/31/2002
* USD 15,950.00

Verdonck EAR-0208019

In most models of Cascadia subduction, lithology and heat flow models constrain
the downdip extent of coupling between the subducting and overriding plates.
Recent seismological studies suggest that some of the previous assumptions made
regarding lithology may be unjustified. A preliminary model suggests that active
surface deformation can be the result of deep coupling in addition to the
shallow region that is indicated by currently accepted models. An exploratory
model is being developed that tests the hypothesis that the Cascadia subduction
zone is locked deeper than currently thought. Traditional two dimensional
dislocation modeling is being employed as a first step, possibly followed by
more advanced models.

Three seismic hazards pose a threat to western Oregon and Washington state:
large megathrust earthquakes; moderate size earthquakes on crustal faults; and
large intraplate earthquakes within the subducted slab. All three of these
hazards may be influenced by the location and extent of coupling between the
subducting Juan de Fuca and overriding North America plates. Reducing the
uncertainty regarding the downdip limit of this locked region will allow for
better assessment of the potential for damaging earthquakes near the highly
populated urban areas of the Pacific Northwest.