* 0208929
* Light Spanners for Hard Metrical Optimization Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Michelangelo Grigni, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2004
* USD 125,712.00

Given a metric space, that is a finite set of points with&lt;br/&gt;distances
between them, there are several classical&lt;br/&gt;minimization problems that
are hard to solve exactly. A&lt;br/&gt;prime example is the traveling salesman
problem (TSP),&lt;br/&gt;where we want to find a cyclic tour visiting all
the&lt;br/&gt;points with minimum total distance. These problems
arise&lt;br/&gt;in a wide range of applications such as manufacturing
and&lt;br/&gt;communications network design. In the worst case it
is&lt;br/&gt;NP-hard to solve these problems even approximately,
that&lt;br/&gt;is with relative error better than some constant
threshold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent results show that these problems are
easier in&lt;br/&gt;metric spaces that often arise in practice. In
particular&lt;br/&gt;if the distances are geometric, or if they are given
by&lt;br/&gt;shortest paths in a simple graph (such as a planar
graph),&lt;br/&gt;then the TSP and similar problems have
approximation&lt;br/&gt;schemes. These schemes run in polynomial
or&lt;br/&gt;quasi-polynomial time, with the exponent depending on
the&lt;br/&gt;desired relative error. The main techniques
include&lt;br/&gt;separators, spanners, and dynamic programming.
In&lt;br/&gt;particular a spanner is a subgraph of a given graph,
whose&lt;br/&gt;shortest path metric is a close approximation of
the&lt;br/&gt;original. In various graph families we can find
spanners&lt;br/&gt;with a useful tradeoff between the total weight and
the&lt;br/&gt;relative error.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research continues the
development of these&lt;br/&gt;techniques, in particular seeking better
spanner&lt;br/&gt;constructions and possibly some useful lower bounds.
One&lt;br/&gt;goal of the project is some progress on two
unsolved&lt;br/&gt;variants: the geometric case in the presence
of&lt;br/&gt;obstacles, and the graphical case in the presence of
many&lt;br/&gt;extra ``Steiner'' points.