* 0208011
* In-situ X-ray Studies of Surface Structure during Plasma Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Karl Ludwig, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 09/30/2005
* USD 321,919.00

This project address fundamental issues associated with surface structure and
its relationship to the plasma environment in plasma-based processing of
electronic materials. The approach is to use real-time, in-situ, synchrotron-
based x-ray diffraction to investigate the surface and near-surface structure of
silicon and compound semiconductors (GaAs and GaN) undergoing chlorine-based
plasma processing. After gaining experience using real-time x-ray scattering to
understand silicon surface structure during processing, compound semiconductors,
GaAs(100)/(110) and GaN(0001) (i.e. polar surface vs. non-polar surfaces) will
be addressed. The atomic structure of the surfaces will be examined during
exposure to the plasma, including questions of the extent to which surface
reconstruction remains in the compound semiconductors in this environment. The
evolution of the surface morphology during plasma processing will be
investigated using grazing-incidence small-angle x-ray scattering (GISAXS). The
evolution of step structure (bunching vs. anti-bunching) on the compound
semiconductor surfaces during exposure to the plasma will be studied as a
function of substrate miscut size and direction. In addition, regimes of layer-
by-layer removal vs. step retraction will be examined to better understand their
relationship to the surface structure. The evolution of the GaAs surface
stoichiometry will be followed in real time with x-ray fluorescence. In silicon,
the density and depth of the damaged chlorinated surface layer will be studied
and compared with existing simulations. The results of experiments performed in
the x-ray portion of the proposed work will be correlated to independent
characterization efforts performed at BU and NRL. Post- processing surface
morphology will be examined with AFM. Surface damage will also be characterized
ex-situ using C-V measurements, transmission line measurements of contact
resistances to processed surfaces and photoreflectance spectroscopy. The
proposed research program focuses on the fundamental questions of the relation
between plasma processing conditions and atomic surface structure and is
expected to serve as a stimulus for further development of theory and
simulation. The new knowledge gained will be important for future rational
development of new processing techniques, especially in novel
materials.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research
issues in areas of electronic materials science having technological relevance.
An important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the
integration of research and education. The research program provides excellent
opportunities for hands-on experience in the use of sophisticated scientific
equipment. The broad resources, and collaborative aspects, provide special
opportunities for education and training of graduate and undergraduate students
involved in interdisciplinary forefront research. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;