* 0208001
* 3-D geometry of the Moine thrust and its implications for 3-D strain distribution and thrust sheet kinematics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Gautam Mitra, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2006
* USD 159,995.00

Most thrust fault traces are arcuate in nature and are comprised of a series
of&lt;br/&gt;salients and recesses suggesting that thrust faults are, in
general, non-planar. Such three-&lt;br/&gt;dimensional complexities in the
thrust surface geometry may be an important factor&lt;br/&gt;controlling the
thrust fault kinematics. Consider the analogy of glacial ice flowing
over&lt;br/&gt;an irregular substrate. The major resistance to movement is not
due to the friction&lt;br/&gt;between the two materials (which is greatly
reduced by pressure-melt water that coats the&lt;br/&gt;surface) but due to the
distortion of the ice as it flows past surface irregularities.
Thrust&lt;br/&gt;sheets may behave in a similar manner. Fault rocks are
considerably weaker than the&lt;br/&gt;host rock and, therefore, the continued
deformation of such rocks may not be the factor in&lt;br/&gt;large-scale thrust
sheet emplacement. The PI suggests that three-dimension irregularities
in&lt;br/&gt;thrust surface geometry play a major role in thrust sheet
kinematics. If this is the case,&lt;br/&gt;one should expect that the strain
patterns observed along strike of a given thrust fault will&lt;br/&gt;reflect
the thrust fault geometry. Preliminary studies have shown that both
c-axes&lt;br/&gt;patterns and relict grain shapes vary along the strike of the
fault most likely due to the&lt;br/&gt;fault geometry effects. Initial data
suggest that deformation is nearly plane strain&lt;br/&gt;within a prominent
salient; but along the margins of the salient there is a
stronger&lt;br/&gt;component of flattening strains. However, further examination
of the strains in this&lt;br/&gt;region are needed to truly resolve this
pattern. Three-dimensional finite strain geometries&lt;br/&gt;have been
determined in this region by measuring relict quartz grain shapes
and&lt;br/&gt;examining quartz c-axes fabrics. Moreover, it may also be useful
to measure final stage&lt;br/&gt;incremental strains by determining three-
dimensional recrystallized quartz grain shapes&lt;br/&gt;and three-dimensional
quartz overgrowth geometries. It is only through examining&lt;br/&gt;incremental
strain histories that the PI can fully understand the kinematics of thrust
faults.&lt;br/&gt;Nevertheless, current mechanical models do not take into
account the existence of&lt;br/&gt;non-plane strains and therefore only predict
realistic fold-thrust belt behavior to a first-&lt;br/&gt;order. In order to
make more realistic models for the evolution of fold-and-thrust
belts&lt;br/&gt;we must start to incorporate the non-plane strain elements of
geometrically complex&lt;br/&gt;thrust faults.