* 0208553
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Archaeology and Maya Identity in the Cuchumatan Highlands of Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Robert Sharer, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2003
* USD 8,910.00

Under the direction of Robert J. Sharer, Greg Borgstede will conduct
investigations on the archaeology of ethnicity in the western highlands of
Guatemala among the Huista and Acateco Maya currently living in the area. The
primary purpose of the research is to uncover the material remains of ethnic
identity among groups with no written history. The Huista-Acateco Archaeological
Project (HAAP) will focus on two distinct, homogenous ethnic groups, in a
relatively small region, in order to ascertain how and when ethnic changes
occurred in the two groups. This case is ideal for the study of the archeology
of ethnicity since the Huista and Acateco Maya are today two distinct,
homogenous ethnic groups. Their small population size and the relatively small
area inhabited make archeological studies of both groups feasible. Two questions
will be addressed: Can modern ethnic groups be identified in or correlated with
the archaeological record? And what is the relation between an ethnic group's
modern situation and its historical development, as shown through archaeology
and its material traces? In an attempt to answer these questions, the HAAP will
consist of: archaeological surveys, primarily locating and mapping
archaeological sites in the previously unstudied region; archaeological
excavations of the discovered sites; analysis of artifacts; and oral history
collection.

The changing nature of culture at the turn of the millennium, as many social
scientists have pointed out, is toward increased globalization, normalization,
and westernization. While this is undoubtedly true, it masks the increased
regionalization and balkanization of many cultures of the world: processes that
are often phrased in terms of ethnic groups and ethnic identity. These ethnic
groups often base claims of political and cultural identity on long historical
cultural continuity. Historians have addressed these claims in cases where
historical records are available, but archaeologists have largely ignored the
topic.

The significance of the HAAP is that it will analyze the relevance of
archaeology to conceptions of ethnic identity. The results will be directly
applicable to these groups themselves, particularly in their claims to cultural
and political representation in the Guatemalan society. These groups,
marginalized because of decades of civil war, have only recently begun to
develop a sense of cultural self-determination, and an interest in their own,
unwritten history. The results will also provide a broader framework for
understanding how ethnicity can be traced through the material remains available
to archaeology.