* 0208015
* Algorithms for Discrete and Stochastic Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Howard Elman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 122,000.00

This project concerns the development and analysis of
efficient&lt;br/&gt;numerical algorithms for problems arising in computational
modeling,&lt;br/&gt;with emphasis on two main topics: algorithms for systems of
equations&lt;br/&gt;arising from the stochastic finite element method, and
algorithms for&lt;br/&gt;algebraic systems arising in models of fluid dynamics.
The first of&lt;br/&gt;these addresses the fact that models of physical
phenomena often&lt;br/&gt;contain parameters or equation coefficients whose
precise properties&lt;br/&gt;are not well understood. Examples include
permeability properties of&lt;br/&gt;media in which quantities (e.g., pollutants
in groundwater) are&lt;br/&gt;flowing or diffusing, and boundary conditions
(e.g., along the ocean&lt;br/&gt;bottom). In the stochastic finite element
method, the random aspects&lt;br/&gt;of problems are handled in a manner
analogous to the introduction of&lt;br/&gt;new spatial dimensions. This
methodology appears to have the&lt;br/&gt;potential to be more efficient than
Monte-Carlo methods, provided&lt;br/&gt;efficient algorithms are available for
the algebraic systems that are&lt;br/&gt;generated after discretization. Our aim
is to study the algorithmic&lt;br/&gt;issues that arise from this approach. For
the second project, we will&lt;br/&gt;develop and study efficient algorithms for
solving systems of&lt;br/&gt;equations arising in models of incompressible flow,
principally,&lt;br/&gt;methods for eigenvalue problems derived from linear
stability analysis&lt;br/&gt;of steady solutions, and multigrid algorithms for
the discrete&lt;br/&gt;convection-diffusion equation. These are fundamental
problems arising&lt;br/&gt;throughout fluid dynamics, and their efficient
solution is critical&lt;br/&gt;for development of effective computational
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general aim of this project is to enhance the
utility and&lt;br/&gt;effectiveness of mathematical modeling for understanding
scientific&lt;br/&gt;and engineering phenomena. There are useful models for many
disparate&lt;br/&gt;physical processes, including blood flows, dispersal of
environmental&lt;br/&gt;pollutants, performance of aerospace vehicles, and
atmospheric and&lt;br/&gt;oceanographic phenomena. Understanding such processes
through purely&lt;br/&gt;experimental techniques is prohibitively expensive or
impossible,&lt;br/&gt;whereas the use of modeling and together with algorithmic
solution&lt;br/&gt;introduces a basic understanding of the physics by
providing&lt;br/&gt;approximations to quantities such as flow rates and
pressures.&lt;br/&gt;Accurate solutions are only available, however, if reliable
and fast&lt;br/&gt;solution algorithms can be used. Moreover, it is often the
case that&lt;br/&gt;certain aspects of models, such as the geologic properties
of&lt;br/&gt;transporting media or the velocities of flows along boundaries,
are&lt;br/&gt;not known with certainty. Our goal for this work is to develop
fast&lt;br/&gt;solution algorithms for mathematical models and to ensure that
the&lt;br/&gt;solution strategies are able to handle uncertainty and to
produce&lt;br/&gt;reliable statistical information about solutions at low
computational&lt;br/&gt;cost.&lt;br/&gt;