* 0208258
* Organized Turbulence over Forested Landscapes: Theoretical Basis for a Low-Dimensional Transport Model
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Gabriel Katul, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2006
* USD 403,498.00

0208258&lt;br/&gt;Albertson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need to understand the
coupling between forested landscapes and turbulent fluxes of energy, water, and
carbon has become a national priority, as evidenced by both
the&lt;br/&gt;USGCRP's Water and Carbon Cycle Science Plans. Here, a conceptual
model is proposed to describe turbulent transport of mass and energy between
forest canopies and the atmosphere in terms of two end-member flow types: mixing
layer (over dense vegetation) and rough walled boundary layer. Regions with
varying degrees of sparse vegetation are represented as a superposition of the
two end member regimes. The overarching goal is the development of a similarity
theory for canopy sublayer (CSL) transport, where vertical transport phenomena
are described by coupling high resolution surface features (that are readily
observed remotely) and coarse resolution atmospheric fields (as both observed
and modeled). The project is structured to test three hypotheses regarding the
underpinnings of the conceptual model. The focus is on the interplay between
canopy morphology and organized turbulent transport. Analysis of Field data is
combined with Large, Eddy Simulation (LES) - with the data providing
observations of field conditions and the LES providing a full view of the
evolving structure of turbulence under controlled boundary conditions. The LES
results will be used to identify the essential dynamics and to formulate
signatures of the coherent structures that will be used to guide subsequent
analysis of the field data sets. Multi-scale decompositions of the turbulence
fields are to be used in concert with nonlinear time series analysis tools to
begin the development of the low-dimensional model. This approach will provide a
unique training experience for a graduate student and post-doc. The PI's will
continue recruiting/training under-represented
candidates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;