* 0208492
* Dispersion of Water Age in Aquifer Systems and in Groundwater Samples
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Graham Fogg, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/2005
* USD 300,322.00

0208492 Fogg

Groundwater age dates estimated using various environmental tracer methods is
being increasingly called upon to address groundwater quality problems and to
understand many other aspects of subsurface systems. However, systematic
analysis of the meaning of groundwater age dates is lacking, which may limit the
application, or result in serious misinterpretations. The PI's recent work
indicates that common interpretations of estimated groundwater ages are
dependent on assumptions about dispersion and mixing that are not appropriate in
many, perhaps most, cases. The PI finds that, while most age dates are thought
to be representative of all the water molecules in the water sample if the well
screen is not too long, actual ages within that sample can vary significantly
(from IO0 to 102+ yr.) in typically heterogeneous systems. Although some
subsurface hydrologists already anticipated this, the scientific basis for
evaluating groundwater age dates remains undeveloped and vague. This in turn has
led to an extreme range of interpretations and assumptions by both water
managers and researchers. Herein the PI proposes a theoretically accurate,
tested simulation approach to provide the first ever quantitative evaluation of
the roles of heterogeneity, well-bore mixing, well screen depth and length,
aquifer parameters, and boundary conditions on groundwater age variations in
space and time in geologically realistic alluvial aquifer systems. In
particular, the research will investigate how ages of water "particles" can be
expected to vary within individual water samples in space and time in subsurface
with different degrees of heterogeneity. Through both modeling and field-testing
the PI also proposes to explore a new hypothesis that variation in age dates
during long-term pumping of a well provides a signal indicative of aquifer
heterogeneity and vulnerability . Understanding of the main factors controlling
groundwater ages and age distributions is a prerequisite for any application of
tracer-based age-dating data. Fluctuations in groundwater age as a function of
space and time may be used to explore subsurface hydrologic processes far beyond
the traditional static groundwater age dating method. Proposed testing of the
above hypothesis holds out the possibility that groundwater age dating
approaches can be transformed from qualitiative procedures dependent on vague,
untested assumptions to powerful characterization tools for quantitatively (or
semiquantitatively) assessing groundwater conditions in previously unanticipated
ways. The PI shows abundant preliminary simulation results to support this
problem statement and to demonstrate feasibility of the general approach.

Key words: groundwater, contamination, transport, aquifer vulnerability,
modeling, age Date.