* 0208642
* End-to-end Integrity and Confidentiality for Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Andrew Myers, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 12/31/2005
* USD 330,000.00

Providing assurance of security and privacy is becoming more difficult with
current trends towards building computing infrastructure out of distributed
components connected by networks, including untrusted client machines. Important
to this assurance are the confidentiality and integrity properties of
distributed systems that serve principals whose trust in each other is
incomplete. This description encompasses, among others, clinical information
systems, joint military information systems, and financial information systems.

A new security mechanism, secure program partitioning, can provide stronger,
end-to-end assurance that data remains confidential. In this approach, programs
are transformed according to strong security policies, resulting in secure
distributed systems. This is an attractive way to specify and enforce
confidentiality and integrity in environments that include untrusted, possibly
malicious host machines.

Because the integrity of distributed computations and data is difficult to
maintain in the presence of untrusted hosts, this research investigates an
extension of secure program partitioning to use redundant computation to
preserve integrity. In addition, new models of information flow in concurrent
systems are being explored because the current theory and practice of security
for concurrent systems is restrictive, yet also unsound. This is especially
important because distributed systems are naturally concurrent. Solutions to
these problems are being implemented as part of the Jif language system.