* 0208217
* Collaborative Research:  Comparing Deformation Rates in Wrench Borderlands from Geodetic and Geologic Data to Evaluate the Permanent and Recoverable Components
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Steven Wojtal, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2007
* USD 89,742.00

The current velocity field associated with plate tectonic motion in western
California is well characterized by geodetic measurements using Global
Positioning Systems (GPS). The exact nature of what geodetic measurements record
in actively defon-ning zones remains a significant problem, as this technique
records both recoverable (elastic) and pen-nanent (quasi-plastic) strains in
wrench borderlands (blocks adjacent to major strike-slip faults). The goal of
this proposal is to evaluate the relative magnitudes of the recoverable and
permanent components in the deformation of wrench borderlands, by simultaneously
studying two different sections of the San Andreas fault system. Creeping
segment, central California: Geodetic measurements alone are generally unable to
distinguish between recoverable and permanent deformation, because of the long
(&gt;50 yr) interval between slip episodes on faults. In contrast, intervals
between slip episodes are short (weeks to months) in the creeping central
section of the San Andreas fault. By collecting geodetic data throughout the
short seismic cycle in the creeping segment, the PI's will be able to evaluate
the relative sizes of the recoverable and permanent components of the
displacement field in the vicinity of the fault. They propose to check the
estimates of currently accumulating permanent measurements against long-ten-n
averages detentiined from geologic and paleogmagnetic data. Prior work suggests
clockwise rotation of the palcomagnetic signal of Miocene and younger sediments
in the wrench borderlands. Documenting the areal extent, regional distribution,
and amount of rotation throughout this area will allow them to calculate a long-
ten-n average for pen-nanent deformation. This part of the proposal involves
permanent GPS stations and monitoring, campaign-style GPS, paleomagnetism, and
geologic mapping. Durmid Hill, Salton Trough, southern California: In this area,
previous work has determined the amount of permanent strain. The PI's propose to
complete a step-wise, three-dimensional retrodeformation of defon-ned
sedimentary rocks. In order to convert these incremental strain data into
estimates of defon-nation rates, one must have precise knowledge of time of
defon-nation. In this region of excellent exposure, one aspect of deformation
timing is provided by the presence of an ash layer correlated with the 0.76 Ma
Bishop tuff. Additional information will result from paleomagnetic techniques
that record the magnetic field during deposition. Utilizing the variety of ages
of the different sedimentary layers to provide differential vertical axis
rotations, The PI's can determine the timing of minor structures (e.g., joints,
fractures, and small folds) by determining which units are affected. By
comparing geodetic rates (which include both recoverable and pen-nanent strain
components) with geologic rates (which record only a permanent strain component)
they can assess the amount of recoverable strain accumulation in this area. This
part of the proposal involves geologic mapping, paleomagnetism, and
campaignstyle GPS. By combining the results of geological, geodetic, and
paleomagnetic investigations from our two field areas, the PI's will assess the
relative contribution of recoverable (elastic) and pen-nanent (quasi-plastic)
strains in wrench borderlands. Resolution of this issue has fundamental
implications for earthquake mechanics, geological implications of borderland
deformation, and potential slip magnitudes on major faults.