* 0208335
* BAC and YAC Libraries for Exploring Metazoan Origins
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* David Miller, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/2004
* USD 66,215.00

0208335&lt;br/&gt;Steele&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A complete description of the
evolutionary history of multicellular animals will require detailed information
on the content, organization, and regulatory mechanisms of the genomes of
animals from phyla throughout the animal phylogenetic tree. Of particular
importance for such studies are species that diverged early from the rest of the
animals and unicellular organisms which are close relatives of animals. Features
of the genomes of such organisms which are shared with more recently diverged
animals would then be ones which were present in the ancestor of all modern
animals. The goal of this project is to prepare and archive bacterial artificial
chromosome libraries from Nematostella vectensis (a sea anemome which is a
member of the early diverging animal phylum Cnidaria) and from the
choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis, a unicellular organism closely related to
multicellular animals. These libraries will provide important resources for
addressing a variety of questions related to the origins, evolution, and
development of multicellular animals. Such questions include: How did the Hox
family of developmental regulatory genes evolve? When did various other
developmental regulatory gene families appear during animal evolution? How
closely related are choanoflagellates and multicellular animals, and what genes
were necessary to make the transition from unicellularity to multicellularity?
What happened at the genome level when nerves were added to multicellular
animals? What cell adhesion and intercellular signaling molecules were present
in the common ancestor of modern animals? Are cnidarian genes organized into
operons, as suggested by the presence of spliced leader addition in this phylum?
In addition to providing material for analysis of animal evolution, the
libraries will facilitate the isolation of gene promoters, which will be
essential for the development of functional assays in these organisms and for
dissecting gene regulatory networks. The libraries generated by this project
will be freely available to the research community. Information on the libraries
and their availability will be provided through various means, including
appropriate scientific newsgroups and web sites. &lt;br/&gt;