* 0208036
* Role of Silicon-Organic Interactions in Silica Biomineralization
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Nita Sahai, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2006
* USD 207,723.00

Sahai&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0208036&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing appreciation
of the need to understand organic-inorganic interactions at the molecular-level
for processes relevant to biogeochemistry as exemplified by silica
biomineralization, and to materials science as in the controlled synthesis of
biomimetic mesoporous silica. I propose to investigate the nature of silica
interactions with carbohydrates and amines in the aqueous phase combining
theoretical and experimental approaches. We will (i) determine whether putative
hypercoordinated Si-carbohydrate complexes can play a role in biological silicon
uptake, and (ii) identify the role of amines in catalyzing the biopolymerization
of dissolved silicon species. The carbohydrates examined will include
polyalcohols, sugar-acids and polysaccharides. The amines will be examined for
the most likely pathway of biogenic silica nucleation and polymerization.
Specifically, we will attempt to determine whether the amines act to catalyze
hydrolysis of a starting Si-organic compound via a SN2 mechanism or whether
polyamines act to bring about aggregation of inorganically formed silica
clusters from a starting compound of silicic acid. For the former mechanism, we
will examine amines of different nucleophilicities including methylamine,
dimethylamine, pyridine, guanidine, imidazole, lysine, arginine and histidine.
The alternative mechanism will be studied using 1,2-diaminoethane,
1,2-diaminopropane, 1,3-diaminopropane, 1,2,3-triaminopropane, and analogous
triamines on a butane backbone as the model polyamines. The effect of nitrogen
hybridization will be determined by comparing 1,3-diaminopentane to imidazole.
Further, the effect of 1,6-diaminohexane versus 1,4-diaminobenzene will permit
examination of carbon hybridization effects. Experimental NMR and Attenuated
Total Reflectance Fourier Transform Infra-Red (ATR FTIR) spectroscopy will
provide independent measurements. Temperature dependence NMR will provide
activation enthalpies. The computational method used will be ab initio MO theory
to calculate the structure, energy, vibrational frequencies and 29Si Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) shifts to explain the experimental spectra, and to
determine the electronic contributions to the overall nucleophilicities of the
amines.&lt;br/&gt;