* 0208783
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research (INRIA): A Semantic Foundation For C++ based IC/System Design
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Rajesh Gupta, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2006
* USD 40,000.00

0208783&lt;br/&gt;Gupta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year award for U.S.-France
cooperative research in embedded and hybrid computer systems involves Rajesh K.
Gupta and Sandeep K. Shukla of the University of California, Irvine, Jean-Pierre
Talpin and Paul Le Guernic of the French National Institute for Research in
Computer Science and Engineering (INRIA) in Rennes (IRISA). The research is
aimed at enabling C++ based design paradigms, a software programming language
which can be used in object-oriented programming language IC systems and system
on a chip (SOC) designs. The research addresses development of C++ usage, which
is "semantically clean" and can be used in high-level hardware systems. This
requires semantics that matches across compilers, high-level synthesis tools and
simulated behavior of C++ design. The approach combines an unambiguous semantic
framework named BDL (backbone description language) developed by researchers at
IRISA and a split-level programming paradigm developed by the Irvine group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the U.S. side of a joint proposal to
the NSF and INRIA. NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses of the U.S.
investigators and graduate students. INRIA will support the French researchers'
visits to the United States. The U.S. and French teams represent expertise in
software programming languages, hardware description languages, and formal
semantics.&lt;br/&gt;