* 0208165
* InSAR Measurements and Theoretical Modeling of Deformation due to Large Mid-crustal Magma Bodies:  Investigation of the Dynamics and Timescales of Crustal Anatexis
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Yuri Fialko, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2006
* USD 201,808.00

Fialko&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0208165&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed models regarding
characteristic spatiotemporal scales of formation of parental silicic magma
bodies in the continental crust range from partial melting of the tectonically
thickened fluid-rich lower crust to magmatic underplating, whereby the heat
required to produce crustal melting is advected by intrusions of mafic sills
(presumably, from the mantle source). These models predict very different time
scales for the production of granitic magma. The pertologically-based model of
slow equilibrium melting of the lower crust implies that granites are generated
on "orogenic'' time scales of the order of millions of years. In contrast,
theoretical models of magmatic underplating predict that anatectic melts are
produced on quite short timescales of the order of the crystallization time of
typical mafic underplates (e.g., 100-1000 years for sill intrusions that are a
few tens to a few hundred meters thick). In principle, the intrusion of mafic
underplates, the volume changes associated with in situ melting, and the
subsequent evacuation of the resulting granitoid magmas can each generate
geodetically observable deformation. Geodetic measurements in areas of
contemporaneous large active magma bodies may therefore provide critical
constraints on the timescales and dynamics of crustal anatexis. This project
uses Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) observations in regions of
the ongoing crustal magmatism to constrain typical rates of the large-scale melt
generation and/or migration, and to test the proposed models of the granitic
melt production. The primary targets include large mid-crustal magma bodies
imaged by seismic studies, in particular, the Socorro (New Mexico, USA), the
Altiplano-Puna (South America), and the Southern Tibet (Asia) magma bodies. The
observed spatial patterns and average rates of magma-induced deformation are
combined with theoretical modeling that explicitly includes thermodynamics of
melting/freezing, realistic variations in the mechanical properties of the host
rocks, and inelastic deformation, to develop a detailed quantitative
understanding of the dynamics of crustal anatexis. Independent observables that
are brought to bear on the model results include constraints on the lateral
extent and thickness of the mid-crustal magma bodies from seismic imaging,
inferences about the duration and total amplitude of the magma-induced uplift
from geomorphologic studies, and structural and geochemical signatures of the
exhumed ancient magma bodies. Results of this work are relevant to
interpretations of seismic observations of "bright spots'' in the mid-to-lower
continental crust, field and theoretical studies of the crustal magmatism, and
origin and evolution of the continental crust.&lt;br/&gt;