* 0208123
* Stable Isotope Studies of Vegetation Change and Mammal Evolution in Australia
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Thure Cerling, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2006
* USD 240,000.00

We propose to study the stable carbon and oxygen isotopes preserved in the tooth
enamel of Australia's herbivorous mammals to reveal dietary shifts and
environmental changes over the past 24 million years, especially in relation to
the spread of the tropical grasses which employ the C4 photosynthetic pathway.
As an island continent, Australia's physiographic and climatic histories are
unique. Intercontinental biotic migration has been severely constrained by vast
transoceanic dispersal distances, which isolated the continent to terrestrial
faunal migration for most of the Cenozoic. Superimposed upon this is the fact
that most of Australia's endemic mammals are marsupials. They diversified in
situ and filled a broad spectrum of niches comparable with placental mammals on
other continents. Australia thus presents us with an unparalleled experiment in
mammal evolution: an isolated radiation of fundamentally different mammals,
adapting to landscape and climatic changes in the absence of competing
immigrants. Stable isotope analyses of Australian herbivore teeth will allow us
to examine the relative strengths of hypotheses previously advanced for the
expansion of C4 vegetation and faunal turnover in the over the past 24 million
years. Does Australia fit the global model, and if not, why?&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal seeks to address the following key issues.&lt;br/&gt;1. Timing of the
appearance and expansion of C4 vegetation in Australia compared with the rest of
the world, as interpreted from d13C values in the tooth enamel of the three
terrestrial herbivore lineages: kangaroos, wombats and
diprotodontoids.&lt;br/&gt;2. Relationships between evolutionary trends in
Australian Neogene terrestrial herbivores and shifts in prevailing
climate/vegetation regimes inferred from enamel d13C and d18O
values.&lt;br/&gt;3. Development of "seasonality" in Australian climate since
the Miocene deduced from isotopic fluctuations down the profile of ever-growing
wombat molars, and relationship to occurrence of C4 plants.&lt;br/&gt;4.
Paleoecologies of late Cenozoic Australian herbivores and
communities.&lt;br/&gt;Critical to tackling these issues is the need to
establish modern Australian isotope baselines. We will ascertain diet-enamel
enrichment factors for extant kangaroos and wombats, and dietary isotopic
variation within species across different seasons and environments. There is no
basis for assuming that isotopic offsets between diet and animal tissues
established for herbivorous placental mammals will hold for marsupials,
especially given their overt differences in developmental biology. Indeed, our
pilot data do reveal marked ontogenetic variation along the molar row for
several different kangaroo species. &lt;br/&gt;Our preliminary d13C data of
fossil marsupials also indicate a diet containing C4 plants for animals from
only the two youngest of 11 northern, central and eastern fossil localities so
far sampled. Both are ~3.4 million years old and, if their C4 signatures can be
attributed to grasses, are much younger than those sites in which the earliest
appearances of C4 grass diets are observed in Asia, Africa and the Americas. We
intend to extend this initial work to cover all of the significant Neogene
fossil deposits in Australia to better outline the isotope changes recorded in
the teeth of fossil marsupials through time.&lt;br/&gt;