* 0208517
* UMEB:  Research Integrating Molecular and Environmental Sciences (R.I.M.E.S.) Program
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Bruce Jackson, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2005
* USD 309,800.00

The Research Integrating Molecular and Environmental Sciences (R.I.M.E.S.)
Program is an international research and educational collaboration. It was
created for highly motivated minority scholars who have completed two years of
college and who are committed to research careers in marine or environmental
sciences. As with Dr. Jackson's highly successful Biotechnology Program for
nontraditional students at Massachusetts Bay Community College, the guiding
philosophy of the R.I.M.E.S. Program is that continuous interdisciplinary
research training coupled with intensive mentoring drive the success of
nontraditional scholars in science. The goal is to produce an outstanding and
numerically significant corps of minority researchers in the marine and
environmental sciences who will bring distinction and much-needed diversity to
their fields.

The academic component of the R.I.M.E.S. Program occurs at Boston University
School of Medicine (BUSM) and prepares scholars for the scholastic rigor of a
doctoral-degree program. This is achieved through intensive mentoring and
rigorous tutorials designed to enhance the academic performance of scholars
during their junior and senior years. Scholars are selected to the R.I.M.E.S.
Program through a rigorous application process designed to identify and recruit
only the most motivated individuals. Recruitment focuses on men and women whose
personal circumstances made traditional college education difficult or
impossible. Thus, recruitment is primarily from three categories of college
sophomores: (1) young African-American and Hispanic males from single-parent
families (the two most at-risk societal groups in the nation), (2) single
mothers whose children are 12 years and older, and (3) married women who
deferred their education to raise children. Scholars from these categories
attend college in the face of overwhelming obstacles. Thus, they already possess
the human qualities that drive the career of a successful scientist:
persistence, focus, resourcefulness, guile and tenacity. The academic component
of the R.I.M.E.S. Program promotes the utilization of these attributes so that
scholars achieve and expect continuous scholastic excellence.

The research component of the R.I.M.E.S. Program integrates marine and
environmental science and molecular biology through molecular investigations at
BUSM of organisms collected in summer field research on the volcanic island of
Montserrat (Northern Antilles). A corps of research mentors, established marine
and environmental scientists from several countries, is available to guide the
scholars on Montserrat and (by e-mail, phone and fax) after they return to Dr.
Jackson's lab at BUSM. The research projects converge on effects of the
environmental stresses exerted on the ecosystem of Montserrat by the eruptions
(in 1995 and 1997) and ongoing activity of the Soufriere Hills volcano. The
abrupt environmental changes produced by this cataclysm provide a rare
opportunity to study ecosystem development at the molecular level. The
investigative focus is on molecular processes that have been modified in
adaptive response of organisms to sudden environmental changes caused by the
volcano.