* 0208608
* Information acquisition as a factor in improving agent performance in negotiation and decision making
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Jonathan Wilkenfeld, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2006
* USD 426,114.00

The proposed research contributes to the development of autonomous agents
capable of operating in real world situations. Agents in multi-agent
environments must often choose between maximizing their expected utility
according to their current knowledge, and trying to learn more about the world
and thereby increase their gains. A negotiator may try to obtain information
about its options by asking outside sources, taking actions, or by making offers
and counter offers. In order to find the best negotiation strategy, agents'
decision-making processes will be modeled. This research will lead the automated
agent to reach more beneficial agreements when negotiating with bounded rational
agents (human or automated). Strategies and decision-making procedures will be
tested in the domains of e-commerce and international crises. The significance
of the research lies first in the evaluation of alternate strategies for the
acquisition of information by self-interested agents, from the perspective of a
fully automated environment, and also by evaluating the behavior of automated
agents interacting with human actors in simulated decision making environments.
The dynamics of information acquisition in complex decision making structures
will be better understood. The research will also contribute to the better
understanding of decision making when automated negotiators interact with
bounded rational agents.