* 0208520
* Studies of Weakly Adsorbed Layers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Milton Cole, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2006
* USD 423,179.00

This project is a collaborative study employing both experimental and
theoretical methods to study fundamental questions about forces at surfaces and
their implications for the structure and dynamics of thin films. Key problems to
be addressed include when and why many adsorption systems exhibit low-
coordination adsorption sites, and whether the existing theory adequately
describes the ultra-weak adsorption of simple gases. These studies will extend
the groups' previous research, which has established a partial empirical and
theoretical base for understanding weak adsorption phenomena. The techniques to
be employed are low-energy electron diffraction, He-atom scattering, computer
simulations and state-of-the-art theoretical methods. The importance of these
studies is that they will provide a fundamental understanding of adsorption
phenomena that will be applicable to many different fields, including nano-
patterning, self-assembled monolayers, coatings technology, tribology and chip
fabrication. Students and postdoctoral scholars will be trained in fundamental
methods, which are applicable to the aforementioned
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surface science is of importance as a subject
of both fundamental interest and potential application to many technologies.
This project addresses a number of basic scientific questions in this area.
Principal problems that will be explored include the structure of films that are
just one molecule thick. A focus of this research is the determination of where
individual molecules sit in relation to the underlying supporting surface. A
second major topic is the question of how strongly these films are bound to the
surface as well as their dynamics. In some cases, such films are bound to the
surface at high temperature, but not at low temperature. In other cases, the
reverse situation is observed to be the case. These phenomena, and many others,
will be explored with diverse experimental, theoretical and computational
methods. The principal experimental techniques are electron and atom beam
scattering from surfaces. Theory and simulation are to be carried out, using
state-of-the-art modeling methods, some of which will be further improved as
part of the research. The research will benefit from the combination of
techniques being applied. Students will be trained in fundamental methods which
are applicable to industrial concerns such as the development and fabrication of
coatings, lubricants, and computer chips.&lt;br/&gt;