* 0208303
* GPS Study of the Kinematics of the Intersection of the Tarim, Tien Shan, and Pamir
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Bradford Hager, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

High quality results from a dense GPS network spanning the Central Tien Shan,
from Kazakhstan, through Kyrgyzstan, and into China, reveal a relatively simple
kinematic picture to the east of the Talas-Ferghana fault. GPS velocities from
several independent studies agree that there is ~20 mm/yr convergence between
the Tarim Basin and the Kazakh platform, about half the total convergence
between the Indian and Eurasian plates. GPS velocities from the PI's dense
network show that convergence is localized on a handful of structures. Slip
rates on these structures inferred from both geologic studies and geodetic
studies agree remarkably well. The PI's have used this new geodetic data, in
conjunction with a simple block model that accounts for elastic strain
accumulation, to invert for the motions of crustal blocks in the region. Notable
results include much less right-lateral motion on the Talas-Ferghana fault than
the previous geological estimate, rotation of the Ferghana Valley at ~0.8
degree/myr (a fraction of the long-term geologic rate from paleomag), and
convergence across the Alay valley between the Pamir and Southern Tien Shan of
~20 mm/yr, comparable to previous estimates. However, existing geodetic coverage
in the west, across the Talas-Ferghana fault into the Ferghana basin, and south
across the Alay valley and South Tien Shan and into the Pamir, is both more
sparse and less accurate than that in the Central Tien Shan. These rates of
strike-slip motion on the Talas Ferghana fault, rotation of the Ferghana
basin,and convergence across the Alay valley are not well constrained. For
example, the inferred rate of rotation of the Ferghana basin differs by a factor
of two depending upon which GPS results are used to constrain the model.
Clearly, more observations are needed to obtain results in this area comparable
in usefulness to those obtained to the east. In addition, the proposed joint
analysis of the PI's raw GPS data with that taken by others (GFZ and CSB) will
provide a combined solution with improved accuracy. In collaboration with
colleagues at the Russian Institute for High Temperature Physics (known as
IVTRAN)in Kyrgyzstan, the PI's propose to install 20 new sites in western
Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan. The Chinese Seismological Bureau (CSB)in Wuhan,
China, will work with us to install additional sites in northwestern Xinjiang
Province in China (exact number and locations to be determined after a visit to
the field). The PI's collaborators will survey these sites, as well as existing
sites that GFZ, IVTRAN, and CSB previously installed in the region, in order to
unravel the kinematics of the area where the Tien Shan, Ferghana Basin, Pamir,
and Tarim Basin intersect. In addition to analyzing the GPS data, they will also
use simple continuum mechanics-based models to interpret the GPS velocities that
they obtain in terms of geologic motions.