* 0208673
* Ge Islands on Ultrathin Silicon-on-Insulator: Opportunities for Nanoscale Characterization and Processing of Electronic Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Peter Sutter, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2004
* USD 417,983.00

This project involves a combination of experimental research and numerical
simulation with the objectives of understanding heteroepitaxial materials
integration using oxide-supported compos-ite substrates, and of identifying
novel routes for materials processing using the strain-fields of self-assembled
nanostructures. The proposed work is motivated by recent results on the forma-
tion of Ge quantum dot (QD) islands on ultrathin silicon-on-insulator (SOI)
substrates. For growth of pyramidal 'hut' islands, a previously unknown local
strain relaxation process was found that involves the nanoscale stressor as well
as the thin substrate, and results in a pro-nounced buckling of the Si substrate
slab. This result suggests a novel route for comprehensive characterization of
the incoherent c-Si/a-SiO2 interface in SOI and related composite structures.
These studies strive to determine the mechanism by which this interface responds
to applied stress, and the temperature-dependent kinetic parameters that govern
and limit the response. %%% The project addresses fundamental research issues in
a topical area of electronic/photonic materi-als science having technological
relevance. An important feature of the project is the strong em-phasis on
education, and the integration of research and education. The proposed project
offers outstanding research and training opportunities for students at all
levels. It will involve participa-tion of undergraduates, and promote the
integration of minorities, particularly female students, into science and
technology. Planned outreach activities focus on networking with local middle-
and high schools and aim at sparking the interest of the younger generation. ***