* 0208953
* InfoFabric: Adaptive Services in Distributed Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Calton Pu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2004
* USD 200,000.00

Schwan, Karsten&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0208953&lt;br/&gt;"InfoFabric: Adaptive Services
in Distributed Embedded Systems" This research is developing
&lt;br/&gt;"Infofabric" services to manage multiple shared data streams and
enable high performance sensing and &lt;br/&gt;communication in dynamically
reconfigurable sensor nets. For example, in emergency response
&lt;br/&gt;applications, the computing infrastructures employed are rapidly
assembled conglomerates of portable and &lt;br/&gt;handheld end user devices.
Multiple communication modes are used to interact across collaborating peers
&lt;br/&gt;and also with local and remote command centers and/or information
repositories. A key problem is that &lt;br/&gt;such devices typically cannot
access, display, and manipulate information with the quality needed by end
&lt;br/&gt;users. An example is an observer `in the field' trying to match
visible cloud formations with the &lt;br/&gt;outputs produced by remotely
running weather simulations, the latter using real-time radar data. Unless the
&lt;br/&gt;handheld device can visualize data with high quality and in real-
time, field observations cannot be used to &lt;br/&gt;refine or steer the remote
weather prediction programs. Similarly, search and rescue operations can be
&lt;br/&gt;aided by rich (multi-media), real-time communications between team
members and by high fidelity &lt;br/&gt;graphical displays of terrain data
available from remote servers.&lt;br/&gt;The basic technical problems to be
solved for the resulting complex, distributed and embedded applications
&lt;br/&gt;include (1) the provision of high levels of flexibility in how,
where, and when necessary processing and &lt;br/&gt;communication actions are
performed on the underlying distributed platforms, and (2) the ability to
&lt;br/&gt;continuously meet end user needs despite runtime variations in
service locations, platform &lt;br/&gt;capabilities (e.g., remaining power on
end devices), and user requirements. The `InfoFabric' approach
&lt;br/&gt;supports data-intensive, embedded applications with lightweight
publish/subscribe middleware. An end &lt;br/&gt;user dynamically subscribes to
information channels when needed, and the InfoFabric applies the
&lt;br/&gt;processing specified by the user. Processing and communication
actions are dynamically mapped to the &lt;br/&gt;underlying distributed devices
and machines. To attain high performance and meet embedded systems
&lt;br/&gt;requirements like such as power, new compiler and runtime binary code
generation methods dynamically &lt;br/&gt;generate and install code on the
InfoFabric's platform. Code is specialized to match current user needs to
&lt;br/&gt;available platform resources. To meet dynamic needs and deal with
runtime changes in resource &lt;br/&gt;availability, resource management
mechanisms associated with middleware carry the performance, &lt;br/&gt;usage,
and needs information required for runtime adaptation of processing and
communication actions. Because the InfoFabric middleware has detailed knowledge
of the ways in which information should be transported and manipulated before
delivering it to end users, it can employ techniques like automatic
&lt;br/&gt;redundancy and replication, and service (re)location and
(re)partitioning to match changing user needs and platform
availabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;