* 0209614
* NMR Studies of Dynamics and Structure of Penetrants and Polymers in High Permeability Membrane Materials and Barrier Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Alan Jones, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2006
* USD 351,000.00

The dynamics and structure of high permeability polymeric systems will be
studied to develop a molecular to morphological level of understanding of
transport. Transport in high permeability systems will be tailored through the
use of structural modification of repeat units, blending, crystallization,
sample preparation and sample history. The tailoring procedures will be used to
make the materials inhomogeneous to produce rapid diffusion through regions of
poor packing, low density, and high free volume. Disordered high permeability
glasses will be produced by increasing the fraction of high free volume regions
by for instance having bulky, slowly rearranging backbone units that are unable
to pack well as the glass is formed. In blends, high free volume regions will be
produced by combining a low glass transition polymer with a high glass
transition polymer. The molecular level characteristics of the defect or high
free volume regions will be determined and the longer length scale organization
of the regions will be characterized. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy will be used as the primary experimental method since NMR is well
established as a tool for the study of materials on the length scale of
molecular structure. Sorption sites of penetrants will be examined using
xenon-129 NMR and the short range aspects of translational motion will be
observed as exchange between sites in xenon-129 spectra. Local segmental motion
in high free volume regions in a blend will be studied using spin-lattice
relaxation and solid state line shapes. These experiments will look at
properties on the nanometer scale while longer length scale, morphological
properties on a scale of 100's nanometers to microns will be studied by pulse
field gradient (PFG) diffusion experiments. This method will be shown to detect
structure associated with the longer range organization or connectivity of the
nanometer sized defect regions. We will attempt to show that these regions lead
to rapid diffusion in high permeability systems and to the observation of the
signature of tortuous and restricted diffusion in high permeability systems
where the apparent diffusion constant slows as the time scale over which
diffusion is observed increases in the PFG experiment. Computer simulation will
be used to aid in understanding such behavior and to clarify the role of sample
preparation, sample history and aging in high permeability polymers. PFG NMR
experiments will be used to provide a unique view of aging and conditioning
effects on the long length scale associated with the organization of defects.
NMR will be used to quantify the changes in side chain crystalline systems upon
crystallization when the side chains lock the backbone into a rigid though
poorly packed state. The investigators will combine the results of the NMR
experiments with information from traditional permeability and solubility
experiments, mechanical experiments, scattering experiments and dielectric
experiments through interaction with a network of collaborators.

These polymer systems are of fundamental interest but also serve as the basis
for separation membranes, controlled delivery systems and solid electrolytes in
batteries. Membrane separation systems are an energy efficient form of
separation of permanent gases such as nitrogen and oxygen. Separation membranes
can be used in environmental applications to collect organic gases while
releasing water and carbon dioxide. The side chain crystalline polymers are used
as controlled delivery systems which will allow the passage of small molecules
above the melting point of the side chain and will contain the small molecules
above the melting point. The low glass transition component in two of the blends
to be studied is polyethylene oxide which acts as a solvent for lithium salts in
battery applications. The understanding developed from the proposed research
will aid in improving such applications.