* 0209136
* Interdisciplinary Workshop on Reputation Systems in Online Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Chrysanthos Dellarocas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2003
* USD 31,662.00

INTERDISCIPLINARY WORKSHOP ON REPUTATION MECHANISMS IN ONLINE
COMMUNITIES&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an interdisciplinary academic symposium
on Reputation Systems. The production of trust is an important requirement for
forming and growing open online communities. Online reputation reporting
systems, such as eBay's well-known feedback mechanism, have emerged as an
important trust building mechanism in such settings. The rising practical
importance of online reputation systems invites rigorous research in this
largely virgin territory. Do these systems truly promote efficient market
outcomes? To what extent can they be manipulated by strategic buyers and
sellers? What is the best way to design them? How should buyers (and sellers)
use the information provided by such mechanisms in their decision-making
process? This is just a small subset of unanswered questions, which invite
exciting and valuable research. This workshop will bring together scholars and
practitioners from a wide range of disciplines whose research informs the
analysis and design of reputation systems. The workshop chairs will prepare a
report summarizing the conclusions of the symposium. The report will provide a
snapshot of the current state of the field and an agenda for future
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;