* 0209326
* Collaborative Research:   Three-Dimensional Numerical Investigation of Density Currents
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Jinqiao Duan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2006
* USD 189,000.00

The oceanic thermohaline circulation is strongly affected by localized dense-
water formation in high-latitude oceans. Such dense water masses are released
into the large-scale circulation in the form of ocean bottom density currents
mostly from localized regions (e.g., Denmark Strait, Strait of Gibraltar for the
Mediterranean overflow, Bab el Mandep Strait for the Red Sea overflow). Because
of the small space and time scales required to resolve their dynamics, such
density currents form the ``bottle neck'' of the thermohaline circulation
investigation. Despite their importance, we have a limited understanding of the
dynamics of bottom density currents, and at present, the oceanic density
currents are poorly represented in global climate simulations. The main goal of
this proposal is to enhance the understanding of the dynamics of ocean bottom
density currents from laboratory scale, to geophysical scale, through three-
dimensional, nonhydrostatic numerical simulations. The investigators accomplish
this in three stages. First, benchmark a parallel high-order spectral element
Navier-Stokes solver, Nek5000, by reproducing existing laboratory results of
bottom density currents by direct numerical simulations. Second, explore
dynamics for which there are few or no laboratory results, in particular
dynamics of bottom density currents protruding into a stratified fluid, and in a
rotating environment. Third, bridge the gap between laboratory scale and
geophysical scale by using large eddy simulations. Geophysical scale
calculations are configured for the Red Sea overflow, and confirmed with data
from the Red Sea Overflow Experiment. Various metrics are used to quantify
density current dynamics.

Variation of solar heating with latitude, and other factors, drive the so-called
``thermohaline'' circulation in the ocean, which is closely linked to the role
that the ocean plays in climate dynamics. This complex geophysical problem, with
its range of scales, physical, mathematical and computational constraints can
only be approached through an orchestrated effort involving cross-disciplinary
expertise. The investigators conduct physically-guided numerical simulations,
quantify dynamical behavior of ocean density currents, and describe the impact
of density currents on the climate. The investigators integrate this research
project with education of three graduate students and contribute to the training
of US technical workforce for the 21st century. This research project enhances
the scientific understanding of oceanic density currents, and helps improve the
representation of ocean density currents in global climate simulations and
contribute to the climate change research.