* 0209279
* NER:  Terahertz Detection of Electron Spin Precession
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Steven Cundiff, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* C.  Caldwell
* 06/30/2003
* USD 95,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NER category. The overall
effort focuses on direct detection of electron spin dynamics by sensing the
emission of terahertz radiation mediated by the magnetic dipole of a population
of electrons precessing in an applied magnetic field. The goal of this initial
exploratory project is to determine if measurable terahertz radiation is
produced from an optically excited population of spin-oriented electrons in
n-doped GaAs and possibly semimagnetics such a CdMnTe. A superconducting split-
coil magnet will be used to apply fields upto 6.5 Tesla. Detection of the
radiated intensity of the terahertz will be done by using a liquid helium cooled
bolometer to avoid the alignment difficulties presented by electrooptic or
photoconductive detection. The population of spin-oriented electrons will be
generated by optical excitation with circularly-polarized femtosecond pulses. To
obtain populations that are sufficient large to generate a detectable signal,
either amplified pulses, or "spin amplification" by excitation that is resonant
with the spin precession will be used. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on
measurement of the intensity alone, the optimum configuration can be determined
and saturation characteristics studied. These results will complement prior
studies made using Faraday rotation and provide the background for using more
sophisticated detection of the terahertz radiation to measure the emitted
electric field, which reflects the spin dynamics. This will provide a direct
probe of the electron spin dynamics without the ambiguities present in the
currently used indirect optical probes such as Faraday or Kerr rotation. Such a
direct probe will answer important basic questions about spin dynamics for
larger spin densities than can be probed with current techniques. The results
will provide important fundamental knowledge necessary for the development of
nanotechnology devices based on the manipulation of electron spins. In addition,
they could provide the basis for a source of terahertz radiation based on
advances in spin manipulation using nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;