* 0209695
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences (SCREMS)
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Carl Kelley, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/2005
* USD 57,789.00

NSF Proposal DMS-0209695&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Ipsen, Campbell, Kelley, and
Meyer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
concerns the numerical solution&lt;br/&gt;of sparse optimal control problems.
The research issues&lt;br/&gt;originate from the Boeing Company's software
project&lt;br/&gt;SOCS (Sparse Optimal Control Software).
The&lt;br/&gt;constraints in the control problems are represented
by&lt;br/&gt;systems of differential algebraic equations (DAEs),
a&lt;br/&gt;class of differential equations whose solution
poses&lt;br/&gt;serious challenges. The PIs propose to advance
the&lt;br/&gt;state-of-the-art in high-index DAE technology to
solve&lt;br/&gt;realistic, large-scale applications; to
increase&lt;br/&gt;software scalability through the use of interior
point&lt;br/&gt;methods for non-linear solvers and Krylov-space
methods&lt;br/&gt;for linear solvers; and to develop prototyping
software&lt;br/&gt;to test accuracy and performance of new
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be conducted on improving
software for&lt;br/&gt;difficult, complex problems in aerospace and
mechanical&lt;br/&gt;engineering applications, such as design of
flight&lt;br/&gt;control systems, robot arms, and information
retrieval&lt;br/&gt;systems. The use of computation to explore new
science&lt;br/&gt;and engineering concepts is central to the
project.&lt;br/&gt;This multi-disciplinary project is driven
by&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with the Boeing company on its
industrial&lt;br/&gt;software project SOCS which solves many large-
scale&lt;br/&gt;optimal control problems that occur in
chemical&lt;br/&gt;reactions, and a large variety of aerospace
problems.&lt;br/&gt;