* 0209237
* Towards Certification by Verification
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Zohar Manna, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 09/30/2005
* USD 93,000.00

Certification of medical device software is a major concern for the Food and
Drug Administration: it is costly and time-consuming for the companies involved,
and there is a growing suspicion that the current certification requirements are
becoming more and more inadequate with increasing system complexity. At present
certification of medical device software is process-oriented. There is a strong
desire to move to a more product-oriented approach, but it is as yet unclear
what methods/evidence should be required. The goal of this research is to show
that existing formal methods can be adapted and augmented such that they can be
used effectively in the certification process. The research to achieve this
consists of the following three components:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automatic
Generation of User Models:&lt;br/&gt;For many medical devices operability is an
important concern, but it is not explicitly designed for. Automatic generation
of user models (that is, what does the user need to know about the system to be
able to operate it) allows evaluation of operability in early stages of the
design and guarantees a correct correspondence between user model and machine
model. The project is formalizing user model requirements and developing methods
to construct these models automatically from the machine
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Run-time Verification: &lt;br/&gt;Run-time
verification can complement design-time verification when the system is too
complex to be realistically verified in full. Run-time analysis techniques can
also be used for performance modeling and improvement of the system based on
run-time characteristics. The project investigates the usefulness of run-time
analysis in the certification process, both in the specification
phase&lt;br/&gt;(to stress test the model generated from the specification), and
in actual operation (to establish audit trails and catch unexpected behaviors).
The research is directed at the development of adequate specification languages
and logics for run-time verification, and efficient data structures for program
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Case study: &lt;br/&gt;At the request of
the FDA, the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research (WRAIR) has made available a
requirements document for a medium-sized medical device. It is the intent to use
this system as a basis to study the feasibility of product-oriented
certification. The modeling&lt;br/&gt;of this device has already started and
some preliminary analyses have been performed. The goal is to use formal methods
to produce a fulll set of proof documents and evaluate, in cooperation with the
FDA, whether these documents would be considered adequate evidence for
certification.