* 0209660
* Theoretical Studies of Structure and Reactions of Transition Metal Atoms, Ions, Complexes and Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Keiji Morokuma, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Raima Larter
* 06/30/2006
* USD 345,000.00

Keiji Morukuma of Emory University is supported by the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to study the structure and reactions of
transition metal clusters and complexes using ab initio, density functional, and
ONIOM (hybrid molecular orbital plus molecular orbital or molecular mechanics)
methods. The ONIOM method, which allows inclusion of complex real ligands into
computations, will be developed and calibrated for large transition metal
complexes. As well, the ONIOM-PCM (polarized continuum model) method will be
tested and employed to study organometallic reactions in solutions. Close
contact with experimental chemists will be maintained, while experimentally
relevant problems are explored. Gas phase reactions of dihydrogen, alkynes, and
alkenes with bare transition metal clusters and C-C, C-H and molecular nitrogen
bond activation, along with skeletal rearrangement, on trinuclear ruthenium
complexes will be studied, with the goal of examining metal clusters that can
catalyze reactions not possible on a single transition metal center. As well,
the mechanisms of several important reactions in organometallic chemistry will
be elucidated, encompassing a wide variety of reactions of mononuclear
transition metal complexes and full homogeneous catalytic cycles including (a)
olefin copolymerization, (b) element-element addition to unsaturated
hydrocarbons, (c) utilization of metal-ligand multiple bonds, (d) transition
metal catalyzed cycloisomerizations, (e) reaction of allylic compounds with
formic acid or metal-hydride, and olefin metathesis. The knowledge of structure,
spectroscopic properties, and energies of reaction intermediates and transition
states that will be gained from this research is expected to promote fundamental
understanding as well as aid logical design of new catalysts for better control
of complicated chemical reactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This computational
research project complements efforts in experimental chemistry, and is expected
to promote the fundamental understanding of complex chemical reactions. Although
many industrial catalytic processes have been developed in the past, the
chemical industry is trying hard to switch to catalysts using clean homogeneous
processes. Designing efficient catalysts is one of the areas where computational
chemistry can make a substantial impact in the chemical industry.