* 0209609
* The Causes and Consequences of Differential Press Coverage of Legislators
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* R. Douglas Arnold, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 06/30/2004
* USD 43,946.00

This project explores how local newspapers covered members of the House of
Representatives during a two-year period. The project involves searching all
editions of the chosen newspapers for any articles, editorials, columns, or
letters that mention the selected representatives, coding the items for their
content, and analyzing the coded data. &lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to
determine whether newspapers report the kinds of information that citizens need
to hold representatives accountable for their actions in office. The assumption
is that unbiased and readily available information enhances the prospects for
accountability, while incomplete or biased information thwarts it. The study
explores the regularity with which local newspapers report roll-call votes, the
extent to which newspapers cover representatives' other activities, including
introducing bills, holding hearings, and building coalitions, and the types of
policy issues that attract journalists' attention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project involves collecting four data sets to answer questions about the volume,
content, causes, and consequences of newspaper coverage. It includes: (1) a
systematic account of how 25 newspapers covered 25 representatives between
January 1, 1993, and November 8, 1994, in 8,003 articles, editorials, columns,
and letters; (2) a comparative analysis of how six pairs of newspapers covered
six representatives from Boston, Chicago, San Francisco, Seattle, Tucson, and
Washington during 1993 and 1994; (3) an analysis of the factors that affected
how extensively 67 local newspapers covered 187 representatives during a two-
year period, with a data set of 61 ,084 citations; and (4) an analysis of how
the volume of coverage in local newspapers affected how much citizens knew about
their local representatives, achieved by linking the data set of 61 ,084
citations with the 1994 survey conducted by the National Election Studies. The
current proposal is for a project to clean and document these four data sets and
prepare them for permanent archiving and public use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is the fIrst systematic study of how newspapers cover individual
legislators outside the campaign period. It is also the first study to examine
press coverage for a period longer than a few weeks. Most previous studies
estimated the extent of press coverage for representatives without analyzing the
content of coverage. The project demonstrates the utility of computers for
identifying and retrieving articles about representatives from newspaper
archives. All previous studies of how the press covered legislators have
required that researchers browse through newspapers searching for articles that
mention individual legislators. This study employs computers to do the browsing.
Computers have the advantage of being more efficient and less error-prone than
ordinary labor. Thus, they permit a vast increase in sample size. &lt;br/&gt;A
better understanding of how the press covers representatives' actions should
provide the foundation for a better understanding of citizens' electoral
decisions, representatives' policy decisions, and the nature of political
accountability in a large polity with separated powers and weak political
parties.&lt;br/&gt;