* 0209789
* Arabidopsis 2010: Functional Genomics of Arabidopsis Starch Granule Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Eve Wurtele, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 07/31/2006
* USD 2,048,943.00

The molecular and physiological functions of the Arabidopsis starch metabolism
gene network will be determined. The glucose polymers that make up starch,
despite their simple chemical structures, display a complex molecular
architecture that is essential for starch function. The Arabidopsis genome
sequence allows identification of all the genes involved in starch biosynthesis
or mobilization, and determination of the function of each gene product
individually and within the metabolic network. This aspect of metabolism is a
distinguishing feature of all plant life, by which the metabolic gains of
photosynthesis are stored and used later when light is not available as the
energy source. Understanding starch assembly and disassembly as a comprehensive
chemical system, therefore, is required for a complete functional description of
how the sequence information in the Arabidopsis genome is translated into the
plant life form.&lt;br/&gt; In this project, "determination of function" implies
that the role of each protein in the assembly or disassembly of starch polymers
will be understood at the level of specific molecular interactions. The project
focuses on 28 genes that are likely to be involved in starch metabolism after
the production of the glucosyl unit donor. The gene set includes starch
synthases, branching enzymes, debranching enzymes, a-amylases, b-amylases,
disproportionating enzymes, and starch phosphorylases. In each instance the
genome sequence predicts multiple isoforms. The two organizing hypotheses of the
project are that most isoforms have specific, non-overlapping roles in creating
or dismantling the molecular architecture of starch, and that many components of
the network act via direct functional interactions rather than in a series of
independent enzymatic steps.&lt;br/&gt; Results will be shared through
scientific publication, regular web postings (www.starchmetnet.com), and via
scientific conferences. Resources that will be developed and made available to
the scientific community include mutant lines, isoform-specific antibodies, and
purified recombinant enzymes. &lt;br/&gt; The project will have broader impacts
in the training of scientists at all levels in areas such as mRNA profiling,
biochemistry, and bioinformatics. The project will strive to involve members of
under-represented groups in this activity at the undergraduate level, through
established partnerships with universities that traditionally serve such
students. Starch provides the majority of calories in the human diet, and is
also a renewable resource for energy production and industrial raw materials.
Comprehensive understanding of this energy storage system will provide a greater
ability to exploit renewable plant resources to meet the continually increasing
demands of our changing society and environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;