* 0209934
* CRC:  Multi-dimensional Molecular Metals, Crystal Design, and Superconductivity
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Stephen Lee, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2006
* USD 770,000.00

Stephen Lee and Francis J. DiSalvo of Cornell University and Dhandapani
Venkataraman of the University of Massachusetts are supported by the Division of
Chemistry and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate for their interdisciplinary collaboration aimed
developing crystal design strategies for molecular metals. They will study ways
to control the transition from the insulating state to the metallic state in
organic systems. Because the superconducting critical temperature, Tc, is
highest in metals containing light elements, (ie., the carbon and oxygen in
fullerides and copper oxides) this study will focus on a number of distinctly
different multi-dimensional organic metals. Important multi-dimensional crystal
design parameters, such as packing efficiencies, local dipole-dipole
interactions, hydrophobic-hydrophilic interactions, hydrogen bonding and
coordination bonding, will be delineated. In these systems, which will include
multidimensional pi coordinated molecular networks, pthalocyanines and inorganic
clusters coupled to pi organics, effects of electronic structure on Tc- will be
investigated, and connections made to the problem of hole and electron mobility
in organic semiconductors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research in
Chemistry (CRC) awards are given to interdisciplinary teams of scientists
working on problems of broad chemical interest. The emphasis in these awards is
on new collaborative modes of research and training.&lt;br/&gt;