* 0209584
* US-Bangladesh Cooperative Research: Theoretical Studies of Reaction Processes in Light and Medium-Light Nuclei Involving Alpha-Particle
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2008
* F. Bary Malik, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2008
* USD 35,000.00

0209584&lt;br/&gt;Malik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a cooperative project by Professor F. Bary Malik, Department of
Physics at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois, Dr. Arun Basak,
Physics Department at Rajshahi University, Rajshahi, Bangladesh and Dr. Susanta
Das, Physics Department, Shahjalal University of Science and Technology, Sylhet,
Bangladesh. They plan to study the global alpha-nucleus potential for light and
medium light nuclei by extending the investigations carried out by the PI and
his collaborators, under the sponsorship of NSF, to other reactions and nuclei.
In particular, the study will be extended to reactions with polarized
projectiles, proton and deuteron, and with carbon, oxygen, sulfur, calcium and
nickel targets. In addition, the investigation will be extended to a-silicon
case at lower energies. The relations of the alpha-nucleus potential, determined
herein, to two nucleon potentials will be investigated within the context of an
energy-density functional theory and folding model. The study will be extended
to alpha-transfer reactions involving lithium projectile. Finally, the phase
equivalencies for a shallow and deep complex potential with the context of the
super symmetric transformation will be investigated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The US and Bangladesh collaborators have
complementary qualifications. They have access to the necessary computer codes
for the research. The project deals with an important point in theoretical
physics that may have applications for shielding space vehicles. The
collaboration will also benefit the educational and research capabilities of two
universities in Bangladesh. Dr. Das, who completed his doctorate research in
this area through past collaboration between Dr. Malik and Dr. Basak, has
coauthored a series of papers. The project is funded by the Office of
International Science and Engineering and the Division of Physics. &lt;br/&gt;