* 0209454
* SGER: Discovery of Substrates and Inhibitors of the Anthrax Lethal Factor using Peptide Libraries
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Lewis Cantley, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 03/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

`Inhalational anthrax is nearly always fatal unless antibiotic treatment begins
early in the course of the disease. There is therefore an urgent need for novel
agents to treat the disease in the event of further terrorist use of anthrax.
Fatality from anthrax is attributable to a toxin produced by the bacteria called
lethal toxin. Much attention has turned to the development of agents which
target lethal toxin as an adjunct to antibiotic therapy. The enzymatically
active component of lethal toxin is a zinc-dependent metalloprotease called
lethal factor (LF). LF causes the activation and lysis of macrophages as a
consequence of the specific cleavage of proteins in the cell cytosol. Data on
the cleavage site specificity of LF is at this point limited, and no specific
inhibitors of LF have thus far been reported. The substrate specificity of LF
will be determined using recently developed peptide library methodology. Data
from peptide library screens will be used to prepare model substrates for
monitoring LF activity both in vitro and in living cells. Peptide analogous
inhibitors based on the optimal cleavage motif will be prepared. Improved
inhibitors will be generated based on additional peptide library screens
incorporating non-proteogenic "unnatural" amino acids, thus allowing a virtually
unlimited source of chemical diversity to be tapped in an unprecedented manner.
Such inhibitors can serve as lead compounds in the development of novel anthrax
drugs. The technologies developed will be generally applicable to the design of
substrates and inhibitors for proteases essential for the pathogenesis of other
infectious diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;