* 0209439
* Responsive Polymer Multilayers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Svetlana Sukhishvili, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2005
* USD 307,118.00

This research focuses on understanding the principles of building responsive
polymeric materials by means of self-assembly of polymers at surfaces.
Applications of the multilayering technique to produce new materials for
controlled delivery of chemicals have been recently proposed, yet there is
presently no adequate understanding of the response properties of multilayered
films. Multilayers will be built using various copolymers that contain centers
for both electrostatic and hydrogen bonding; and the fraction of monomer units
within a copolymer will be systematically varied to control pH/ionic strength at
which the films delaminate or swell. Novel modifications of the polymers will
produce non-delaminating films with targeted response properties. The film
growth and response properties will be determined by in situ ATR-FTIR
spectroscopy, in situ ellipsometry in phase-modulated mode, and permeability
ionizations and degree of hydrogen-bonding among the layered molecules. The
second will enable measurements of the swelling of the films in different
environmental measurements. The question of how they are translated into changes
in film density and stability will be addressed. Finally, the knowledge of
interlayer interactions, swelling and permeability of the films will be used to
build polymeric containers with rationally designed response of the
membrane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research might enable the design of novel
layered polymer films and capsules with targeted response characteristics. The
potential applications of these materials include temporary protection layers,
responsive coatings and controlled delivery of chemicals, such as pesticides,
fragrances or drugs.&lt;br/&gt;