* 0209678
* NIRT: Nanorobotics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Aristides A. Requicha, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,010,000.00

This research project is funded in response to the Nanoscale Science and
Engineering Initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. Nanorobotics is concerned
with (1) manipulation of nanoscale objects by using micro or macro devices, and
(2) construction, control and programming of robots with overall dimensions at
the nanoscale (or with microscopic dimensions but nanoscopic components). This
project covers both of these aspects, because both are important:
nanomanipulation is the most effective process developed until now for
prototyping of nanosystems, and nanorobots with dimensions comparable to those
of biological cells are expected to have revolutionary applications in
environmental monitoring and health care-for example, in the early detection and
destruction of pathogens. The initial research will be biased towards
manipulation, with a focus on the automation of techniques developed in previous
NSF grants for reliable and accurate nanomanipulation by using the tip of a
Scanning Probe Microscope (SPM) as a sensory robot. Work on nanorobot
construction will begin at a low level but increase as the project evolves. It
will integrate research on sensors, actuators, control, power, communications,
and interfacing across spatial scales and between organic/inorganic as well as
biotic/abiotic systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical and experimental
results of this work will contribute to the understanding of robotics in domains
with large spatial uncertainties, and to the development of NEMS
(Nanoelectromechanical Systems). The software will be widely distributed and
will be very useful to scientists and engineers working in nanomanipulation and
nanolithography. The project will involve students at all levels, from postdocs
to minority high-school students, who will be exposed to this new and
interdisciplinary field. The research will be further coupled to education
through conference tutorials and new, regular university courses. For example, a
graduate course in nanorobotics offered in the Spring semester of 2002 will
evolve by incorporating the research findings of the project, and a tutorial
based on the course will be offered at the 2002 IEEE conference on
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;