* 0209024
* Testing Based on Hybrid System Models
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Insup Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2006
* USD 450,000.00

Lee, Insup&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0209024&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many embedded systems are
part of safety-critical applications, e.g.,&lt;br/&gt;avionics systems,
manufacturing, automotive controllers, and medical&lt;br/&gt;devices. The
safety-critical nature of embedded applications requires a
higher&lt;br/&gt;level of robustness and reliability than is called for in
conventional&lt;br/&gt;software systems development. In the attempt to insure a
higher level of&lt;br/&gt;confidence in the design and implementation, current
practice merely&lt;br/&gt;increases the duration, frequency, scope, etc. of
traditional&lt;br/&gt;verification practices. The net result is substantially
higher&lt;br/&gt;development costs and longer design cycles, leading to a design
cycle&lt;br/&gt;where a verification bottleneck is impacting overall
operational&lt;br/&gt;effectiveness, efficiency and safety.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to mitigate the verification bottleneck
by identifying&lt;br/&gt;appropriate specification formalisms, and using those
formalisms as a&lt;br/&gt;basis to develop fully automated techniques for
verifying&lt;br/&gt;implementations using testing. An important distinguishing
&lt;br/&gt;characteristic of the embedded applications listed earlier is the
&lt;br/&gt;hybrid (discrete and continuous)nature of behaviors. The continuous
&lt;br/&gt;components of embedded systems, and the large state&lt;br/&gt;spaces
of all industrially relevant systems, make verification&lt;br/&gt;techniques
based on exhaustive exploration of the state space&lt;br/&gt;intractable.
Therefore, it is necessary to approach the verification&lt;br/&gt;problem with
techniques based on sampling, i.e., testing. This requires
&lt;br/&gt;abstracting the original system state space to&lt;br/&gt;create a
condensed state space that can be explored to determine&lt;br/&gt;valuable
points to sample. Methods of abstraction, methods for&lt;br/&gt;selecting test
points, and methods for evaluating the relative merit&lt;br/&gt;of one set of
test points vs. another are all issues addressed by this&lt;br/&gt;work. The
research also explores the use of traditional&lt;br/&gt;notions of test coverage
applied to formal specifications of hybrid&lt;br/&gt;systems. Test suites are
generated using the counterexample or&lt;br/&gt;witness generation techniques of
model checkers as well as random
path&lt;br/&gt;generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The practical issues of
demonstrating the working techniques, and the&lt;br/&gt;efficacy of these
techniques when applied to realistic systems, are&lt;br/&gt;addressed through
the implementation of tools that automate all&lt;br/&gt;steps of the process:
abstraction, test selection, test derivation,&lt;br/&gt;test application to
concrete implementations, and the evaluation of&lt;br/&gt;test results. Tools
are developed on top of the existing&lt;br/&gt;CHARON framework for creating
hybrid system models.&lt;br/&gt;Case-study work based on real system
specifications and&lt;br/&gt;benefit from interaction with practicing engineers
working for Honeywell, a&lt;br/&gt;leader in the development of advanced
avionics systems. One issue is how&lt;br/&gt;to integrate the techniques into
development processes that conform &lt;br/&gt;to the DO-178B avionics
certification process.&lt;br/&gt;Among the broader impacts that are anticipated
from this work are (1)&lt;br/&gt;an increase in awareness of and actual use of
formal methods by&lt;br/&gt;practicing developers, and (2) an acceleration of
the safety-critical&lt;br/&gt;embedded system development process that will
enable the creation of&lt;br/&gt;safer, more reliable systems with shorter
development cycle times.&lt;br/&gt;