* 0209536
* Bifurcation Analysis for Large Problems:  Algorithms, Software Applications to Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS)
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Mark Friedman, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2006
* USD 211,308.00

Nonlinear equations depending on parameters are the basis for many scientific
and engineering problems. The principal approach of numerical bifurcation
analysis is based on continuation of solutions to well-defined operator
equations. Such computational results give a deeper understanding of the
solution behavior, stability, multiplicity, and bifurcations. This project is
concerned with development of new algorithms and software for bifurcation
analysis in large nonlinear systems and applications to MicroElectroMechanical
Systems (MEMS). Typical MEMS devices lead to multiscale-multiphysics problems.
These devices include coupled mechanical, electrical, thermal and other parts.
In addition to the bifurcations like beam buckling which involve a single type
of physics, MEMS also exhibit bifurcations due to interactions between different
energy domains. Bifurcations in MEMS play a variety of roles: (i) bifurcation as
a failure mode (lead systems to fail), (ii) bifurcation as a design feature
(i.e. bistable systems), (iii) bifurcations to extract material
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the engine of an automobile to a hospital
operating room, MicroElectroMechanical (MEMS) products are finding applications
in every aspect of our lives at an increasing rate. SUGAR is a new system level
simulation program in MATLAB for three-dimenisonal MEMS developed at the
University of California Berkeley. It is already widely used in academia and
industry and is currently under active development, which is a part of the
revolution in the MEMS design. SUGAR will be made freely available in source and
as a web service. New algorithms for bifurcation analysis in MEMS will be
implemented in MATLAB, and then the resulting new code will be incorporated into
a MATLAB continuation toolbox, developed at Universiteit Utrecht, to enhance its
capabilities for bifurcation analysis of large systems. The upgraded MATLAB
continuation toolbox will be integrated into SUGAR and will become a part of the
MEMS design loop which includes design, simulation, fabrication, laboratory
measurements, and comparison of simulation with measurements.