* 0209692
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Emerging Complexity among Middle Preceramic Hunter-Gatherers on the North Coast of Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2004
* Tom Dillehay, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2004
* USD 11,930.00

Under the direction of Dr. Tom Dillehay, Ms. Kary L. Stackelbeck will collect
archeological and paleoecological data for her doctoral dissertation. She will
continue archaeological survey and excavation in the lower Jequetepeque Valley
on the north coast of Peru, which began during the Proyecto Pacasmayo
(1997-2001; co-directed by Drs. Tom Dillehay and Alan Kolata). The Central
Andes, particularly Peru and Ecuador, is known as an area where pristine
civilization and monumental architecture developed early. But unlike other parts
of the world where the earlier Neolithic and Archaic periods are fairly well
known, relatively little is known about the preceding cultures and practices of
the Middle Preceramic Period (ca. 7000-4500 BP) that set the stage for these
later independent developments in Peru. It has generally been assumed that
simple coastal fisherfolk and gatherers of the Middle Preceramic suddenly
established complex polities with sophisticated social hierarchies and
monumental architecture of the Late Preceramic period without any transitional
socio-economic formations. But there are indications that some social, economic,
and technological changes had their roots in the preceding Middle Preceramic. It
is the purpose of the proposed research to examine the processes of emerging
social and economic complexity as evidenced by Middle Preceramic occupations of
the lower Jequetepeque Valley on the North coast of Peru and to compare these
processes with those in other regions of the world. &lt;br/&gt;The student
applicant has spent two field seasons conducting survey in the lower
Jequetepeque Valley as part of the Proyecto Pacasmayo. During this survey, tight
clusters of a wide variety of Early and Middle Preceramic sites were identified
in parts of Quebrada del Batan and Quebrada Talambo. The Q. Talambo sites in
particular exhibit the remains of Middle Preceramic and later domestic
architecture defined by earlier circular and later semi-rectangular stone-lined
structures, dense concentrations of chipped-stone lithics (including unifaces),
and/or grinding stones. The presence of permanent architecture in the form of
two to eight circular stone-lined huts at single sites signals important early
steps toward settlement permanency, social aggregation, and increased
localization in preferred ecological zones along the lower western slopes of the
Andes in this area. The Q. Talambo area lies within an ecological setting
consisting of multiple, closely-juxtaposed microenvironmental zones along the
lower western flanks of the Andes. The pattern of Early and Middle Preceramic
sites is different from the Late Preceramic pyramids and settlements, which are
located closer to the valley floor, presumably for the purpose of exploiting
fertile agricultural lands. The proposed research project will be the first
opportunity on the north coast of Peru to systematically examine tight clusters
of Middle Preceramic sites in this kind of ecological setting in order to
understand the socio-economic processes that set in motion social aggregation,
subsistence/settlement localization, and technological change, and to relate
this understanding to other areas of the world. The research methodology will
involve the completion of survey within the Q. Talambo drainage and excavation
of selected, intact Middle Preceramic sites. In addition, various lithic
analyses, paleoecological studies, and intrasite spatial analysis will be
performed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the proposed study is specifically
focused on local evidence for emergent complexity, it is understood that this
research will have implications for our understanding of long-term culture
change within the Jequetepeque Valley, the north coast region, and the Central
Andes in broader perspective. In addition, the results of this research will add
to a growing body of research aimed at understanding how the organizational
principles of early hunter-gatherers in many parts of the world ultimately set
the stage for later, complex societies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;