* 0209313
* Adaptive hr-mesh refinement for the numerical solution of advection-diffusion equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Weiming Cao, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 90,252.00

DMS Award Abstract Award #: 0209313 PI: Weiming Cao Institution: University of
Texas, San Antonio Program: Computational Mathematics Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis

Title: Adaptive hr-mesh refinement for the numerical solution of advection-
diffusion equations

A fundamental issue in the numerical solutions of partial differential equations
(PDEs) is adaptive mesh refinement. Local refinements (the h-methods) and moving
mesh methods (the r-methods) are two basic types of approaches. Each has its
features. The h-methods are robust and reliable. The r-methods can be highly
efficient and effective for time dependent problems. The goal of this project is
to develop a comprehensive combined h- and r-refinement method to achieve the
advantages of both approaches. This combined method is especially useful in
solving advection-diffusion problems, with which the numerical diffusion and
advection speed can be significantly reduced. Major issues to be addressed in
this research include: the error estimates used to guide the hr-refinement,
stable and accurate time integration methods used in conjunction with the
spatial hr-refinement; the conservative numerical schemes based on the hr-
refined meshes; the efficient solution of the linear algebraic equations arising
from the discretization; the implementation and software development. While the
analysis and algorithms will be established in the context of general time
dependent advection-diffusion problems, we shall focus on two specific
applications: the contamination and remediation of ground water systems in
environmental science, and the motion and deformation of white blood cells in
biophysics.

With the advances of modern computer technology, numerical experiments have now
become one of the two primary tools in science, industry, and engineering (the
other is physical experiments). Numerical simulation of many important processes
involves the solution of advection-diffusion problems. Examples include optimal
design of aircrafts and automobiles, forecast of global weather change,
remediation of surface and ground water contamination, and innovation of
biomedical devices. This project aims to develop a robust, reliable, and highly
efficient mesh refinement method used for solving the advection-diffusion
problems. Major issues in the design, analysis, and implementation of this
method will be addressed. In particular, it will be applied directly to solve
environmental and biophysical problems. We anticipate that successful completion
of this project will not only enrich the mathematical theory of adaptive
solution of partial differential equations, but also generate highly efficient
and accurate numerical algorithms, which will find applications in a variety of
industrial and engineering areas that are essential to our national economy and
security.

Date: May 22nd, 2002