* 0209476
* Organometallic Reaction Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Charles Casey, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 05/31/2007
* USD 700,000.00

This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Professor Charles P. Casey at the University of Wisconsin
to develop an understanding of industrially-important metallocene polymerization
catalysis and to pursue new synthetic paths to enediyne complexes that may
facilitate the preparation of enediyne anticancer drugs. Metallocene catalysts
have revolutionized the polymer industry and now account for the production of
over 2 billion poinds of polyethylene a year. This research will look at a key
step in the polymer chain-lengthening process by exploring the detailed
structural dependence of alkene insertion into metallocene alkyls. A new
synthetic reaction involving alkynyl carbene complexes, which juxtapose a metal-
carbon double bond with a carbon-carbon triple bond, will be used to generate
regioselective dimerization of the organic portion to yield enediyne complexes
through a coupling of the terminal alkyne carbons. The initial focus will be on
manganese compounds, which are more economical and more amenable to release of
the metal ion. Since reactions of the alkynylcarbene complexes suggest a
carbene-like reactivity at the remote alkynyl carbon, experiments will be
undertaken to determine whether such complexes can react as if they were
dicarbenes.

The details of how catalysts add carbon groups in important industrial
polymerization processes will be determined. A novel class of reagents that
offers new routes to the preparation of an important class of anticancer drugs
will be developed.