* 0209835
* Experiments in Education:  Development of a Week-long Summer Shortcourse in Polymer Chemistry for Undergraduates
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* David Tyler, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 05/31/2007
* USD 60,150.00

This award will support a week-long summer program in polymer for
undergraduates. Participants will be selected from applicants from across the
nation. The purpose of "PolyCamp" is to expose undergraduate students to the
fascinating field of polymer science with the ultimate goal of getting them to
consider graduate school and eventual employment in the field. A second key
purpose is to expose the students to the various exciting career opportunities
in polymer science. The week-long program consists of a number of introductory
lectures on polymer chemistry; industrial plant tours; industrial and academic
lab tours; three laboratory experiments; and group and individual discussions of
career pathways and opportunities in the polymer field. Although PolyCamp has is
only one week in duration, it will especially appeal to students who, for
whatever reason, cannot commit to a full summer. It is proposed that programs
such as PolyCamp are an excellent way to increase the number of students who are
interested in polymer science, which will benefit the entire polymer community.
Long-term assessment data will be collected and used to determine to what extent
the PolyCamp experience stimulated the students' interest in polymer science and
how it has helped them develop and execute their career plans. The program has
the strong backing of industrial affiliates, who eager to give plant tours and
lead discussions of career opportunities.