* 0209187
* A Computational Infrastructure for Embedded High Consequence System Development
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Victor Winter, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 06/30/2004
* USD 90,000.00

Project Summary



The objective of the proposed activity is the development of a high-assurance
function, called a classloader. This function carries out the static aspects
associated with the execution of Java classfiles as it is defined by a concrete
implementation of the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). The implementation being
targeted is called the Sandia Secure Processor (SSP). To date, a prototype of
the SSP has been developed in VHDL which synthesized to < 40K gates and is
capable of operating near 75MHz.

The goal is to compose the classloader and the SSP to produce a Java-centric
computational component capable of being used in embedded system development.
Intended application areas for this technology encompass high to ultra-high
consequence embedded systems.

A primary application domain for which this technology is targeted has imposed
the following constraints on the system:

1.There must be the option of building the processor using rad-hard technology.

2.An open source for the system must be available allowing detailed design
analysis and testing of all aspects of the system (possibly down to the gate
level).

3.Certification evidence should be provided by formal mathematical proofs of
correctness to the extent possible, and strongly convincing evidence must be
provided in all other cases where mathematical proofs have not been achieved.

4.A security policy must be strictly enforced ensuring that any program is
either rejected as incorrect by compile-time or run-time checks, or its behavior
must be understandable by reasoning based entirely on the language semantics,
independent of the implementation. In particular, no security violation must be
permitted to succeed regardless whether it is the result of an inadvertent
error, or a malevolent well thought out attack.

Correctness-preserving program transformation is the method that is being
employed to implement a high-assurance classloader function. In this approach,
the functionality of the classloader is realized via a lengthy sequence of small
"intellectually manageable" rewrite steps. Here, a rewrite step is considered to
be intellectually manageable if its correctness can be formally verified in
practice. In order to achieve this goal, novel transformation techniques are
being explored and developed.

This project will significantly impact the computer science community by (1)
advancing knowledge in the area of program transformation, (2) demonstrating to
industry that formal methods (in this case program transformation) can be
effectively applied to real-world problems, and (3) providing a computational
infrastructure (i.e., the SSP) that is suitable for embedded high-consequence
system development.

