* 0209817
* Nanomachining by Combining Femtosecond Laser Radiation with Near-Field Scanning Optical Microscope: Fundamental Studies and Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Costas Grigoropoulos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 07/31/2004
* USD 188,570.00

&lt;br/&gt;The production of surface nanofeatures has many important
applications in critical emerging technology fields, including the heterogeneous
integration of nanoscale components and devices in microelectronics, information
storage and optoelectronic systems. The ultra-fast temporal scale of femtosecond
pulsed laser radiation will be combined with the high spatial resolution of
near-field optical microscope for nanomachining. This hybrid single-step
experimental methodology offers superior flexibility and control over the
nanofabrication process. The project will encompass both basic investigation of
the extremely rapid transport phenomena in nanometer length scales as well as
the design and demonstration of novel practical processes for nanomachining and
nanofabrication. The main objectives of the proposed research are given
below:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Development of experimental procedures for
nanomachining by coupling femtosecond laser radiation with near-field optical
microscopes.&lt;br/&gt;2) Detailed study of the fundamental mechanisms of the
ultra-fast laser energy deposition and the ensuing nanoscale phase
transformations by in-situ time-resolved optical spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;3)
Investigation of the ultra-fast transport phenomena in the machining, cutting
and joining of nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the impact of
the work in many nanotechnology applications, fundamental insight will be gained
into the complex thermophysical phenomena in ultra-fast laser-induced nanoscale
surface modification processes. Funding is being provided by the Thermal
Transport and Thermal Processing Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems
Division and by the Nanomanufacturing Program of the Design, Manufacturing and
Industrial Innovation Division.&lt;br/&gt;