* 0209689
* Conference: 2002 Gordon Research Conference on CO2 Fixation and Metabolism In Green Plants;   August 11-16, 2002, South Hadley, Massachusetts
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Raymond Chollet, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Neil E. Hoffman
* 07/31/2003
* USD 7,800.00

This grant provides support for the Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on CO2
FIXATION &amp; METABOLISM IN GREEN PLANTSlI to be held at Mount Holyoke College
on August 11 th -16 th , 2002, four days after the Plant Biology 2002 meeting in
Denver. This international GRC regularly takes place on a triennial basis,
alternating between sites in the US and Western Europe. Its specific focus on
extensive, forward-thinking discussion is not duplicated by any other plant-
related conference. The internationally recognized organizing committee,
comprised of Drs. Raymond Chollet (University of Nebraska-Lincoln) and Christine
Foyer (IACR-Rothamsted, UK) as the elected Co-Chairs and Drs. George Bowes
(University of Florida) and Susanne von Caemmerer (Australian
NationalUniversity) as the elected Co-Vice-Chairs, has developed and finalized a
timely, exciting program consisting of nine informal sessions and four
contributed poster sessions. Consistent with recent trends in this GRC and this
field's advancing basic science, the former sessions will be both integrative
and rather wide-ranging under the general theme of photosynthetic CO2-fixation
and metabolism in plants, including [1] Photosynthesis in the Ecosystem, [2, 3]
CO2-Assimilating Enzymes &amp; Their Regulation, [4] CO2-Concentrating
Mechanisms, [5] Starch and Sucrose Metabolism, [6] C- and N-Signaling, [8]
Chloroplast-Mitochondrial Interactions, and [9] a featured, after-banquet
presentation on the emerging role of the chloroplast and photosynthesis in
secondary metabolism in green plants. In addition, one entire session [7] will
be devoted to early-career scientists and/or late-breaking, hot-off-the-press
results selected from among the poster presentations and/or very recent
literature. Along these lines, the critical, singular goal of this grant is to
provide partial, fixed-fee and/or travel support to 12 early-career, US plant
scientists, including graduate and advanced undergraduate students; postdoctoral
research associates; and unfunded, beginning PIs. The participation of these
junior US scientists will not only be of immense professional benefit and
encouragement to them, but also to the dynamic, cutting-edge nature of a GRC,
the success of Session 7, and to future exciting advances in this active field
of experimental plant biology.