* 0209497
* Multiscale Methods for Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Constantin Bacuta, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2005
* USD 116,567.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0209497&lt;br/&gt;PI: Xu,
Jinchao&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Pennsylvania State University &lt;br/&gt;Program:
Computational Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Multiscale Methods for Partial
Differential Equations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this work is on the
development and applications of a two-scale discretization technique, namely the
finite element method based on partition of unity. One main application is on
the design of efficient discretization for nonmatching (either overlapping or
nonoverlapping) grids. The main idea of nonmatching grids is to divide a
physical domain into a set of overlapping or nonoverlapping subregions which can
accommodate smooth, simple, easily generated grids. In this approach, a grid
generation for complex geometries can be made simple, refinement grids can be
added or removed without changing other grids, different equations/numerical
methods may be used on different grids, efficient structured grid solvers may be
used. Furthermore, overlapping grids are well suited for parallelization and
vectorization. The proposed generalized finite element method based on partition
of unity provides a general and powerful discretization framework for this type
of grids. Another major task is the development of a multigrid iterative method
for solving the resulting algebraic systems for these new discretization
schemes. As divide and conquer techniques, the proposed multiscale algorithms
are suitable for parallel and high-performance computers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A class of new multiscale techniques are proposed to study
for efficient numerical solution of partial differential equations. Multiscale
methods in general are proven to be among the most powerful mathematical tools
for the investigation of a broad range of models that are described by partial
differential equations. Their pivotal role in the design of fast, reliable, and
robust numerical methods for the solution of various problems places them among
the most important research areas in the applied mathematics in the recent
years. Since these methods are in some sense problem-independent, they are
expected to have many important applications in science and engineering such as
composite materials and subsurface flows in environmental
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date: May 28, 2002&lt;br/&gt;