* 0209094
* Hybrid Modeling and Analysis of Error Recovery in Safety Critical Flight Control Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Oscar Gonzalez, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2004
* USD 119,996.00

Oscar R. Gonzalez&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0209094&lt;br/&gt;"Hybrid Modeling and Analysis
of Error Recovery in Safety Critical Flight Control
Systems"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Embedded computer systems have become
an essential component of technological products and systems. An example is the
safety-critical real-time computer systems on board the Boeing 777, a digital
fly-by-wire aircraft. To completely certify that safety-critical systems will
operate as intended requires the validation and verification of both the
software and the hardware. An additional challenge is the use of safety critical
systems in harsh environments that produce electromagnetic interference (EMI)
such as high intensity radiated fields (HIRF) or lightning. Under these harsh
conditions, it is known that triple modular redundancy, error correcting codes,
and other fault-tolerant computing techniques are of limited use, since multiple
fault containment regions are near-simultaneously affected by correlated or
common-mode faults. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
developing enhanced models and analysis tools from the ground up, that is, it
starts with models of the physical system, the controller, and the environment
in order to study the stability of closed-loop systems and the safety properties
of embedded software. To make sure that the theoretical foundations being
developed are sound, a particular class of systems is considered: computer
systems with error recovery, which control physical processes and mitigate the
effects of common-mode faults. The external events are triggered with a certain
probability by the presence of a harsh electromagnetic disturbance. The internal
events are generated by the error recovery logic. This class of systems is
hybrid since it includes the continuous-time dynamics of the process under
control and of the electromagnetic environment, the discrete-time dynamics of
the controller, and the models for the transitions. The models and tools being
developed are enhancements of switched system models and analysis tools. Their
capabilities are validated together and independently with a particular flight
control system. The controller is being implemented using an architecture that
has been evolving for the past 30 years: rollback recovery. This architecture
has been widely used in digital process control systems and in real-time
database transaction systems. In particular, a rollback error recovery
architecture using dual-lock step processors is part of a prototype of a
recoverable computer system (RCS) being investigated by a NASA-industry
partnership to deal with transient or soft common-mode faults. The new models
will be validated using data from NASA Langley Research Center's HIRF Laboratory
via a Cooperative Research Agreement. The analytical tools developed in this
project will allow system designers to quickly evaluate new recoverable computer
architectures before doing the more expensive and time consuming physical tests.
&lt;br/&gt;