* 0209179
* Integrated System-Theoretic and Software-Enabled Strategies for Embedded Smart Sensors in Hybrid Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Jay Lee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Bonnie Heck CCR-0209179 "Integrated System-Theorectic and Software-Enabled
Strategies for Embedded Smart Sensors in Hybrid Systems"

This research addresses the efficient design and effective operation of "smart"
sensor suites, which are to be embedded in complex hybrid systems with multiple
modes of operation and multiple mission / fault scenarios. An integrated
approach is being pursued in which system-theoretic analysis is combined with
real-time embedded software design techniques that focus on composition and
dynamic reconfiguration issues. This integrative approach supports the design of
the sensor suite, including its management software, which is capable of fusing
information from heterogeneous sensors to develop estimates for physical
parameters and detect / diagnose faults, and of dynamically reconfiguring itself
in the face of identified fault scenarios or mode changes. The research
addresses system-theoretic issues and software-design issues on a concurrent
basis so that the requirements and capabilities of the two sides can be
understood and taken into account. Hence, issues such as synchronizing data from
multiple distributed sources and managing transitions while reconfiguring
continuous components, are being formalized and explicitly accounted for
throughout the design, beginning with the sensor selection / placement decision
to the development of algorithms for sensor fusion and dynamic reconfiguration.
This work is drawing upon existing results in the hybrid systems literature and
developing some additional theories and tools as necessary. The topics studied
in this research include: o Sensor placement in a distributed hybrid system:
What types of sensors should be placed where so that important changes, both
continuous and discrete, can be observed with required accuracies. o Sensor
fusion: How the signals generated from a heterogeneous sensor array will be
combined to generate useful information, such as physical states, parameter
values, and fault status, under different modes of operation. o Dynamic
reconfiguration: How to reconfigure on the fly the processing and fusing of
signals from different sensors, in the face of an identified fault or a mode
change, and how the information will be transitioned from one mode to another.

The research is creating system-theoretic and software modeling tools for
constructing smart sensor suites that can adapt to changes and faults that occur
in a complex hybrid system. The research is also expected to improve the
fundamental understanding into the observability property of hybrid systems and
the design and analysis of a state estimator for such a system. The theoretical
/ methodological development is being validated on sensor suites for real
applications (e.g., a three tank process demonstrator) so that no important real
issues are overlooked.

On the educational front, cross-disciplinary course(s) and research programs are
being developed that breed a unique set of students versed in both systems-
control theories and real-time software design.