* 0209694
* Collaborative Research:  Arabidopsis 2010:  In Vivo Genomics:  Visualizing G Protein Interactions in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2002,11/30/2006
* Sarah Assmann, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 11/30/2006
* USD 1,372,083.00

Heterotrimeric G proteins couple multiple and diverse signals (e.g. light,
pathogens, hormones) recognized by receptors to downstream effectors in a cell-
specific manner. In Arabidopsis, hypothesized G-protein involvement in multiple
signal transduction and developmental processes can be assessed using the tools
developed by this project. The gene set comprises 16 heptahelical membrane
proteins (candidate G protein-coupled receptors), one canonical Ga subunit, one
Gb, and two Gg subunits (of the heterotrimeric complex), and three 'extralarge'
Ga-related proteins (XLGs). The resources/tools that will be developed are: 1)
GUS constructs allowing localization of expression for the gene set and; 2)
constructs allowing visualization of physical interactions between members of
the gene set in vivo in real time and with spatial dimensions using fluorescence
energy transfer (FRET) between cyan fluorescent protein (CFP)-tagged and yellow
fluorescent protein (YFP)-tagged proteins. The GUS constructs will be available
at the conclusion of the first year of funding, and the YFP and CFP
translational fusion constructs will be available at the conclusion of the
second year of funding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vector maps, images of expression
levels and patterns, protocol updates, and instructions for obtaining material
will be posted weekly at the following URL, which will be TAIR-linked:
www.plantbiology.unc.edu/ Constructs will be available for order via the
webpage. For each translational fusion, three stable transgenic lines will be
deposited in the stock center following validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
significance of the proposed work in relation to the overall 2010 project
objectives is twofold. Function of the members of the gene family that is the
target of this project will be determined as follows. Expression patterns of the
genes will be evaluated in plants. The role the gene projects have in root cell
proliferation and guard cell signaling will be evaluated, and novel small
molecules that modulate plant G protein signaling pathways, as assessed by the
FRET 'readout', will be identified. Tools developed by the project will allow
the community to perform direct in vivo tests of hypothesized G protein
involvement in any signal transduction or developmental context. As insights are
gained into use of plant cell in vivo FRET analysis for monitoring the
interaction between G protein complexes and G protein-coupled receptors, this
tool will be made available to other plant research groups for evaluation of in
vivo protein:protein interactions in other systems. In addition, the YFP
constructs and lines will be compatible with BRET analysis being developed by
the von Arnheim/Johnson 2010 project (Univ. Tennessee).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the proposed research includes pre- and postdoctoral training
by direct mentorship of the two Principal investigators, and a hands-on tutorial
on FRET measurements during a G protein workshop organized by the PIs. The
workshop will be advertised in particular at small liberal arts colleges and
minority institutions and undergraduate students will be eligible to apply for
travel grants.&lt;br/&gt;