* 0209879
* CONFERENCE:  2002 Gordon Research Conference on Environmental Endocrine Disruptors, July 14 to July 19, 2002, South Hadley, Massachusetts
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Ana Soto, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 04/30/2003
* USD 7,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award provides partial funding to support the 2002 Gordon
Research Conference on Environmental Endocrine Disruptors to be held July 14 to
July 19, 2002, at Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Massachusetts. This
conference, more than any other, will bring together a diverse group of
scientists to share their approaches and progress in this most interdisciplinary
of subjects spanning many levels of biological organization. Humans and wildlife
are exposed to a large number of widely used environmental chemicals known or
suspected to have hormonal activity or to interfere with hormone action.
Wildlife studies strongly suggest that populations are severely affected by
these environmental endocrine disruptors (EEDs) in a number of ways (altered
endocrine and reproductive systems, altered behavior, reduced reproduction and
population numbers). EEDs are also thought to cause malformations of the human
genital tract as well as testicular and breast cancers. These findings have
alerted the scientific community, governments worldwide and the general public
to the harm likely to be caused by EEDs. The objectives of the Environmental
Endocrine Disruptors Gordon Conference are to: 1) present state-of-the-art
research at all levels of complexity (molecular to population), 2) emphasize
mechanistic approaches to the understanding of endocrine disruption, 3) work at
integrating data emerging from these different fields of inquiry and levels of
biological complexity, 4) identify gaps in knowledge and emerging areas of
inquiry for exploration, and 5) enhance effective communication between
scientists and foster new collaborative research efforts at national and
international levels. The potential scientific impact of the conference will be
to foster research in the area, prioritize common goals and generate new
collaborative efforts to solve the identified gaps in knowledge, and to generate
a synthesis of the problem across all the levels of complexity. In addition, by
facilitating the interaction between established leaders in the field with young
scientists, women and minorities, it will enable these young scientists to
foster their education, training and career advancement. The conference will
consist of nine formal sessions, each containing an introduction by a leading
scientist, followed by 2-4 oral presentations, and two afternoon poster
sessions. Speakers will be selected on the basis of their relevant expertise,
while emphasizing a program with gender balance, minority representation and
participation of young investigators that show promise as future scientific
leaders. Funds from NSF will be used to reimburse the conference fees and travel
expenses of some junior speakers (2 or 3), and to provide travel fellowships to
allow the participation of young scientists (preference will be given to women
and minorities who are graduate students and postdoctoral fellows).