* 0209110
* Robust Codes for Space-Time Communication, Iterative Decoding, and Multi-Rate Broadcast
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Richard Wesel, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 08/31/2005
* USD 240,000.00

The primary goal of this research is to produce practical codes that
provide&lt;br/&gt;unequaled robustness, approaching the performance predicted by
compound&lt;br/&gt;channel information theory for linear Gaussian channels. The
resulting&lt;br/&gt;channel codes will find application in many scenarios
including wired and&lt;br/&gt;wireless broadcast, wireless local area networks,
asymmetric digital&lt;br/&gt;subscriber lines, military anti-jam communications,
and frequency hopped&lt;br/&gt;communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from
compound channel information theory state that a single code&lt;br/&gt;exists
that supports communication over every channel that has a
mutual&lt;br/&gt;information above the information rate of the code. Thus, once
the&lt;br/&gt;transmitter power spectrum is fixed, a code need not be
specialized to a&lt;br/&gt;particular frequency selective channel in a single
antenna system or a&lt;br/&gt;particular space-time path-gain matrix in a
multiple antenna system. While&lt;br/&gt;this theoretical result is more that
thirty years old, practical code design&lt;br/&gt;has focused to date on a
weaker notion of robustness, that of average&lt;br/&gt;performance according to
a statistical channel model, such as Rayleigh&lt;br/&gt;fading. The power of the
code design approach taken in this&lt;br/&gt;research is that the code design is
independent of statistical assumptions&lt;br/&gt;about the channel. The code
simply works on every channel that it
possibly&lt;br/&gt;could.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second goal of this research is
to develop codes that support multiple&lt;br/&gt;rates to different users. Here
again, information theory (this time&lt;br/&gt;information theory for degraded
broadcast channels) lays out the limits of&lt;br/&gt;performance. Our research
will closely approach these performance limits by&lt;br/&gt;applying turbo codes
to the concept of superposition coding for the degraded&lt;br/&gt;broadcast
channel.&lt;br/&gt;