* 0209624
* Thermodynamic Modeling of Aluminum and Nickel Ternary Alloy Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Philip Nash, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 05/31/2006
* USD 270,062.00

The objective of this research is to develop a thermodynamic description for the
free energy of each phase as a function of composition and temperature in
ternary aluminum and nickel base alloys. The heats of formation are determined
using a custom built high temperature reaction calorimeter with a typical
accuracy of +/- 1kJ/mole. In addition, differential thermal analysis will be
used to determine melting points and other phase transitions and differential
scanning calorimetry will be used to determine heat capacity of selected alloys
as a function of temperature. The DTA and DSC experiments will be performed in a
new SETARAM 1750 C calorimeter. The data determined from the experiments will be
used to develop an improved, self-consistent thermodynamic database for
Aluminum-Nickel-base alloys that find application in technologies requiring high
temperature structural alloys. Such data on Al and Ni-base alloy systems are
scarce or non-existent. The experimental results will be used to compute the
minimum in free energy for a particular composition at a given temperature. Such
thermodynamic modeling of phase diagrams provides an opportunity to approach the
phase equilibria aspects of alloy development in a more efficient manner. The
improved database will be used to compute several isothermal sections in each of
the ternary alloy systems using THERMOCALC. The data will also be used to
validate various extrapolation models from the literature for the prediction of
heats of formation of ternary compounds from binary data.

The work finds application in the design of multi-component nickel and aluminum
based alloys that are used in many technologies as structural materials. The
experimental results of the study will provide the needed data for phase diagram
calculations using CALPHAD methodology that is far more efficient than the
currently available techniques. These experimental data are not available and
this will be the only facility in USA that has the expertise to fill the need.
From a fundamental viewpoint, the project will advance a largely uncharted area
of research that is concerned with multi-component, multi-phase systems with
varied phases. These systems find application in many technologies that require
high temperature structural materials.