* 0209634
* Workshop on Genomics Approaches to Cis-Element/TF Interactions; Arlington, Virginia, January 16 -17, 2002
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2003
* Philip Benfey, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 11/30/2003
* USD 26,760.00

0209634 Benfey

The purpose of the workshop on "Genomics approaches to cis-element/TF
interactions", to be held in Arlington Virginia on January 16-17, 2002, is to
bring together scientists working on computational approaches with those who
have taken more traditional approaches to the identification of cis-
element/transcription factor interactions. In the last twenty years,
investigators have discovered regulatory sequences by studying the DNA binding
characteristics of single proteins, or the cis elements that control the
expression patterns of single genes. This has led to the identification of
binding sites for around 100 transcription factors. These studies have greatly
increased our knowledge of the nature of regulatory sequences, however, the
analysis of recently completed genome sequences suggest that there are upwards
of a thousand transcription factors in most eukaryotic organisms. Thus, it is
probable that whole families of DNA-binding proteins exist that have not yet
been discovered. This workshop will focus on advances being made in combining
computational approaches with genome-wide sampling techniques to identify
functional regulatory sequences. The goal is to exchange information on existing
methodologies, with the hope that cross-disciplinary collaborations will be
established and the seeds of new approaches will be sown.