* 0209213
* Web Accessibility for Low-Bandwidth Input
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Jennifer Mankoff, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2005
* USD 248,311.00

This research is intended to develop technology that will allow motor-impaired
disabled people to communicate with a computer most effectively, especially
giving them access to the web. An important part of the work will be development
of a tool that can model users with severe motor impairments and automatically
make the adjustment necessary to provide access to the web. For example, a web
page may be modified to show preview information about a selected link to user
to avoid the cost of following a wrong link and then backing out again.
Preliminary work has identified seven requirements for such a tool, ranging from
navigation support to dealing with forms. These requirements will be augmented
and refined as the work progresses. Two complementary systems will be built that
meet these requirements. One is a dynamic browser interface and leaves the
actual HTML unchanged. The other is a proxy server that modifies HTML to be more
accessible. Neither requires the authors of web pages to make changes. The first
approach will allow finer control over modifications and provide a platform for
experimentation with different mappings between input signals and action based
on errors and fatigue. The modified browser will be able to track errors and
adjust its interface accordingly. It will also allow experimentation with
different approaches to avoiding errors such as confirmation dialogs. The second
approach will be platform independent, and available to any user without
requiring that any special software be installed. It will allow the testing of
modifications on a much wider scale. These automatic approaches are necessary
because it is unrealistic to expect that web designers will handcode the
necessary modifications into their websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally,
the research will explore the feasibility of automatically generating user
interface modifications based on a user model, something applicable to other
common and important applications such as email and word processing. Both the
web accessibility work and this larger goal have applications outside of
assistive technology. For instance, they may be used to increase accessibility
of the web to other users with limited input capabilities, for example, to
mobile phone users with limited (9-key) keyboards.&lt;br/&gt;These systems will
be developed and tested first with abled and then motor-impaired users. They
will be deployed publicly, and their impact will be studied over time. Finally,
the research will impact accessibility guidelines, so that more web pages and
other applications can support low bandwidth accessibility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contribution of this work will be a set of techniques
for making the web more accessible in conditions where input is extremely
limited and errors are likely. This system will be useful to people with motor
disabilities, or any user with access to limited input devices, such as a
wearable computer user. &lt;br/&gt;