* 0209367
* Group Travel for U.S. Participants in the XVth World Congress of Sociology; Brisbane, Australia, July 7-13, 2002
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2003
* Felice Levine, American Sociological Assoc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2003
* USD 33,000.00

The project provides funds for a block travel grant for U.S. sociologists to
attend the XVth World Congress of the International Sociological Association in
Brisbane, Australia, July 7-13, 2002. The major conference of the International
Sociological Association, the World Congress occurs at four-year intervals and
attracts approximately 5,000 participants. Support for travel of U.S.
sociologists permits continued growth of international exchange and
collaboration in sociology. An activity of this type is particularly timely
given the necessity to promote international collaborations on challenges
arising from global social processes and transformations, including those
stemming from global interconnectedness, the new technolgies associated with the
internet, and the growing hybridization of cultures. Evaluation of indiviudal
requests for travel awards, selection of recipients, and the distriubtion of
funds will be the responsibility of the American Sociological Association.
Competitive criteria for an award include an iinvitation or acceptance of a
paper, the scientific merit of the paper, and qualifications of the applicant.
The selection process will seek to ensure a presence at the World Congress of
junior scholars and sociologists underrepresented in international scholarly
meetings.