* 0209941
* The Prediction and Interpretation of Protein pKa's Using QM/MM
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Jan Jensen, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2006
* USD 334,788.00

The objective of this project is to establish a QM/MM methodology for the
prediction and interpretation of protein pKa's that have unusual values and/or
are difficult to model with current methodologies. The methodology will be
applied to three proteins (turkey ovomucoid third domain, ubiquitin, and
xylanase) for which detailed experimental studies of the factors that influence
pKa's have been performed. A three-layered computational (QM/MM/LPBE)
methodology for protein pKa prediction will be developed. The ionizable residue
and its immediate environment will be treated by ab initio electronic structure
(QM) methods (including energy minimization and harmonic vibrational analysis).
The rest of the protein will be treated with a polarizable, multipole-based
electrostatic model (MM) derived specifically for each protein by separate ab
initio calculations. The bulk solvent will be treated by a very accurate
solution of the linearized Poisson-Boltzmann equation (LPBE). The combined use
of this new method with current methods will contribute significantly to the
experimental design of proteins with greater stability or new
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is at the intersection of
molecular physics, quantum chemistry, and structural biology, and will therefore
offer important cross-disciplinary training to the postdoctoral associate,
graduate student, and undergraduate students involved. Their training is further
enhanced by tight collaboration with experimental research groups. The resulting
scientists will be well versed in both the mathematical foundations and
practical aspects of quantum chemistry (including algorithm development and
parallelization) and macromolecular modeling within the context of an
interdisciplinary research environment. Furthermore, all algorithmic
developments will be implemented in the quantum chemistry program GAMESS, which
is distributed free of charge to the scientific community. This work is funded
jointly by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division and the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;