* 0209078
* Trust Emanates from Within: A Micro-architectural and Compiler Support Framework for Trust
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Akhilesh Tyagi, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 07/31/2005
* USD 200,000.00

Traditional computer security assumes a paranoid model of the world resulting in
a necessity for each transaction to be secured through encryption or similar
techniques. However, a typical human transaction is not paranoid, specifically
between trusted parties. A similar notion of trust exists for system level
transactions such as an e-commerce application. Trust obviates the need for
computationally expensive security techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trust has
traditionally been defined at system and/or transaction level. The proposed
research develops a much lower level definition of trust --specifically a
program's self-assessment of its own trustworthiness. This definition of trust
captures any deviations from the expected norm for the program flow behavior.
Each point in program can be reached through a set of control paths, one of
which is instantiated by a specific set of input. In a compromised program,
however, an entirely new control path leads to the exploited program point. Such
departures from the norm lower the program's trust value. An affirmation of a
norm control path can raise the program's trust. When the trust value falls
below a certain transaction defined threshold, the program can raise an
exception to invoke a system level intrusion detection utility. The compiler is
responsible to construct a set of valid, expected paths for each program point.
The processor microarchitecture is responsible for interpreting and verifying
the compiler generated set of valid control paths against the instantiated
control paths. This research will develop compiler technology for the analysis
and specification of valid control paths. The required microarchitecture support
for this activity will also be explored. The expected impact of this research
will be to provide a robust trust value from the program components of a
transaction, which in turn makes the system level trust reflect the system state
more accurately. This should allow for an easier integration of trust paradigm
with the traditional security techniques.&lt;br/&gt;