* 0209539
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of  Globalization on Adolescent Gender Roles
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Louisa Schein, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 09/30/2003
* USD 14,248.00

This project, to be conducted by a doctoral student in anthropology from Rutgers
University, investigates how two processes, public health discourse and TV
consumer culture, are reshaping adolescent values surrounding gender relations
on Nevis, a small English-speaking island in the Eastern Caribbean. While social
and economic life throughout the Caribbean has historically been built upon a
complex and dynamic interchange between local and global forces, new forces are
rapidly changing Caribbean societies. At the present time, Nevis is experiencing
an influx of returning nationals as well as immigrants who arrive to work in the
growing tourist industry. In addition to this demographic influence, mass media
(cable television) brings more global influence. The growing Caribbean AIDS
epidemic, in tandem with the other global forces, is transforming the economic
and social milieu in which Nevis adolescents come of age. Relying on surveys,
focus groups, in-depth interviews, and participant observation to collect data,
this project investigates how adolescent gender role identity is produced within
the emerging complex and changing social context of Nevis life. The majority of
the research will be conducted in two communities, Charlestown, the capital of
Nevis and Gingerland, a small rural agricultural community located inland. The
results of this project will contribute to knowledge on gender identity,
globalization, and cultural change. In terms of wider impacts, this project will
inform policy makers in their effort to work with adolescents so as to limit the
spread of HIV