* 0209185
* EHS: Composable Execution Environments: A Foundation for Building Robust Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Jay Lepreau, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 06/30/2005
* USD 310,431.00

Lepreau, Jay&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0209185 &lt;br/&gt;"Composable Execution
Environments: A Foundation for Building Robust Embedded Systems"&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Real-time and embedded systems are built using a wide variety of
"execution models"---collections of rules for sequencing actions and mediating
access to shared resources. In general, systems developed using restricted
execution models are easier to understand, debug, and test than are systems
developed using powerful models. They are also more efficient and permit
stronger properties to be proven about them&lt;br/&gt;with less effort, such as
non-violation of timing constraints and freedom from deadlock, livelock, or race
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instantiation of an execution model with a
specific set of tasks and their associated timing and resource sharing
requirements is called an "execution environment." The central premise of this
project is that it is feasible and useful to structure embedded systems as
hierarchical compositions of execution environments. If successful, this
research will result in a new way to develop embedded systems software that
permits developers to make use of powerful compositions of execution
environments without sacrificing the software engineering benefits of
individual, more restricted environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish
this, the researchers must solve a number of research problems. First,
compositions of execution environments must be analyzed and mapped to threads
and schedulers in such a way that no&lt;br/&gt;real-time deadlines or other
constraints of the individual environments are violated. This will be
accomplished by leveraging the researchers' experience with hierarchical real-
time scheduling, with&lt;br/&gt;constraint checking for component systems, and
with flexible execution models in operating systems. Second, compositions of
execution environments must not suffer from undue or unexpected degrees of
inefficiency and unpredictability. The researchers will accomplish this by
leveraging their experience in developing and optimizing component-based
operating systems.&lt;br/&gt;