* 0209464
* GOALI:    Creep and Microstructural Coarsening of Lead-Free Solders in Micro-Electronic Packaging Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Indranath Dutta, Naval Postgraduate School
* Interagency Agreement
* Alan Ardell
* 07/31/2006
* USD 252,232.00

This project, which is supported by the Division of Materials Research and the
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences, aims to investigate the life limiting thermal cycling, creep
and microstructural instability of lead-free solders for electronic packaging
with special reference to flip-chip (FC) and ball-grid array (BGA) packages. The
project is a highly leveraged collaborative program of research between Naval
Postgraduate School (NPS) and Intel (Chandler, AZ). The objectives of this GOALI
proposal are to (1) devise a methodology for rapid creep characterization of FC
and BGA solder balls with minimal sample preparation, based on the impression
creep approach; (2) develop a unified creep model incorporating the effect of
phase coarsening applicable to lead-free solders of 2 representative
microstructural types; (3) generate comprehensive creep and coarsening kinetics
data for solder joints of 2 selected lead-free alloys belonging to these
microstructural types; and (4) provide fundamental mechanistic insight into the
roles of microstructural scale and compositional artifacts (associated with
attaching tiny volumes of solder to other materials) on the evolution of creep
behavior during thermo-mechanical cycling (TMC). A major goal of the project is
to directly measure the creep response of individual solder balls joined to a
substrate, in lieu of the standard tests on bump arrays and bulk materials. The
study will lead to an understanding of the fundamental phenomenological
dependence of creep kinetics on the (a) microstructural scale, and (b) process-
history dependent compositional variations of the joints. These goals are
achieved by a systematic variation of material and process parameters. The work
constitutes developing closed-form unified creep laws including microstructural
coarsening effects, which may be incorporated into finite element models for
solder-joint reliability assessment. The impression creep of single solder bumps
is a challenging scientific effort and the successful completion of the project
will have direct impact on semiconductor electronic packaging technology in
predictive engineering processes. The work is multidisciplinary with impact on
experimental aspects in materials sciences and mechanics, as well as predictive
modeling efforts involving microstructural as well as finite element aspects.
The project takes advantage of the expertise and experimental facilities
available at the academic institution (NPS) as well as industrial counterpart
(Intel/Chandler). In addition, collaboration with experts at Motorola is
pursued. The unique aspect of this GOALI program includes the time spent by the
Intel PI at the academic institution. The personnel (PI, post-doctoral fellow
and graduate students) from the academic institute (NPS) plan to perform studies
at the industrial laboratory (Intel/Chandler) while Intel supports the post-
doctoral fellow during that time. The educational and technological impacts of
the program are rated superior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is a close
collaboration between NPS and Intel with secondary interactions with personnel
at Motorola with implications to developing a thorough understanding of the
life-limiting aspects of lead-free solders in microelectronic packaging. The
project has practical importance to the microelectronic industry while addresses
basic scientific issues. The study will (a) develop testing methodologies and
models for improving current reliability engineering practices, and (b) generate
kinetics data for two lead-free solders of strategic importance to the industry.
The collaboration of the university personnel with industrial counterparts
provides a significant opportunity for students.&lt;br/&gt;