* 0209311
* Sixth IMACS International Symposium on Iterative Methods in Scientific Computing; March 27-30, 2003, Denver, CO
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Harvey Greenberg, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2003
* USD 16,555.00

Knyazev&lt;br/&gt;0209311&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and his
colleagues organize a conference on &lt;br/&gt;iterative methods in scientific
computing. Iterative methods for the &lt;br/&gt;solution of linear and nonlinear
systems of equations play an &lt;br/&gt;increasingly important role in the
numerical simulation of physical &lt;br/&gt;phenomena. Preconditioning is the
key for significant improvement of the &lt;br/&gt;performance as it allows one
to find a path between Scylla of expensive &lt;br/&gt;factorizations of direct
methods and Charybdis of slow convergence. The &lt;br/&gt;recent surge of
activity in computational biology creates new &lt;br/&gt;opportunities for
iterative methods. As an example, the protein folding &lt;br/&gt;problem
involves predicting the native state of a protein. This is
&lt;br/&gt;accomplished by minimizing a complex energy function. Global
&lt;br/&gt;optimization methods for solving this problem employ iterative
methods, &lt;br/&gt;but computational limitations have restricted the
application of such &lt;br/&gt;methods to small proteins (fewer than 100 amino
acid residues). High &lt;br/&gt;performance computing is one avenue researchers
are taking. The &lt;br/&gt;protein folding problem is only one of a great many
applications that &lt;br/&gt;can use iterative methods to solve them. Some of
the specific topics &lt;br/&gt;targeted at this meeting are: applications (with
new emphasis on &lt;br/&gt;computational biology), domain decomposition,
preconditioning, parallel &lt;br/&gt;methods, nonsymmetric solvers, nonlinear
systems and eigenvalue solvers, &lt;br/&gt;multilevel methods, Krylov methods,
interdisciplinary research, student &lt;br/&gt;papers, and open problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The International Association for Mathematics and
Computers in &lt;br/&gt;simulations (IMACS) International Symposiums on
Iterative Methods in &lt;br/&gt;Scientific Computing are meetings that have been
held regularly since &lt;br/&gt;1988. The investigator and colleagues organize
the sixth such meeting. &lt;br/&gt;The conference is dedicated to providing an
overview of the state of the &lt;br/&gt;art in the use of iterative methods with
an eye to contributions of the &lt;br/&gt;past, present and future. The emphasis
is placed upon identifying future &lt;br/&gt;research directions in the
mainstream of modern scientific computing. Of &lt;br/&gt;particular interest are
talks on interdisciplinary research, open &lt;br/&gt;problems, and applications,
particularly in computational biology. A &lt;br/&gt;special issue of the IMACS
Journal Applied Numerical Mathematics is &lt;br/&gt;devoted to the meeting.
&lt;br/&gt;