* 0210807
* NIRT: Probing Viral Adhesion with Nanoengineered Biomembranes and Quantum Dots
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Gang-Yu Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,132,232.00

This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) award to University of
California Davis is supported by Divisions of Chemistry (MPS), Biological
Infrastructure (BIO) and International Office (SBE), and this proposal was
submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering"
(NSF 01-157). With this award, Professor Gervay-Hague and her team will study
viral adhesion and infection that are mediated through the binding of viral
proteins to cellular ligands. In many cases, the ligands are presented in a
multimeric form, which gives rise to polyvalent interactions with viral
proteins, and much less is understood about the molecular basis these polyvalent
interactions. Nanotechnology and bioimaging spectroscopies will be used to study
protein-ligand interactions systematically at a molecular level with this award.
Using a combination of nanofabrication, lipid bilayer engineering and
nanoparticle functionalization, carefully designed ligand arrays and local bio-
environments will be constructed. Protein recognition of these molecular
architectures will be investigated to determine the binding strength,
stoichiometry, cooperativity, and kinetics of adhesion to develop an
understanding of the mechanism of viral adhesion to host-cells. A knowledge
developed from these studies has larger applications toward the detection and
deactivation of viruses in the environment. In addition, these studies at the
interface of chemistry, nanotechnology and biology will provide students with
opportunities in research and training in many interdisciplinary fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, a team of research scientists with
expertise in organic, inorganic, and analytical chemistry, as well as chemical
engineering and immunology will study the mechanism of viral adhesion to host-
cells. These adhesion interactions have the dimensions of nanometers and it may
be possible to regulate viral adhesion to surfaces that have been engineered to
mimic the native state of host cells. Introduction of viral proteins to these
nanoplatforms and monitoring of the binding process using microscopy and
spectroscopy will help elucidate the mechanism of viral adhesion to surfaces,
which may ultimately lead to novel strategies for detecting and deactivating
viruses in the environment. Students, postdoctoral associates, and co-workers
will greatly benefit from this multidisciplinary approaches to problem solving
in the area of nanoscale biosystems.