* 0210924
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Power Strategies at Early Postclassic Sitio El Coyote, Sta. Barbara, Honduras
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Geoffrey Braswell, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2004
* USD 11,270.00

With National Science Foundation support, William McFarlane will conduct an
eight-month field season of archaeological research at the site of El Coyote
located in the Cacaulapa Valley of northwestern Honduras. Founded during the
Late Formative Period (200 BC - AD 200), El Coyote remained a regional center
into the Early Postclassic (AD 900 - 1200). This is noteworthy as the Early
Postclassic has been viewed as a transitional period in the prehistory of
southeastern Mesoamerica, characterized by socio-political decentralization and
an end of nucleated settlement. Data in hand suggest the Early Postclassic
community at El Coyote was a centralized village boasting a large ceremonial
center, a well defined set of ritual practices, organized production locales,
and long-distance trade connections to greater Mesoamerica. Current models of
the Early Postclassic cannot account for the existence of such a site. It is
clear an individual or group at El Coyote was able to maintain community
solidarity when other sites in the region were abandoned. It is therefore
imperative to refine current models of Honduran prehistory by documenting the
social, political, and economic organization of El Coyote and charting the
trajectory of the community through time. Early Postclassic investigations
directed by William McFarlane, including excavation of ceremonial,
administrative, and residential structures, mapping of archaeological materials
throughout the immediate area, and artifact analysis will compliment on-going
research by the parent project, Proyecto Valle de Cacaulapa. In addition to
refining current models of Early Postclassic northwestern Honduras, the research
design will address broader issues of human interaction. The central question:
how do individuals and groups use diverse resources to seize and maintain
positions of power within and between communities, is considered from three
different perspectives. The first perspective emphasizes the use of ideological
resources, such as religious practices, foreign symbols, and imported concepts
of statecraft by individuals or groups to create social distance between the
leaders and the community. The second perspective considers resource allocation
strategies that impact the economy. Control over the importation, production,
and distribution of raw materials and commodities is frequently cited as a
central feature of complex societies. The final perspective focuses upon
attempts to develop and promote activities that reinforce community solidarity,
thus, tying polity members together. It is expected that during the 3 centuries
investigated by this project various power strategies were implemented with
diverse success rates thus providing an index from which to rate the viability
of successive leader's social, economic, and political policies. The Early
Postclassic research project stands to contribute to our understanding of a
little researched and poorly understood period of Honduran prehistory. Further,
investigations of El Coyote provide an opportunity to examine how actions rooted
in diverse sources of power can have dramatic consequences relative to long-term
regional developments. It is hoped that a better understanding of the power
struggles within and between political groups in the past and present may be
achieved.

