* 0210372
* NER:   Orthogonal Molecular Recognition Motifs for Nanoscale Assembly
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2004
* Michael Krische, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 06/30/2004
* USD 90,000.00

This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) award to University of Texas Austin is
supported by Divisions of Chemistry (MPS) and Chemical Transport Systems (ENG),
and this proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale
Science and Engineering" (NSF 01-157). With this award, Professors Krische and
Anslyn will design and synthesize a family of oligomers to serve as synthetic
programmable codons to mimic the templating by DNA to embody information storage
properties. Oligomers with programmable codons will be synthesized using
different chemistries such as: neopentyl amino alcohol-linked to amino-
dichlorotriazines; guanidinium-phosphates; guanidinium-carboxylates; and
dihydrophalazine diones-diaminophthalazins. These oligomers with dye-labeled
strands will be evaluated for self-assembly and templating binding affinities
using NMR dilution experiments, isothermal titration calorimetry, vapor pressure
osmometry and cross-hybridization by thin layer chromatography. Training and
research of undergraduate and graduate students in this interdisciplinary
program in physical and synthetic organic chemistry are integral parts of the
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A group of oligomers with dye-labeled groups and
with "programmable" ultra high-affinity/specificity building blocks in nanoscale
will be designed and synthesized to serve as "codons" with information storage
capabilities mimicking some of the properties of DNA. These oligomers will
enable surface-patterning schemes wherein multiple, predetermined optical
constellations representing "memory-bits" are generated via spontaneous self-
assembly. Owing to the interdisciplinary nature of this project, the proposed
program of research will facilitate education and training of both graduate and
undergraduate students in fields ranging from organic chemistry to molecular
recognition and materials patterning.