* 0210058
* NER:  Deposition of Molecular Nanostructures with Controlled in-plane Orientation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Hans Hallen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 07/31/2004
* USD 99,999.00

This project was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER. Nanoscale materials are now fabricated by
a variety of means, but the dominant methods rely on self-assembly or advanced
lithography. These and other fabrication schemes, especially self-assembly, can
create structures in which the molecular orientation perpendicular to the
surface is controlled by the chemistry, conferring the functionality. This
project will take control of orientation one step further - so that the
molecules can also be locally oriented in the plane of the surface. Variations
of the orientation on a &lt;100 nm length scale permits nanoscale functionality
based on the relative orientation of molecules to be obtained. This is a
powerful concept for high performance molecular devices, since the properties of
molecules are highly anisotropic. The 'nanopoling' scheme should be much more
effective at orienting molecules than current poling methods due to the larger
electric field that can be generated locally. The central task of this project
is to demonstrate the attachment of oriented molecules to a surface. Major tasks
will be the identification of the best method for each of a few classes of
molecules (conjugated polymers, porphyrins, DNA), to model the orientation and
attachment processes, and to study the dependence of these processes on field
strength and electrode geometry. The latter will require the facile scanning
probe microscope. Topography and orientation of the molecules is characterized
with polarization-sensitive near-field optical microscopy (NSOM) utilizing the
same probe as deposited the oriented molecules, and the electrical properties
are obtained via lithographically-defined contacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
novelty and importance of this project evolves from the breaking of the in-plane
symmetry within the nanostructures. It will result in new types of
nanostructures with novel properties and functionality. This will lead to new
devices. In this project we will focus on the science of the growth process with
a scanning probe microscope. Ultimate usage for fabrication of the novel devices
engendered by this deposition technique will require much faster fabrication
methods. The prospects for large-scale fabrication once the processes are
understood are good, and we have defined a possible route to a mask-based
technology resulting from these studies.