* 0210918
* Structural Diversity Based on Cyclopropane Scaffolds
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Richard Taylor, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 05/31/2005
* USD 380,000.00

Professor Taylor's group has successfully used molecules containing homoallylic
alcohol and allylsilane functional groups to prepare enantiomerically pure
cyclopropanes and oligocyclopropanes. In the current award period, they will
study the mechanisms of these cyclopropane forming reactions and use that
understanding to control future reactivity and selectivity studies. In the
current project period, this group will be extending their cyclopropane forming
methodology to the use of silyl enol ethers as cation traps in addition to the
allyl silane traps used previously. This change will provide access to
cyclopropyl aldehydes which can be further functionalized. Vinyl cyclopropyl
alcohols will also be prepared and elaborated into oxepene core structures found
in marine natural products. Lastly, vinyl cyclopropanes will be studied as
substrates for olefin cross metathesis. This methodology will be used to prepare
oligocyclopropanes and cyclopropane containing fatty acids. The fatty acids can
be used to study membrane and monolayer stabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
research of Dr. Richard E. Taylor of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Notre Dame. Dr. Taylor will work on the development of chemical
reactions which can be used to prepare organic molecules containing a
cyclopropane ring. Cyclopropanes are three membered rings containing three
carbon atoms. This functional group is found in a number of molecules with
pharmaceutical and agrochemical uses. The cyclopropane ring forming reactions
developed by Professor Taylor and his research group produce cyclopropanes which
are chiral (have two nonsuperimposable mirror images) and make only one of the
two possible forms (a single enantiomer). Development of this family of
reactions is one of the most important problems facing the pharmaceutical and
agrochemicals industries today. Students trained during the course of this work
will gain skills needed by the pharmaceutical and speciality chemicals
industries which now produce a number of single enantiomer compounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;