* 0210820
* NER:  Mesogeochemistry Ã¹ Geochemical Reactions and Mass Transfers in Nano-scale Pore Space Confinement
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2002,02/29/2004
* Yifeng Wang, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 02/29/2004
* USD 99,425.00

Xu &amp; Wang&lt;br/&gt;NER-0210820&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was
received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative NSF
01-157, category NER, and is co-funded by the GEO Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;The
emergence of nanotechnology has made it possible to manipulate material
structures at nanometer scales and has greatly advanced our understanding of how
these nano-scale structures give rise to novel physical and chemical properties
not seen in bulk materials. Nano-scale pore structures, also called mesoporous
structures, are ubiquitous in geologic and engineered materials. Our preliminary
studies, both experimentally and theoretically, indicate that chemical reactions
in mesopores can be significantly modified, both thermodynamically and
kinetically, due to the nano-scale confinement. The objective of this proposal
is to (1) clarify the sorption behavior of chemical species in a nano-scale pore
space confinement as compared to that in bulk solutions and test the hypothesis
that metal sorption on mesopore surface can be greatly enhanced by the
confinement effect; and (2) to determine the rates of aqueous species diffusion
in nano-scale channels to test the assumption that these channels can provide
passages for mass transport during chemical reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
isolate the effect of nano-scale pore space confinement, we will conduct
parallel sorption experiments on non-mesoporous materials, and the measured
sorption capabilities will be compared between mesoporous vs. non-mesoporous
materials. Particular attention will be paid to the possible effect of electric
double layer (EDL) overlap in mesopores on ion sorption and diffusion. Based on
the experimental data, a new surface complexation model will be proposed to
explicitly include the effect of EDL overlap. The issues to be addressed in this
proposal are fundamental, and the proposed work will highly impact many aspects
of geochemical research. The proposed research will establish a theoretical
foundation for the development of high-performance functional materials for
solving challenging environmental issues we are facing
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;