* 0210647
* NER:   Silicide Quantum Dots for Nanoelectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2003
* David Greve, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Venkata Mulpuri
* 12/31/2003
* USD 89,871.00

This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NER category. The proposal
focuses on the fabrication of nanoscale silicide quantum dots. Silicide dots are
potentially useful for fabrication of quantum cellular automata and other
quantum dot devices. Quantum cellular automata are assemblies of quantum dots
which can perform the basic information-processing functions of interconnect,
digital logic, and memory. A major motivation for the exploration of silicide
quantum dots in particular is the fact that they will be compatible with silicon
devices which will probably remain useful as an interface between
nanoelectronics and the outside world. This research will explore novel
nanoscale fabrication processes and will develop improved understanding of
surface chemical reactions and phase transitions on the nanoscale. We wish to
demonstrate the integration of in situ lithography, selective deposition of
metals, silicide formation, and epitaxial layer overgrowth. In particular,
lithography will be performed by exposing thin silicon dioxide layers with an
electron beam, thereby enhancing thermal desorption of oxide from the exposed
regions. Subsequently the quantum dots will be formed by chemical vapor
deposition and reaction to form a metallic silicide. One particularly attractive
approach is selective deposition of the silicide-forming metal from an
organometallic source, although other approaches may also be explored. This
research will be performed using a recently constructed apparatus which combines
electron beam patterning with the deposition and characterization of quantum
dots. All process steps, including epitaxial overgrowth of the quantum dots, can
be performed without exposing the substrates to atmosphere. Characterization
tools to be used in the work include reflection high energy electron
diffraction, thermal desorption mass spectrometry, and atomic force microscopy.
Within this one-year exploratory program, we expect to fabricate patterned
silicide quantum dots in the 20-40 nm size range. We will also obtain improved
scientific understanding of selective growth which will be broadly useful in the
fabrication of nanoscale devices.