* 0210069
* Assessing the Accuracy of Self-reported Pollution Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* James Hamilton, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2004
* USD 83,032.00

Information provision is increasingly used as a regulatory tool. The
&lt;br/&gt;Environmental Protection Agency's Toxics Release Inventory (TRI)
program &lt;br/&gt;requires manufacturing facilities that handle threshold
amounts of specific &lt;br/&gt;chemicals to report yearly their releases and
transfers of these toxic &lt;br/&gt;substances. This project investigates how
accurate TRI data are and what &lt;br/&gt;factors give rise to errors or evasion
in self-reporting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research uses two different
methods to assess the accuracy &lt;br/&gt;of TRI data. For 12 of the chemicals
covered by TRI reporting, the EPA samples &lt;br/&gt;air concentrations of these
chemicals using a network of monitors across the &lt;br/&gt;country. Geographic
information systems (GIS) software allow one to determine &lt;br/&gt;which
polluting facilities are within range of the EPA's monitors. The
&lt;br/&gt;researchers can thus compare how measured trends in pollution from
monitoring &lt;br/&gt;data match self-reported trends on air releases by the
polluting facilities. To &lt;br/&gt;investigate potential divergences between
the monitoring data and TRI figures, &lt;br/&gt;the analysis will also explore
how the nature of the surrounding community, &lt;br/&gt;state environmental
enforcement, and company and facility-level characteristics &lt;br/&gt;affect
the apparent accuracy of the reported TRI air emissions. The comparison
&lt;br/&gt;of reported TRI figures with expected distributions of emissions
digits offers &lt;br/&gt;a second way to assess the accuracy of pollution data.
The key insight is that &lt;br/&gt;if facilities are estimating emissions with a
downward bias, the overall &lt;br/&gt;distribution of digits will not follow the
same pattern as the actual digits in &lt;br/&gt;the monitor data. This research
will demonstrate the degree that selected &lt;br/&gt;physical monitoring and
analysis of data patterns for statistical bias can help &lt;br/&gt;determine the
accuracy of self-reported data.&lt;br/&gt;