* 0210095
* NIRT:  Study of Self-organization in Strained Heteroepitaxial Nanostructures: Multi-scale Modeling, Simulation and Experiment
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2007
* L. B. Freund, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 06/30/2007
* USD 1,100,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-assembled surface nanostructures
hold the promise for manufacture of microelectronic devices with unprecedented
performances characteristics. Potential applications include field effect
transistors, quantum memory devices and solid-state lasers. Strain-driven
nucleation, growth and coarsening of epitaxial islands during MBE growth,
possibly with self-assembly of islands with regular arrays, offer a particularly
versatile and cost-effective approach to manufacturing nanoscale devices. Recent
experimental and analytical studies have revealed that appropriately controlling
mismatch strain and processing conditions may influence island shapes, sizes and
distributions. To exploit this phenomenon in manufacturing self-organized
quantum dot arrays will require a fundamental understanding of the role of
strain, surface energies, and kinetics of transport and deposition on the
formation and evolution of material structures. A particular challenge is that
island morphology is determined both by atomic scale pheno&lt;br/&gt;mena, such
as surface step interactions and alloy dispersion, and by long-range elastic
interaction between geometric features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to
address this issue by developing multiple-scale models of the growth of strained
semiconductor thin films. Our approach will be to use discrete-step and Monte
Carlo simulations, supplemented by appropriate atomistic or continuum
calculations, to model the mesoscopic processes that determine the surface
energies and transport kinetics during growth. The long-range elastic
interactions between surface features will be modeled rigorously using continuum
finite element computations. The model will be used to predict the nucleation,
evolution in shape and organization of islands, and will provide the
understanding required to control and optimize processing. Modeling will be
informed and guided by experimental observations of stress relaxation and
surface evolution in InGaAs/GaAs and SiGe/Si.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
participation of undergraduate students will be integrated into the program in
two ways. First of all, the budget allows for the appointment of several
undergraduate students, which will provide firsthand experience with concepts of
nanotechnology for qualified students. In addition, team members will design a
new course, intended for undergraduate students in materials science and
mechanical engineering, to introduce students to concepts and methods in
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;