* 0210475
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Effects of Machining Parameters on the Strength and Fatigue Behavior of Bolted Joints in GFRP Composites
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Mohamed Seif, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/29/2004
* USD 29,000.00

0210475&lt;br/&gt;Seif&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: &lt;br/&gt;This award
is for support of a joint research project by Dr. Mohamed A. Seif, Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Northern Illinois University (NIU), Dekalb, Illinois,
and Dr. Usama Khashaba, Department of Mechanical Design and Production
Engineering, and Dr. Gamal Nawara, Research and Graduate Studies, both at
Zagazig University, Zagazig, Egypt. With the wide use of composite materials in
structural components, it has become necessary to drill holes into laminates to
facilitate bolting or riveting to the main load-bearing structures. Stress
concentration, delamination and microcracking are the main problems associated
with drilled holes, which significantly reduce the composites' performance. The
PIs will investigate the effect of the drilling parameters on the mechanical
properties of composites. This includes the effect of different cutting
conditions (feeds and speeds), machining operations (CNC, laser, and water jet),
and the size and shape of the drills. The influence of the quality of the hole
on the notched strength, pin bearing strength and bolted joint strength under
uniaxial static and fatigue loading conditions will also be examined. Special
interest will also be given to study the joint performance under various
assembly conditions such as the bolt tightening torque, the washer size, the
bolt clearance, and the diameter/width ratio. Optical microscopes, SEM, and
laser measurement techniques will be used in this investigation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: &lt;br/&gt;This project will help in establishing a
better understanding of the behavior of&lt;br/&gt;bolted joints in composite
materials. In addition, the development of engineering models will contribute to
improve basic studies of composite materials under various
operational&lt;br/&gt;conditions. The collaboration involves an established and
experienced U.S. scientist in the field and two researchers in a relatively
small university in Egypt as well as a number of industrial organizations in
that country.&lt;br/&gt;