* 0210366
* NIRT: Direct Power Generation by Electron Emission from Novel Carbon Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Timothy Fisher, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,516,914.00

The proposal was submitted under Solicitation NSF 01-157 "Nanoscale Science and
Engineering," under the Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT)
category. The research examines a novel concept for direct thermal-to-electrical
power generation. The concept involves electron emission from arrays of carbon-
based nanostructured emitters, such as carbon nanofibers and diamond nanotips.
With characteristic dimensions of one to ten nanometers, these materials enable
highly efficient electron emission and the possibility of quantum confinement
effects that enhance the energy conversion process. However, the conversion of
thermal energy to electrical energy using such structures has not been
previously explored in detail. Specific research tasks include development of
synthesis processes, material characterization and analysis, experimental and
theoretical analyses of electron energy distributions, and characterization of
energy conversion under practical conditions. In addition, the program will
support trans-institutional education and training initiatives through a
graduate student exchange program and a joint seminar series on nanotechnology
to be held in conjunction with the MBA programs of the participating
institutions, which include Vanderbilt, Purdue, and Michigan State. NSF support
is being provided by the Chemical and Transport Systems Division and the Design,
Manufacturing and Industrial Innovation Division in the Engineering Directorate,
and by the Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;