* 0210175
* Intramolecular Anodic Olefin Coupling Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Kevin Moeller, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2005
* USD 360,000.00

With this award Professor Moeller will continue his work on the use of
intramolecular anodic olefin coupling reactions in synthetic organic
electrochemistry. This work involves the development of stereocontrolled
synthetic methods based on radical cation chemistry and then the utilization of
these chemical reactions in the synthesis of natural products. Proposed new
method development on asymmetric electrochemical cyclizations utilizing chiral
ketene acetals as substrates could lead to a new enantioselective carbon-carbon
bond forming reaction. Reactions discovered with prior NSF support will be
applied to several total syntheses in the new support period. The first two
total syntheses involve key tandem cyclizations, the first of which are
initiated by electrochemically generated enol ether radical cations, whereas the
last two syntheses utilize highly functionalized furans as the initiating group.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Dr. Kevin D. Moeller of the Department of Chemistry at
Washington University in St. Louis. Dr. Moeller will work on the use of
electrolysis to generate chemical species which react with predictable patterns
and selectivities. Use of electrolysis to generate reactive intermediates may
prove to be a new "green" synthetic method with potential industrial
applications. If large quantities of oxidants and reductants currently used in
organic synthesis could be replaced by reliable electrochemical methods then
many redox synthetic methods could be made more environmentally friendly. This
group will also explore stereoselective oxidative cyclization reactions. These
reactions produce molecules which are chiral (have two nonsuperimposable mirror
images) and make only one of the two possible forms (a single enantiomer).
Development of this family of reactions is one of the most important problems
facing the pharmaceutical industry today. When developed, Dr. Moeller's work
could be applied to the environmentally friendly syntheses of a number of
biologically active molecules. Students trained during the course of this work
will gain skills needed by the pharmaceutical industry which now produces a
number of single enantiomer compounds.