* 0210210
* NER:  Torque Spectroscopy for Nanosystem Characterization and Fabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2004
* Robert Clark, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,994.00

This project was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER. The purpose of this research is to develop
the technology to deliver regulated torques to nanosystems; such torques would
be on the order of piconewton-nanometers. Helicallv structured light possessing
angular momentum will be used in an optical trapping arrangement to deliver
angular momentum to trapped particles thereby applying a torque to the trapped
object. Position and orientation of a trapped object will be achieved with a
trapping beam constructed from the interference of a helical wave front and a
plane wave. This research focuses on developing an optical trap using a
conventional single-beam trap architecture; constructing the requisite
helically-structured laser beam modes as Laguerre-Gaussian (LG) beam modes and
constructing an interference pattern between LG beam modes and plane-wave beam
modes. Torque spectroscopy experiments of biomolecules will be performed.
Candidate molecules are coiled-coil proteins like myosin, modular matrix
proteins like fibronectin and tenascin, and the DNA double
helix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will have a broad impact in
the advancement of knowledge, education, industry and technology. An optical
torque-trap is an enabling technology for the comprehensive development of
nanoscience and engineering, and will have wide application in nanotechnology
from characterization to fabrication. In nanoscale biosystems it would be used
to provide an understanding of the behavior of single molecules. For nanoscale
structures, it would enable the characterization of novel nanoscale structures
and phenomena which depend upon rotary motion . Finally for nanoscale
manufacturing processes it would enable new nanofabrication processes which
would depend upon the manipulation of particles in six-dimensions Other
applications include measuring the torque and power output of rotary nanomotors,
measuring the bending strength of molecules, measuring the drag on nanobearings,
and driving nanosystems by photonic components. This program will also have
impacts in new curriculum for graduate students, combining elements of
engineering and physics for nanoscience and engineering; the study of
nanosystems and nanobiosystems; training opportunities for undergraduate
students in nanotechnology through participation in research projects; and
industrial collaboration providing technology transfer and training
opportunities for faculty, research associates, and students.