* 0210332
* NIRT: Development, Functionalization, and Assembly of Nanoscale Biological Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Stephan von Molnar, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,050,000.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. We propose a project to develop nanoscale
biological sensors with single molecule detection capability and, more
importantly, a novel technique for nanoscale functionalization and assembly of
these sensors. The devices will consist of several nanoscale building blocks: 1)
ultra-sensitive semiconductor Hall gradiometer capable of detecting a single
5-nm diameter magnetic nanoparticle (magnetic detection); 2) nanoscale field
effect transistor (FET) based on newly developed semiconducting metal oxide
nanobelts (electrical detection). We will employ dip-pen nanolithography (DPN)
to functionalize individual solid state devices to detect specific biological
substances. Furthermore, DPN-decorated solid substrates will be utilized to
assemble nanoscale building blocks onto specific patterns from
solution.&lt;br/&gt;The practicality of any biological sensor is governed by
its: 1) selectivity, 2) sensitivity, and 3) environmental compatibility. We have
recently demonstrated that sub-micrometer Hall gradiometers, made out of
GaAs/AlGaAs two-dimensional electron gas, can detect a single 10-nm-diameter
magnetic particle. They are ideally suited for detecting the presence of
adsorbed biomolecules tagged with magnetic nanoparticles. We will fabricate
gradiometers out of InAs heterostructures for the optimal performance under
ambient conditions. For electrical detection of biological molecules, we intend
to fabricate nanoscale FET's from a group of metal oxide nanobelts. In this
case, charged molecules adsorbed on the functionalized nanobelt surfaces can be
detected by measuring the conductivity change of the nanobelt
junctions.&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing DPN, the nanoscale Hall gradiometer surface and
nanobelt FET channel can be functionalized to create specific affinity for
desired biomolecules, which allows us to build highly selective sensing devices.
Furthermore, multiple nano-FET's can be assembled onto specific locations on a
substrate or in a circuit via surface-templated nano-assembly strategy. In this
method, the solid substrate will be first functionalized with chemical binding
groups with specific affinity to the nanobelts, and then the substrates will be
used to capture the nanobelts from their solution.&lt;br/&gt;Successful
execution of the proposed program will not only produce several highly sensitive
novel biosensors with immediate application values, but also create a new
paradigm for biosensor fabrication and assembly that may be widely applicable in
many other systems. To accomplish the stated goals, we have assembled a team of
six researchers in biology, physics, materials science, and electrical
engineering from three institutions. This team provides a unique
interdisciplinary combination and possesses all the necessary expertise and
tools for the project. In addition, this interdisciplinary research project will
provide many students a valuable opportunity to collaborate with researchers in
other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;