* 0210533
* NIRT:  Nanoscale Magnetic Microscopy with Multi-Photon Absorption Polymers and Y-Junction Nanotubes
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Krzysztof Kempa, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 06/30/2007
* USD 1,056,000.00

&lt;br/&gt; This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and
Engineering initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. It focuses on innovative
approaches to nanoscale subsurface spin imaging, including three MRFM (magnetic
resonance force microscopy) schemes and one novel non-mechanical spin sensing
scheme using giant magnetoresistance (GMR) detection. A research team composed
of a condensed matter physicist, a physical chemist, a materials scientist and a
theoretical physicist will design and develop nanoscale probes for MRFM as well
as MFM (magnetic force microcopy). Carbon nanotube and multi-photon absorption
(MPA) fabricated polymer cantilevers, in linear and various forked geometries,
will be employed for piezoresistive, optical waveguide and RF impedance
detection of specimen spins, with anticipated sensitivities to the single spin
level. Novel attogram-sized ferromagnetic nanorods will be synthesized and
attached to the cantilevers for use as gradient generators/spin probes. In
addition to individual magnetic spin sensors, arrays of MRFM sensors will be
made, with each sensor having an integrated three-dimensional radio frequency
microcoil fabricated via MPA, facilitating spatial and temporal spin correlation
measurements toward nanoscale functional MRI. &lt;br/&gt; There is much to be
gained by advancing spin-detection technology toward the single-spin level, with
potential applications in information technology, medicine and scientific
exploration. MRFM, which is developing into a most highly sensitive measurement
technique, stands to play a major role in this goal. Molecular-scale devices,
such as carbon and other types of nanotubes, will play an increasingly important
role as well. To reach this goal, several impediments must be obviated, such as
thermal noise, the spectral function of which defines a set of parameters to be
optimized in the quest for single spin detection, 3-D molecular imaging, dynamic
visualization and beyond. Another impediment is the traditional optical
detection using visible light, the wavelength of which is larger than the
required physical dimensions of the resonating magnetic sensor. The approaches
of this program are designed to overcome these obstacles.&lt;br/&gt; In addition
to the four senior personnel, this interdisciplinary research program will
involve numerous graduate students, undergraduates, and select high school
students during summer months, covering a broad range of topics such as
nanoscale magnetometry, micro and nanofabrication, carbon nanotube synthesis,
multi-photon absorption, nanomagnet synthesis, and theoretical aspects of
magnetism, nanotubes and semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;