* 0210251
* Physiology of Mosquito Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Marc Klowden, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 07/31/2006
* USD 431,493.00

Mosquitoes are responsible for the transmission of agents of disease to hundreds
of millions of people each year. Their large populations are the result of an
efficient reproductive system that converts the protein contained in the blood
that the female mosquito ingests into eggs. When they mate with females, male
mosquitoes transfer sperm as well as substances from their accessory
reproductive glands and these substances alter the female's physiology. Among
their many effects, the male accessory gland substances prevent the females of
most species from ever mating again. After the first mating, sperm are stored in
a special sac, the spermatheca, for the rest of her life and these are released
to fertilize each batch of eggs as it is laid. Recent work in this laboratory
has demonstrated that in the most important mosquito vector of malaria,
Anopheles gambiae, male accessory glands do not control mating behavior as they
do in other mosquito species. Mating does, however, somehow alter the female's
behavior and the hydrocarbon composition of her cuticle, which may be the cue
that males of this species use to distinguish unmated or previously mated
females. Preliminary experiments suggest that sperm contained in the spermatheca
of the female may prevent her from remating. Another interesting difference that
emerged from this work was the demonstration of a sperm polymorphism in male An.
gambiae; unlike most other mosquito species, male gambiae produce sperm of
considerably variable lengths, but only the longer sperm end up in the female's
spermatheca.&lt;br/&gt; The goals of this project are to examine the mechanism
of cuticular alteration in An. gambiae, its role in mating, and the possible
reasons for the varying types of sperm produced by the male. The change in
cuticular hydrocarbons of female mosquitoes will be assessed by gas
chromatography after various experimental treatments and the degree to which
mating is prevented will be determined. Sperm that are produced by males after
various treatments such as hormone administration will be examined
microscopically and measured for length and presence of a nucleus, both within
the genital tracts of the male and female. The long-term importance of this
project is that it will provide much needed information about the mating systems
of the most important mosquito vector in the world. If, using tools of genetic
engineering, new genes are to be introduced into mosquito populations to prevent
them from transmitting infectious agents, the basic mechanisms of mating by
which those genes are to be introduced must be better understood.&lt;br/&gt;