* 0210257
* LTREB:  Forest Ecosystem Response to Changes in Atmospheric Chemistry and Climate at the Bear Brook Watershed in Maine (BBWM)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* Stephen Norton, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2008
* USD 300,230.00

0210257&lt;br/&gt;Fernandez&lt;br/&gt;The Bear Brook Watershed in Maine (BBWM)
is a long-term paired, forested watershed research&lt;br/&gt;site with each
watershed drained by a first order stream through a v-notch weir. One
watershed&lt;br/&gt;(West Bear) has been treated bimonthly for 12 years with N
and S by aerial helicopter&lt;br/&gt;applications, with the second watershed
(East Bear) serving as the reference watershed. The&lt;br/&gt;objectives of this
LTREB proposal are to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Study the response of the calibrated East
Bear Watershed to long-term patterns of ambient S,&lt;br/&gt;N, and base cation
deposition. This will be accomplished by maintaining high
quality&lt;br/&gt;deposition and stream export data from the reference watershed
in support of research on&lt;br/&gt;ecosystem processes and change over time
funded by this project and others.&lt;br/&gt;2. Study the temporal progression
of N saturation at the West Bear Watershed. This will be&lt;br/&gt;accomplished
by continuing the decadal-scale whole ecosystem N &amp; S addition
experiment&lt;br/&gt;ongoing at the West Bear Watershed. &lt;br/&gt;3. Determine
if a definable relationship exists between short and longer-term climate and
the&lt;br/&gt;biogeochemical and hydrologic processes currently under study at
both watersheds. This&lt;br/&gt;will be accomplished by establishing an air and
soil temperature measurement program across major ecosystem compartments at
BBWM. Studies will focus on the relationships between temperature, N dynamics
(mineralization, nitrification), and surface water N export in both the
reference and treated watersheds, and we will evaluate the efficacy of using
heat units to predict ecosystem behavior with respect to these
processes.&lt;br/&gt;4. Provide support to strengthen the data management
efforts at the BBWM, thereby making&lt;br/&gt;this long-term record more
accessible to the scientific community with an interpretive&lt;br/&gt;interface
to be used by educators and policy makers through an expansive web presence.
A&lt;br/&gt;major emphasis of this LTREB proposal is the development of a
layered web presence on the&lt;br/&gt;BBWM project that provides access to data
and highlights for policy makers, educators
and&lt;br/&gt;researchers.&lt;br/&gt;5. Provide support for graduate student
training and undergraduate student experiences
in&lt;br/&gt;research.&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this research have proven to be
turnkey to date in regional and national debates on&lt;br/&gt;the effects of
acid deposition and the risk of N saturation to forests and surface waters of
New&lt;br/&gt;England. The compelling justification for supporting the long-term
program of research at&lt;br/&gt;BBWM is that changes in response to changing
ambient deposition of N and S (East Bear), long-&lt;br/&gt;term chemical
manipulations (West Bear), and seasonal and inter-annual climate variation
after&lt;br/&gt;11+ years are showing mechanisms of response that were not
discernable within the first 2-3&lt;br/&gt;years of the study. These long-term
mechanisms of response are frequently overlooked when&lt;br/&gt;research is
conducted on short-term funding cycles. The long-term and unique responses
being&lt;br/&gt;investigated at BBWM will be critical for adequately assessing
policy and management options&lt;br/&gt;regarding air pollution and climate
change in the 21 st century.