* 0210279
* NER:  Engineering of InAs Quantum Dot Ensembles Using Interference of Optical Surface Waves
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Serge Oktyabrsky, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 06/30/2003
* USD 90,344.00

Engineering of InAs Quantum Dot Ensembles Using Interference of
Optical&lt;br/&gt;Surface Waves&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
problem of inhomogeneous broadening of the size&lt;br/&gt;distribution of
quantum dot (QD) epitaxial semiconductor ensembles formed&lt;br/&gt;via a
stress-driven Volmer-Weber or Stranski-Krastanov growth mechanism.
The&lt;br/&gt;uniformity and narrow size distribution of the QDs are the major
challenges&lt;br/&gt;for the utilization of QD structures in optoelectronic
devices. The primary&lt;br/&gt;goal of this proposal is to evaluate the
feasibility of nanoscale control of&lt;br/&gt;the nucleation process of InAs QDs
on a GaAs surface using the interference&lt;br/&gt;of the optical surface waves.
The interference pattern will be generated on&lt;br/&gt;the surface of the
substrate using a pulsed UV laser during the growth of&lt;br/&gt;QDs by
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). The pattern, with a typical period
of&lt;br/&gt;few hundred nm, will be created using two different optical schemes
based&lt;br/&gt;on: (i) the interference of the incident wave with the scattered
coherent&lt;br/&gt;surface wave; and (ii) the interference of the incident waves
with two&lt;br/&gt;surface waves coupled to the split laser beams. The optical
interference&lt;br/&gt;pattern will modulate periodically the surface properties
of the substrate&lt;br/&gt;at 100-200 nm level. The nucleation of QDs will be
controlled through either&lt;br/&gt;substrate temperature modulation, thereby
destroying the nucleation clusters&lt;br/&gt;in the antinode of the standing
wave pattern, or through undulation of the&lt;br/&gt;surface by laser ablation
to control the surface energy. The 100-nm&lt;br/&gt;modulation scale is expected
to form a template for initial QD nucleation,&lt;br/&gt;and the subsequent
evolution of the QD ensemble will be driven&lt;br/&gt;thermodynamically towards
higher density of dots, (3-10)e10 cm-2. The&lt;br/&gt;important features of the
in-situ optical impact are that it does not leave&lt;br/&gt;any residues on the
surface, can be conducted during the growth process, and&lt;br/&gt;can be
adjusted to introduce the minimum defect density.&lt;br/&gt;We will
systematically investigate the factors (growth temperature, As
flux,&lt;br/&gt;growth rate, laser power, etc.) that provide uniform and narrow
QD&lt;br/&gt;distribution and efficient luminescence. The samples grown using
optically&lt;br/&gt;controlled nucleation will be studied by the in-situ RHEED,
as well as STM,&lt;br/&gt;TEM and photoluminescence methods to reveal the
correlations between growth&lt;br/&gt;parameters, and the structure and
properties of the QD systems. The&lt;br/&gt;laboratories at the Institute have
all the necessary equipment for the QD&lt;br/&gt;characterization. This includes
state-of-the-art field-emission ultra-high&lt;br/&gt;resolution TEM, focused ion
beam station, surface analysis tools, five STM&lt;br/&gt;tools configured for
different imaging modes and environment including&lt;br/&gt;ultra-high vacuum,
and unique ultrasonic force microscope.&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of
the proposed work would have a significant&lt;br/&gt;impact on the performance
of various optoelectronic components. The method&lt;br/&gt;will allow the growth
of QD structures with sharp size distribution and high&lt;br/&gt;radiative
recombination efficiency. For example, the QD structures will be&lt;br/&gt;used
as active media for laser diodes with superior
performance&lt;br/&gt;characteristics, such as higher efficiency, higher thermal
stability, higher&lt;br/&gt;modulation frequency and increased reliability.
&lt;br/&gt;