* 0210508
* NER:  Bioengineering of Implantable Nanosize Optical Sensing Elements by Controlled Radical Polymerization
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Stephanie Lopina, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

In this Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER), co-supported by the Divisions of
Materials Research and of Bioengineering and Environmental Systems, a new
nanofabrication is proposed for developing nano-composite polymer materials for
biomedical sensing. These materials will be produced by controlled radical
polymerization/copolymerizaiton using cross-linkable self-assembled monolayers
on gold colloidal nanoparticles as templates. The resulting shell-crosslinked
core-shell nanoparticles are designed for making long-term implantable
biosensors that may be used as "tattoo dyes" for noninvasive repetitive or real-
time optical readout. The objective of this proposal is to create nano-sized,
affinity sensing interfaces for glucose that are capsulated within biocompatible
polymer hydrogel shells. The polymer shells will minimize nonspecific bindings
at the molecular recognition site and improve the longevity and biocompatibility
of the glucose sensor. The small size of the capsules and the large effective
sensing surface should allow for improvements in the selectivity, dynamic range,
and mass transport (speed) of affinity-based biosensing interfaces in general.
This method will also greatly improve the structural homogeneity of the sensing
interfaces by pre-organizing the sensing elements on nanoparticle
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nanophotonic properties of the template gold
nanoparticles will be utilized as optical detection methods and for selective
structural characterization of the proposed encapsulated molecular recognition
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;