* 0210954
* SGER:  Smectite Incubation of Organic Molecules in Seafloor Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2003
* Lynda Williams, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 02/28/2003
* USD 49,988.00

The PIs propose an experimental study to examine how the catalysis of organic
molecules may be influenced by the conversion of smectite to illite via the I/S
(illite/smectite) transitional structural states. Basically, simple organic
molecules may be held in interlayer smectite sites while the smectite converts
to illite. This mineralogic change could catalyze the formation of more complex
organic products in present day hydrothermal systems and the early earth, with
implications for the origin of life. The idea is that the polymerized organics
would be protected by being in interlayer positions. Experiments will be
conducted at 300 degrees C, 250 degrees C, and 200 degrees C, and 250 bars, an
appropriate pressure for seafloor hydrothermal systems. Experiments will explore
the effects of different starting concentrations, Eh, pH, and salinity
conditions on catalysis of polymerized organic molecules. Some experiments will
be in sealed capsules, whereas others will be in large vessels that can be
sampled from time to time as the smectite changes to illite, with interlayer
organics presumably also changing in interesting ways. The experimental
materials will be analyzed with XRF, GCMS, HPLC, IC, and FTIR plus MALDI-TOF, a
new technique for analyzing small amounts of organics on solids in
situ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;