* 0210033
* NER:  Magnetically Activated Nanoporous Structures for Biomedical Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Craig Grimes, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 06/30/2004
* USD 90,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NER category. The proposal
focuses on innovative materials synthesis strategies to create both passive, and
magnetically-driven mechanically active precision separation membranes. Of
particular interest is the development and characterization of well-controlled,
stable, and uniform nano-dimensional membranes capable of the separation of
viruses and/or proteins during the blood fractionation processes and the
blocking of antibodies and complement molecules from encapsulated xenogeneic
cells. It is hypothesized that high surface area cylindrical capsules the walls
of which are comprised of nanoporous membranes, created via a two-step process
of electric-field driven anodization of aluminum or titanium, can be used for
the absolute filtration or exclusion of biomolecules in the nanometer range. For
a given capsule, a windowpane structure is used with anodized nanoporous
windows, and un-anodized aluminum struts for structural support. The aluminum
anodization process enables precise control of pore size, with a controllable
pore diameter of approximately 10 nm to 100 nm depending upon anodizing voltage.
Beyond making passive membranes, the investigators propose fabrication of
cylindrical nanoporous biocapsules incorporating magnetoelastic elements.
Incorporation of the magnetoelastic elements enable the biocapsule to be
mechanically vibrated, remotely from a distance, by application of a time-
varying magnetic field that should enable controlled transport through the
membrane. A magnetoelastic thick film layer will be electroplated onto the
aluminum structural supports of the capsule. Such capsules could possibly find
application as in-vivo drug delivery devices, where needed medicine is delivered
in precise amounts by external application of a magnetic field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a further aspect of the proposed research, the
investigators seek to build upon their expertise in fabrication of nanoporous
alumina films of high uniformity to fabricate surface coatings comprised of
perpendicularly oriented gold-coated magnetostrictive nanowire arrays. The
utility of these arrays will be investigated for their utility in prevention of
biofouling. It is hypothesized that the needle-like shape of the nanowire array
elements, and the wave-like movement of the magnetostrictive nanowire array in
response to a time-varying non-uniform magnetic field, will help prevent protein
attachment to the surface, and could ultimately be used to move or transfer
cells across the surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
determine optimal routes for fabrication of the nanoporous capsules with
attention to membrane functionality as biological filters. The application of
passive nanoporous biocapsules for cellular encapsulation and immunoisolation,
and mechanically active biocapsules for controlled transport and delivery
through the nanoporous membranes will be investigated. In addition, the use of
magnetostrictive nanowire arrays will be investigated for their use in the
prevention of biofouling. The proposed outcomes are: (1) Determining a path for
in-situ or in-vivo controlled drug delivery by application of an external time
varying magnetic field. (2) Determination of a surface that would prevent
biofouling, facilitating the introduction of medical devices into the human
body. &lt;br/&gt;