* 0210197
* NER:  Designing Reliable Computers Using Molecular Nanotechnology
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* David Lilja, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2004
* USD 70,000.00

David Lilja&lt;br/&gt;U Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;0210197&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
work in physics, chemistry, and materials science has&lt;br/&gt;produced
nanometer-scale structures out of exotic materials using&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated
fabrication techniques. However, very little work has&lt;br/&gt;been conducted
in computer engineering to investigate how to build&lt;br/&gt;full-scale
computer systems out of these new devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
exploratory project is to begin to develop new&lt;br/&gt;techniques for
constructing finite state machines (FSMs) out of&lt;br/&gt;molecular
nanodevices. FSMs are one of the fundamental building&lt;br/&gt;blocks of any
digital computing system. In this project, we&lt;br/&gt;introduce NanoBoxes as a
possible abstraction for constructing&lt;br/&gt;reliable finite state machines
for use in molecular computer&lt;br/&gt;systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
reliability and error characteristics of molecular nanodevices&lt;br/&gt;are
substantially different from the corresponding characteristics&lt;br/&gt;of
traditional silicon-based CMOS transistors. These
nanodevice&lt;br/&gt;characteristics present new challenges to computer
designers which&lt;br/&gt;will require an entirely new approach for designing
finite state&lt;br/&gt;machines. The techniques we develop eventually could be
used to&lt;br/&gt;build entire computer systems out of molecular
nanodevices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a high-risk/high-reward project. The
risk is that we need&lt;br/&gt;to develop new approaches for designing computers
out of a large&lt;br/&gt;collection of devices which are still under development
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;By observing common trends in newly developed molecular
devices, we&lt;br/&gt;make assumptions about their weak drive capabilities and
their&lt;br/&gt;unstable nature. While we expect that we can adapt and
extend&lt;br/&gt;traditional space, time, and information redundancy techniques
for&lt;br/&gt;fault-tolerance into this new domain of molecular computers,
new&lt;br/&gt;ideas will be necessary to develop appropriate
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is high-reward, however, since by
conducting computer&lt;br/&gt;architecture research in tandem with research on
the nanodevices&lt;br/&gt;themselves, we will be streamlining the development
process to be&lt;br/&gt;able to have fully-functional molecular computers more
quickly than&lt;br/&gt;if we wait for the nanodevice research to solidify.
Furthermore,&lt;br/&gt;while we are tailoring our techniques for molecular
nanodevices, our&lt;br/&gt;techniques also will be applicable to error detection
and correction&lt;br/&gt;in quantum nanodevices and in nanometer-scale
conventional CMOS&lt;br/&gt;devices, which are becoming more fault-prone as
transistor sizes&lt;br/&gt;shrink.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make
substantial contributions to educational and&lt;br/&gt;human resource
development. It will initiate the dissertation&lt;br/&gt;research of a Ph.D.
student in electrical and computer engineering&lt;br/&gt;to focus their research
in this new area. We also expect to involve&lt;br/&gt;a few M.S. students in
this work and possibly provide research&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for
undergraduate students through existing internship&lt;br/&gt;programs at the
University of Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;