* 0210447
* NER:  Fabrication of MgB2 Quantum Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Alexey Bezryadin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 07/31/2004
* USD 90,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NER category. The proposal
focuses on a novel, scanned probe approach to the growth of superconducting MgB2
wires and quantum dots. Superconductive electronics has immense appeal since it
can be extremely fast and possesses inherently low power dissipation. The 39 K
transition temperature of MgB2 in concert with its negligible grain boundary
scattering (the central limitation of the copper oxide superconductors) make it
the most ideal material known for high temperature superconductive
nanoelectronics. MgB2 electronic devices with a minimum feature size of 100 nm
have already been made using conventional fabrication techniques. Our approach
will use a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) to directly react Mg with B in
the presence of an intense tip-induced electric field. This approach has been
used to locally oxide metals with features as small as 5 nm. Our project will
attempt to apply this technique to the growth of MgB2. The project will require
the growth of very pure, thin boron films, the identificationof efficient
chemical precursors for scanned probe growth, the use of an ultrahigh vacuum STM
for scanned growth, photolithography to produce submicron scale contact pads and
low noise, low current cryogenic measurements of resulting devices. In addition
to its very small ultimate feature size, the STM approach permits the direct
fabrication of arbitrary shaped structures without the complications of
conventional lithography. Several important physical problems will be explored.
In extremely narrow wires, thermal and quantum fluctuations will play a crucial
role in the conduction process. In a quantum dot geometry the discreteness of
electrical charge becomes paramount. In a device made from a complex
superconductor like MgB2 these processes are only partially understood but will
have a direct bearing on the operation of future nanoscale devices. A frontier
scientific question that will be explored here is how the mechanism for
superconductivity itself can be altered at in sufficiently small devices. There
is growing evidence that MgB2 is an admixture of two interpenetrating
superconductors. How this unique "two gap" behavior is affected by shrinking the
size of the system, and what new possibilities it holds for device operation and
for designing new superconductors will all be questions that we hope to initiate
with this project.