* 0210445
* NIRT:  Plasmonic Nanophotonics and Optoelectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Vladimir Shalaev, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 12/31/2007
* USD 1,393,147.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. This project is aimed at developing new
classes of metal-dielectric nanostructured materials and their applications in
photonics, spectroscopy and optoelectronics. Metal nanostructures are capable of
supporting various plasmon modes, which can result in high local fields and thus
in dramatic enhancement of optical responses. Such plasmonic nanostructures act
like nanoantennas accumulating and building up the electromagnetic energy in
small nanometer scale areas. The dramatic enhancement of optical cross-sections
resulting from such energy concentration opens new avenues for numerous
applications of metal nanostructures. A number of new phenomena and their
applications in photonics and optoelectronics will be studied in this project.
Those include negative refraction in left-handed materials based on metal
nanowires, photonic band-gap materials using metal nanostructures, plasmon-
enhanced nonlinear photodetectors, disorder-induced localization of plasmons and
fractal sensors for detecting molecules, light-gated optical transmitters,
photonic nano-circuits and nano-chips. This interdisciplinary research brings
together experts in the physics of plasmonic nanomaterials (Prof. Shalaev),
femtosecond pulse-shaping spectroscopy and ultafast photonics (Prof. Weiner),
and fabrication of plasmonic (Prof. Wei) and optoelectronic (Prof. Melloch)
nanomaterials. A successful program in plasmonic nanomaterials, supported by
synergistic activities with the Birck Nanotechnology Center and Center for
Sensing Science and Technology at Purdue, will accelerate the development of a
multidisciplinary Nano-photonics Program. The proposed research will integrate
and infuse cutting-edge research in the emerging areas of photonics and
nanotechnology with top-flight education and training.