* 0210170
* Control of Natural Product Production in Aromatic Herbs
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* David Gang, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 07/31/2005
* USD 360,000.00

Culinary and other aromatic herbs make a significant contribution to improving
the appeal of foodstuff and play increasingly important roles in our society as
components of the herbal remedies and supplements industry. However, the
biosynthesis of almost all bioactive secondary compounds or natural products is
still poorly understood. The plant family Lamiaceae (e.g., sweet basil and mint)
includes many species that are rich in such natural products. Natural product
production by the plant is believed to be associated with defense against
herbivores and pathogens, and Lamiaceae species have evolved elaborate
structures on the surface of their leaves, known as peltate glands, where these
chemicals are synthesized and stored. Basil is a particularly noteworthy herb
because it synthesizes relatively high amounts of both terpenoids and
phenylpropanoids, two large classes of compounds that include many plant defense
and medicinally important natural products, including paclitaxel (Taxol) and
podophyllotoxin (derivatized to form Etoposide and Teniposide) that are used to
treat cancer. Aside from some focused efforts to delineate the pathways to
specific compounds, such as paclitaxel and podophyllotoxin, very little is known
about the biochemical reactions that produce the great diversity of compounds
that result from these two biosynthetic pathways. Even less is known about the
genes and enzymes that control or regulate these pathways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to identify how secondary
compounds are produced in basil peltate glands and to begin to identify and
define the mechanisms that control their production. Specifically, this research
will: 1) use metabolic profiling to characterize levels of known metabolites and
potential intermediates in the phenylpropanoid pathway in peltate glands of
select basil lines; and 2) use a functional genomics approach to determine what
roles specific enzymes and other regulatory factors play in controlling the flux
into and through the phenylpropanoid pathway in basil peltate
glands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research results and developed tools will form
a foundation that should facilitate research of other plant secondary metabolic
pathways. In addition to the intrinsic scientific value of understanding how
plants produce natural products, such knowledge is essential for rational design
of breeding strategies to produce plants with targeted natural product profiles.
This knowledge will also help in the application of genetic engineering to
improve and develop new aromatic plants, which could then serve as feed stocks
for the pharmaceutical and other industries.&lt;br/&gt;