* 0210425
* NIRT:  Processing, Characterization, Scaling, and Development of Fiber-Reinforced Polymeric Nano-Matrix Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,10/31/2005
* James Seferis, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 10/31/2005
* USD 900,513.00

Advanced composite materials are widely utilized because of their low weight and
relatively high strength and stiffness. Traditional composites rely on the use
of macro or micro-scale reinforcements to increase their properties and
performance. Through the use of nano-scale reinforcements and structures, either
alone or in conjunction with macro-scale structures, composites with superior
mechanical, transport, and environmental properties and performance
characteristics can be developed. It is necessary however, to understand the
fundamental phenomena behind nano-reinforcement in the form of a phase as well
as scaling issues if this technology is to be effectively applied. Modeling
analyses that focus on viscoelasticity and molecular-level anisotropy and
heterogeneity will support this investigation and the scaling of material
properties on a nano/micro/macro level. Therefore, the proposed research will
investigate the trinity of nanoscale structures, nanoscale processes in the
environment, and manufacturing processes at the nanoscale. &lt;br/&gt;The
development of nanotechnology represents a fundamental change in the way
materials are designed, manufactured, and envisioned. The realization of the
above research objectives will be accomplished through the development of a
diverse and global team that will incorporate experts from both industry and
academia, with diverse areas of expertise (polymer chemistry, polymer physics,
interfacial and surface science, advanced composite materials, and environmental
science) and age groups varying from scientists with many years of experience
down to graduate and undergraduate students. The team will consist of three
nodes, in the US, Korea and Switzerland. The diverse nature of this team will
allow for a global investigation of this project on many levels and from many
angles in an unprecedented fashion. Furthermore, it will provide unique
opportunities to students and young researchers in the rapidly developing field
of nanotechnology. Interdisciplinary teams are needed to study nanotechnology
and are also needed to educate people about the advancements and varying
disciplines in this field. &lt;br/&gt;