* 0210552
* NIRT: Philosophical and Social Dimensions of Nanoscale Research: Developing a Rational Approach to a Newly Emerging Science and Technology
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* David Berube, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Douglas D. Frey
* 07/31/2003
* USD 175,000.00

NIRT: Philosophical and Social Dimensions of Nanoscale Research -Developing a
Rational Approach to a Newly Emerging Science and
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale science and engineering presents new
challenges and opportunities not only to the scientific research community but
also to all those who shape its public understanding. As nanoscale researchers
claim a middle ground between nano-visionaries and nano-skeptics, the public
also seeks a middle ground between overreaching "hype" and irrational fear. This
award is on an exploratory scale and is designed to enable the interdisciplinary
research team to develop approaches to two main objectives. First it will
develop activities that establish a broad interdisciplinary dialog on nanoscale
science and technology that includes the public as well as interested social and
natural scientists and engineers. This activity will be built around the
NanoCenter of the University of South Carolina. Second, interdisciplinary teams
of researchers will begin work on four specific research projects ("task areas")
aimed at elucidating the rational middle ground for understanding nanoscale
science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities to be pursued as part of
the interdisciplinary include: a Summer Workshop on "Reading Nano-science and
-technology; " a Fall Symposium on "Nano-science and -technology and the
Environment;" a Spring Conference "Discovering the Nanoscale," that focuses on a
"science studies" audience with the hope of follow-up conference six months
later in Darmstadt Germany; a regular series of "Nano Lunches" on the Columbia
campus in fall 2003; and a website and archive for the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pursuit of this first objective allows for the
achievement of the second objective, namely to rationally understand nanoscale
research at the appropriate middle ground between visionary hype and skeptical
or irrational fear. The research team focuses on the concepts of understanding
and control, concepts that are central to the rational comprehension of
opportunities and risks. Four specific topics will be developed: &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;1) Stability and Control of Nano-science and -technology (How
experimental, theoretical and technological work on the nanoscale produces
stable phenomena over which we have significant control);&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;2) Imagining and Imaging the Nanoscale (How our abilities to imagine
the nanoscale (both in words and in drawings) and our abilities to image the
nanoscale (specifically with various nanoscale microscopes) interact, and how
the pictures of the nanoscale that result effect scientific, technological and
public understanding of the nanoscale);&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;3) Risk and
Problems of Self-replication and Cascading Effects with Nanoscale Technology
(How to consider and control the special issues of risk posed by nanoscale
interventions, specifically the use of self-replication and its potential for
cascading effects. Analogies with work in genetic engineering will be
developed); and&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;4) The Public Face of Nano-science and
-technology (How nano-science and -technology is presented to the public and how
the public has reacted to it. Connections with legal and democratic
infrastructure will be developed.)&lt;br/&gt;