* 0210215
* NIRT:  Uncovering Deformation Mechanisms of Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Kevin Hemker, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,230,333.00

This project is a collaborative inter-disciplinary research to elucidate and
model the deformation and fracture mechanisms of nanostructured materials. These
studies are important for the reliability of next-generation MEMS, NEMS,
magnetic and ultra-hard films, and micro/nano devices, in general, that are
closely tied to their mechanical performance. A major objective is to obtain a
thorough and solid understanding of operative deformation mechanisms operative
in nanoscale materials. The study is specifically designed to probe the
mechanical response of materials at nano-scales. Novel designs for in situ TEM
observations and microsample tensile and transient experiments will be used to
uncover and characterize the dominant deformation and fracture mechanisms in
high purity vapor and electro-deposited nanostructured thin films. Multi-scale
finite element calculations containing physical models will be developed based
on the experimental findings. These models along with adaptive meshing and
cohesive elements with atomistic descriptions of grain boundaries in
nanocrystalline materials will be used to develop models to predict the
collective macroscopic response of a compilation of nanocrystalline grains. The
undergraduate and graduate students and post-doctoral fellows engaged in this
project would be co- advised. Two parallel teams, each including a post-doc,
graduate student and an undergraduate research assistant, will be formed and
mentoring skills will be developed at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overriding intellectual challenge of the proposed study is to develop a science
based methodology for measuring, describing and modeling deformation and
fracture processes at or near nanometer length scales. The results will have
application in MEMS, NEMS and other technologies where magnetic and ultra-hard
films are used. This project brings together a synergistic combination of
expertise on the synthesis of nanocrystalline materials, the electron
microscopy, microsample testing, and adaptive meshing and cohesive element
modeling. The importance of teamwork is emphasized and all participants will be
educated to work in an inter-disciplinary multi-scale environment at the nano
scale. &lt;br/&gt;