* 0210160
* Defining the Catalytic Mechanism of Cytokinin Oxidase/Dehydrogenase Reactions
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Kristin Bilyeu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Steve R. Rodermel
* 07/31/2004
* USD 33,200.00

This award supports an international collaborative research project between the
University of Missouri and the Palacky University Olomouc, Czech Republic that
focuses on aspects of plant physiology related to the enzymology of cytokinin
oxidase/dehydrogenase (ZMCKX1) reactions. This new research partnership combines
complementary research expertise of the two laboratories. The research will
examine the role of electron flux within specific compartments of plant cells in
an effort to understand features of metabolic control of cytokinin degradation
and regeneration of active cytokinin oxidase/dehydrogenase. The main hypothesis
of this proposal is that plants contain specific bioactive cofactors that are
capable of regenerating active cytokinin oxidase/dehydrogenase enzymes by
accepting electrons during catalysis of cytokinins. We will determine the
subcellular location of the enzyme, precisely characterize the redox potential
of the enzyme for comparison to the properties of putative bioactive cofactors,
and perform depletion experiments to initially identify the reaction-enhancing
bioactive cofactor used in plants. This research directly addresses the question
of specificity for the ZmCKX1 bioactive cofactor and defines the range of
electrochemical redox potentials for bioactive cofactor candidates. Subcellular
localization of ZmCKX1 and redox characterization will independently contribute
to our understanding of the biochemical and physiological properties of the
enzyme and processes that occur during plant development. The partnership also
provides unique and valuable opportunities for reciprocal exchange of
undergraduate and graduate students who will gain educational and technical
training, and research experience at the international
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;