* 0210585
* NIRT: Merged CMOS/Molecular Integrated Circuit  (Mol-MOS) Fabrication, Analysis and Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Andrew Hillier, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,062,000.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. This program addresses the issues of
fabrication and integration of molecular devices with conventional electronic
technology. The research team will address nanoelectronics from a comprehensive
viewpoint by considering how nano-devices and nano-circuits can be assembled,
modeled and designed with the requirements of large-scale integration and
manufacturability in mind. For one, we will examine new combinations of
electrode and active materials that are more compatible with conventional device
and processing technologies. Modern integrated circuits use a variety of metals
(Al, Cu, Ta, W, Ti, etc.) and insulators (SiO2, SiN, etc.) in multilevel
metalization schemes that result in a complex 2.5 dimensional arrangement of
contacts and wires. In contrast, most molecular devices use planar arrangements
of Au electrodes that are not compatible with MOS-based electronics. This
problem might be overcome by designing organic molecules with end groups
engineered to attach only to Cu electrodes. These would ultimately be mated with
metal electrode structures formed using state-of-the-art film deposition/growth
techniques and electron beam lithography. These structures would incorporate
sacrificial insulating spacer layers. Near the end of the process sequence, the
insulating layers would be etched away leaving pockets that by their shape, size
and Cu endpoints, provide an ideal "home" for the target molecule. The completed
template could then be rinsed in a solution containing these molecules, adding
them to the structure. Since the volatile organics would not be subject to high
temperature processing, this would provide a viable means of adding molecular
electronic devices to underling microelectronic circuits. &lt;br/&gt;We will
also develop black-box models of molecular devices. These models are essential
if one is to anticipate novel computing architectures where molecular devices
may function far differently from modern transistors, and where optimized
circuit design my entail radically different patterns of device interconnection.
Presently, such models do not exist but are absolutely required to allow design
with nanodevices at higher levels of abstraction. &lt;br/&gt;A major part of our
effort will be dedicated to education and outreach. The subject of nano-
electronics is highly interdisciplinary and does not fall within the normal
pedagogical bounds of engineering and scientific disciplines. We will thus offer
a compelling 3D animation-based website (building on our existing expertise) and
a graduate level web-published "Frontiers of Nanoscience" course emphasizing the
fundamentals of nano-device operation and their giga-scale
integration.&lt;br/&gt;