* 0210282
* NER:  Enhancement of the Efficiency of Thermoelectric Devices via Engineering of the Electron-Phonon Interaction in Quantum Dot Superlattices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Alexander Balandin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 06/30/2004
* USD 79,999.00

This proposal was received in response to the National Science and Engineering
Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NER category. The proposal
focuses on a new approache to enhancement of the thermoelectric figure of merit
ZT of semiconductor materials via tuning of electron-phonon interaction in
multiple arrays of semiconductor quantum dots. Quantum dot arrays are potential
candidates for the thermoelectric "electron transmitting - phonon blocking"
material. At the same time, in order to achieve a significant ZT improvement and
compete with conventional thermoelectrics one has to design and fabricate
quantum dot superlattice where carrier transport is facilitated by the formation
of carrier mini-bands. Indeed, hopping conductivity typical for lateral carrier
transport in random quantum dot arrays has very low carrier mobility while mini-
band transport may lead to very high mobility values, particularly if one
manages to suppress at least partially the carrier scattering via smart mini-
band engineering. The important task addressed in this proposal is theoretical
proof-of-concept investigation of requirements for achieving mini-band transport
regime and carrier scattering suppression in quantum dot
superlattices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modification of acoustic phonon modes in
quantum dot arrays due to spatial confinement and boundary scattering leads to a
change in the phonon density of states, a decrease of the phonon group velocity,
and corresponding drop of the in-plane lattice thermal conductivity. Acoustic
phonon confinement, e.g. modification of phonon dispersion due to nanostructure
boundaries, is much less researched phenomenon than carrier confinement effect.
At the same time, it can serve as an additional tool to decrease the lattice
thermal conductivity value and increase the effectiveness of the thermoelectric
device. Thus, another task of this project is a study of the required structure
parameters, e.g. dot size, shape, acoustic mismatch, etc., for achieving
desirable acoustic phonon transport features such as low group velocity along
direction of interest; resonant phonon scattering conditions; decoupling of
phonon bath from electrons; etc. New efficient thermoelectric devices based on
nanostructured materials may have a tremendous impact on a wide range of energy
needs due to their inherent advantages such as high reliability, light weight,
compactness, quit operation, and environmental safety.&lt;br/&gt;