* 0210575
* NIRT:  Nanoscale Quantum Systems:  Excitations and Control
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Boris Altshuler, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2006
* USD 892,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
Initiative, NSF-01-157, Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Teams (NIRT). The
award is funded jointly by the NSF Divisions of Materials Research, Mathematical
Sciences and Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design, development and control
of nanoscale electronics raises many challenging questions, particularly in the
area of quantum systems far from equilibrium. Such mesoscopic devices are often
weakly coupled to their environment, so that equilibration is difficult. Common
issues are shared by diverse problems including quantum dots, driven Josephson
junctions and finite-size quantum glasses. There now exist controllable quantum
systems far from equilibrium that are accessible to both theory and experiment.
In this research, a team of theorists from Rutgers, Princeton and NEC will
address global issues in this area through a series of specific studies, using
the conceptual links between nonequilibrium spin systems and disordered
interacting electrons. It is emphasized that nonequilibrium sources of electron
decoherence must be better understood in order to optimize performance of
nanoscale circuitry, especially that which involves quantum
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of nonequilibrium quantum dynamics
can be approached using localization theory. The dynamics of a quantum glass can
be described by particle motion in a random potential on a high-dimensional
sphere. Such systems display diffusive behavior not expected from a localization
perspective. This discrepancy will be reconciled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charge
transport in a low-density disordered insulator displays slow relaxation,
indicative of the system's inability to find its ground-state. Its complex free
energy is due to competition between Coulomb interactions and a random
potential. Taking an approach analogous to that in spin glasses, the team will
identify and solve a model describing the localization-delocalization transition
in an isolated electronic system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sources of electron
dephasing must be better understood in order to control phase coherence. This
issue is crucial for the construction of quantum circuitry; even if each element
is designed optimally, there is the possibility of collective dephasing. A
related problem is the identification of a single qubit where decoherence is
minimized. A spin liquid with a doubly degenerate ground-state and a gap may be
an attractive candidate, since its absence of long-range order effectively
decouples it from the external environment.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;This
proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
Initiative, NSF-01-157, Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Teams (NIRT). The
award is funded jointly by the NSF Divisions of Materials Research, Mathematical
Sciences and Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This complementary team of theorists
from Rutgers, Princeton and NEC will combine their talents to study fundamental
issues relating to quantum electron dynamics at the nanoscale. As electrical
circuitry approaches the nanoscale these issues become more critical,
particularly as they relate to problems of phase coherence in nanodevices and
its possible application in quantum computers.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;