* 0210936
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Development of New Mortars for Repair and Preservation of Historical Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Raafat Malek, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/2006
* USD 23,600.00

0210936&lt;br/&gt;Malek&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description:&lt;br/&gt;This award
is for support of a joint research project by Dr. R. I. Malek, Materials
Research Laboratory, Pennsylvania State University (PSU), University Park,
Pennsylvania and Dr. Gamal Kamh, Geology Department, Menoufia University,
Shebeen El-Kom, Egypt. The objective of this research is to provide database on
compositions of new restoration mortars and preservation procedure for old
structures. The two scientists plan to investigate deterioration mechanisms.
They will determine the compositions of new mortars that are relevant to the
causes of deterioration and that are compatible with host structures as well as
the use of new binders. They will diagnose the causes of damage using chemical
analysis, ultrasonic spectroscopy, x-ray and Magic Angle Spinning NMR, color
hue, porosity, and elasticity moduli at PSU. They will try several new binders
including cement grout, geopolymers, cement/organic polymer blends, and
phosphate-based binders. They will perform characterization of the binders to
ensure their longevity and compatibility with the host structure. They will
include geopolymers, which have an advantage as repair material in trapping
salts due to the difference in charge between Aluminum and Silicates in the
framework. They will test phosphate binders, which have the advantage of
trapping salts and being color adjustable and are dimensionally stable.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: &lt;br/&gt;The two collaborating investigators have
complementary research background experiences. Dr. Malek has considerable
experience in cementitious materials and their degradation and repair. Dr. Kamh
has experience in modes of deterioration of historic buildings under natural
weathering conditions and due to human activity causes. They will combine their
experiences and using the laboratory resources at PSU for the study of the
practical aspects of restoration and preservation of ancient buildings and
monuments. The two will exchange visits PI will visit, first to Egypt for the
field study and then to PSU for the laboratory analysis. Graduate students at
both institutes will be involved in the field and laboratory research. The
experience these students gain in the restoration and preservation science may
help them further their career goals. Relevant educational materials will be
prepared and used as a seed for a new curriculum on science and technology of
restoration and preservation to further students' education. This project is
funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division
of Civil and Mechanical Systems.&lt;br/&gt;