* 0210153
* NIRT: Architectures and Devices for Quantum-dot Cellular Automata
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2007
* Alexei Orlov, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Timothy M. Pinkston
* 06/30/2007
* USD 999,999.00

CCR-0210153&lt;br/&gt;Kogge, Peter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was
received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF
01-157, category NIRT. Quantum-dot cellular automata (QCA) is a revolutionary
computing paradigm that is well suited to nanoelectronic implementation and
scaling to molecular dimensions. The central feature of &lt;br/&gt;QCA is that
binary information is encoded in the position of single electrons among a group
of dots forming a cell. This represents a significant break with the transistor-
based paradigm in which information &lt;br/&gt;is encoded by the state of the
transistor current switch. In QCA, electrons switch between quantum dots within
a cell, but no current flows between cells. This leads to extremely low power
dissipation, avoiding the problem of heat generation that will ultimately limit
the integration density of transistor circuits. &lt;br/&gt;Clocking of QCA
circuits has proven to be extremely important from the standpoint of both
architectures and devices. It allows arrays of QCA cells to be broken into sub-
arrays for pipelined processing, and it enables cells to produce signal power
gain to replace signal energy lost to the environment. Functioning QCA devices
have already been demonstrated in an aluminum/oxide tunnel junction scheme,
confirming the operation of QCA cells, shift registers, logic gates, and memory
elements. Power gain in a QCA shift register has also been achieved. This
project will advance the architectural development of QCA, investigate questions
of switching speed in nanoelectronic devices, and develop advanced fabrication
techniques to implement the architectural and circuit theory concepts. Since QCA
represents a dramatic break from conventional devices, &lt;br/&gt;significant
changes in architecture are needed to fully exploit the capabilities of QCA. In
QCA layout, timing, and architecture are intimately related, requiring a unified
design approach. This is analogous to the &lt;br/&gt;approach begun by Mead and
Conway which revolutionized VLSI design by making a connection between
architecture and layout and building on that connection to enable designers to
quickly synthesize large and complex functional blocks. Likewise, QCA system
designers will be able to exploit timing in addition &lt;br/&gt;to layout to
produce highdensity functional designs. In particular we will investigate the
development of simple, yet complete, QCA based "Field Programmable Gate Arrays",
where 2D arrays of identical cells are tiled together, with programmable
interconnect and function. Timing plays a pivotal role in QCA designs, so it is
vital to achieve a complete understanding of switching and switching dynamics in
arrays of coupled electrons. Some recent theoretical results indicate that
electron switching speeds would be orders of magnitude lower than that expected
from the capacitances and resistances of the dots and tunnel junctions, contrary
to theoretical work done at Notre Dame. To resolve this issue we will apply high
frequency measurement techniques to the study of switching in QCA cells and in
arrays of cells.&lt;br/&gt;At present, experimental demonstrations of QCA
devices are limited to a small number of cells by the large capacitances
produced by the aluminum tunnel junctions. To support and experimentally confirm
the advances made in architecture and circuit theory, we will employ advanced
fabrication techniques based on AFM lithography to produce QCA with greatly
enhanced operating characteristics. This will allow us to fabricate and measure
arrays of cells with significant extent and complexity. QCA presents a unique
opportunity for a broad impact on the educational experience of students, and on
research in the field of electronic devices. &lt;br/&gt;We will develop
instructional modules based on QCA simulation tools to teach the concepts of QCA
architecture to undergraduate and graduate students. These modules will benefit
students by introducing them to &lt;br/&gt;alternative architectural concepts.
In addition, by broadening their horizons, it will strengthen their
understanding of conventional architectures by emphasizing the foundational
concepts of architectural &lt;br/&gt;concepts.