* 0210519
* NIRT: Formation and Properties of Spin-Polarized Quantum Dots in Magnetic Semiconductors by Controlled Variation of Magnetic Fields on the Nanoscale
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Jacek Furdyna, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 01/31/2007
* USD 1,830,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
solicitation, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. The goal of this project is to explore
the issues of confining spin-polarized charges on the nano-scale, in zero-
dimensional (quantum-dot-like) semiconductor geometries. The approach is to do
this in III-V- and II-VI-based magnetic semiconductors (such as GaMnAs or
ZnMnSe) subjected to a magnetic field that is modulated on the nano-scale. The
giant Zeeman splitting characteristic of these materials is expected to exhibit
nano-scale modulation resulting in tight localization of spin-polarized states.
The idea is to produce such nano-scale field modulation in a magnetic
semiconductor (MS) in three ways: (1) by lithographically-patterned
ferromagnetic (FM) layers deposited on the MS surface (e.g., sub-micron Co/Pt
multilayer discs); by depositing and patterning superconducting (SC) overlayers
on the MSs, where the magnetic field modulation is achieved as the magnetic flux
by-passes the nano-scale SC "obstacles" due to the Meissner effect; and by using
unpatterned SC films, where the field modulation at the MS/SC interface is
achieved via the Abrikosov vortex lattice, whose "lattice constant"-and thus the
Zeeman-induced quantum dots separation-can be controlled by an external magnetic
field. Prior to patterning, the SC films will either be deposited epitaxially,
in the same molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) chamber as the MS layers; or ex-situ,
by sputtering. Key aspects of the project are: theory, materials growth,
lithography, characterization, and development of spintronic concepts. The
project is highly collaborative involving researchers at Notre Dame, Purdue, and
U. IL at Chicago. Additionally, the Superconductivity and Magnetism Group at
Argonne National Laboratory, led by Dr. George Crabtree, will collaborate by
providing magneto-transport, near-field magneto-optical mapping, as well as STM
and (eventually) spin-polarized STS mapping of the SC-MS hybrid structures. %%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials
science with high technological relevance. An important feature of the program
is the integration of research and education through the training of students in
a fundamentally and technologically significant area. In addition to training
graduate students in nano-science, undergraduates will also participate in
research through senior projects and the NSF REU program. It is also expected
that a regular for-credit course on nano-science at the senior and first-year-
graduate level will be developed. The project combines experiment and theory,
and brings together researchers from physics, electrical engineering, and
material science. Activities are designed to develop strong technical,
communication, and organizational/management skills in undergraduate and
graduate students and postdoctorals through unique educational experiences made
possible by a forefront research environment. Cross-disciplinary research and
site visits between organizations will enhance the education and training
process. The project is co-supported by the DMR/CMP, DMR/EM, and ECS/EPDT
Divisions/Programs. ***