* 0210498
* RUI: Effects of Cationic Substituents on the Cope Rearrangement
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Kathleen Morgan, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2007
* USD 174,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Kathleen Morgan of the Department of Chemistry at Xavier has begun a study of
the Cope Rearrangement, which is a reaction where new carbon-carbon bonds are
made with high regio- and stereo selectivity, via the reorganization of a
1,5-hexadiene. The goal of this study is to determine whether the reaction rate
can be accelerated with the attachment of cationic substituents on the reactive
core of the system. The formation of carbon-carbon bonds is at the heart of
organic chemistry, yet there are a limited number of ways to construct them. The
creation of the carbon-based skeleton often represents much of the challenge in
synthesis. The Cope Rearrangement has been much studied and heavily exploited in
synthesis and yet we are still not able to claim that it is fully understood or
that it has reached its full potential in synthetic applications. The
experimental and theoretical study of the Cope rearrangement of 1,5 hexadienes
bearing electron-withdrawing groups at the 3 position is a well-defined project
that has the potential to yield fundamental insights into this rearrangement and
extend the full synthetic utility of this reaction. Because of the importance of
carbon-carbon bond making, this project creatively blends literature, theory,
and wet chemistry in order to increase understanding of the chemistry and
produce novel methodology. .

Professor Kathleen Morgan, of the Department of Chemistry at Xavier University,
with the support of the Organic Dynamics Program, will conducted her research at
an historically black undergraduate university (HBCU). Undergraduates are
capable of performing the majority of the proposed research. The preliminary
results were obtained by more than a dozen undergraduates at Professor Morgan's
previous institution. Underrepresented students will have the opportunity to
participate in all aspects of this fundamental research including the synthesis
of organic compounds using a series of known procedures, development of new
reactions, purification and characterization of products, determination of
reaction rates by spectroscopy, and computational studies.