* 0210587
* NER:  Exploring the Mechanical and Thermoelectric Properties of Composite Nano-Rods and Nano-Springs
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Toh-Ming Lu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

The grant explores a an experimental study of the mechanical and thermoelectric
properties of a novel class of nanostructures that have been developed recently
using the grazing angle deposition (GLAD) technique. The structures are in the
form of nanorods and nanosprings grown perpendicular or at an angle to the
substrate and aligned with each other. The aspect ratio, spacing and symmetry of
the rods may be selected at will. The structures can be made from a large
variety of materials in the elemental, alloy and multilayered form. These
conditions are ideal for material characterization. Mechanically, the nanorods
are the nanoscale equivalent of the cylindrical macroscopic specimens used for
material characterization at the macroscale. A major objective is to load the
nano-rods with an AFM or a nanoindenter tip both in axial compression and in
bending. This technique offers tremendous advantages over the standard
measurements made at the nanoscale by nanoindentation. The thermoelectric figure
of merit of a single nanorod will be obtained from the measured Seebeck voltage
by passing a current from a conductive AFM tip through the nanorod to the bottom
conducting substrate.&lt;br/&gt;Along with the experimental study, several
theoretical issues will be addressed that include the scaling of material
properties with specimen size and the validity of constitutive equations of the
gradient non-local type material behavior at the
nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an exploratory research that will test
the limit of the scaling concept in materials properties thereby providing
guidance to the design and discovery of new nanoscale material combinations for
various applications in future NEMS and energy conversion devices. The proposed
multidisciplinary approach with Physics, Materials Science, and Mechanical
Engineering components, if successful, will significantly advance the field of
mechanical and thermoelectric measurements of nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;