* 0210743
* NER:   Novel Applications Based on Attractive and Repulsive Electrostatic Forces in Nanoscale
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Edwin Kan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kawthar A. Zaki
* 06/30/2003
* USD 80,000.00

Novel Applications Based on Attractive and &lt;br/&gt;Repulsive Electrostatic
Forces in Nanoscale&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the proposed NER research
is to establish an electrostatic interface between nanoelectronics and the
biological molecular systems in the micron and nanometer scales. The main
research actions include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To seek concept demonstration
for nanometer-to-micron-scale manipulation of the electrostatic attractive and
repulsive forces through nonvolatile static charges controlled by CMOS/EEPROM
(electrically erasable programmable read-only memory) devices.&lt;br/&gt;2. To
establish the spatial and energy resolution limits of the electrostatic forces
between CMOS and biological systems&lt;br/&gt;3. To establish the electrostatic
interface between CMOS devices and the ambient electrolyte solution without
chemical contamination in Si and dielectrics.&lt;br/&gt;4. To formulate
realistic goals and implementation methods in the follow-on NIRT effort for
building molecular recognition and actuation capabilities derived from nanoscale
CMOS technology, if the NER efforts give promising
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed NER investigation is unique in the
sense that the nonvolatile static charges in CMOS EEPROM devices are employed at
the interface, and hence the interaction electrostatic forces can be both
attractive and repulsive. For molecular recognition and actuation, availability
of both attractive and repulsive forces at interface is crucial for high
selectivity and sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two technology demonstrations
will be established in the NER effort to investigate the scale and resolution of
the electrostatic attractive and repulsive forces derivable from the CMOS/EEPROM
devices. The first one is the micron-scale electrostatic tweezers. For
electrostatic tweezers actions of pickup and drop, an electrostatic repulsive
force is needed. This can be accomplished by forces induced from nonvolatile
static charges. The second one is the nano-scale molecular recognition from
surface attractive and repulsive forces. Nanometer-scale molecular recognition
by complementary nonvolatile static charges can be achieved in floating
nanocrystal EEPROM structures. The peripheral source/drain structures have
alternative dopant types to facilitate complementary static charge injection.
The control gate is partially implemented by the ground-plane back gate to
expose the nanocrystals for electrostatic interaction with the ambient.
Preliminary concepts for the micron-scale [1,2] and nano-scale [3-6] nonvolatile
static charge control have already been experimentally demonstrated in the PI's
group. The micron-scale control currently offers much faster charge
reconfiguration (in milliseconds) than the nanoscale one (achieved by floating
Si and metal nanocrystals with pixel accessibility inversely proportional to
resolution due to peripheral contact constraints). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Present
efforts by the PI in funded research programs will be discussed in view of the
relations with this NER proposal. A small addition to the existing educational
outreach program will be presented. Rationale has been made to fit the proposed
effort to the one-year span of the NER program. If the concept demonstration is
successful, a NIRT proposal will be composed next year based on the preliminary
modeling and experimental results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;