* 0210351
* NIRT: Manufacturing/Synthesis and Nanostructure of Superhard Thin Films/Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Howard Jackson, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 12/31/2007
* USD 1,000,000.00

0210351 Singh The primary objectives of the proposed NIRT (Nanoscale
Interdisciplinary Research Team) research addressing the theme on manufacturing
processes at the nanoscale are to: (1) develop processing methods to manufacture
novel superhard thin films of controlled nano-structures and properties in the
ternary (C-B-N) system, (2) develop advanced techniques to characterize the
nano-structures of selected new superhard materials, and (3) relate the scale of
the nano-structure (1-50 nm) to their unusual properties such as hardness. With
this vision in mind, the premise of the proposed NIRT is that the
functionality/property of nano-structured materials in the form of thin films
and coatings can be designed by employing a suitable nanoscale architecture and
distribution of the basic structural building blocks to control the properties
at a scale of 1-50 nm. In this proposal we seek to address the design of
superhard and nano-structured thin films not by just refining the
polycrystalline microstructural scale, but rather by exploring the novel routes
for processing/manufacturing, characterizing, and controlling the nano-structure
of new materials in order to achieve unusual mechanical, physical, thermal, and
possibly other properties. Thus, materials will be first designed and
processed/manufactured to have only short-range order and then nano-structured
thin films will be created by clever modifications of the non-equilibrium
processing methods, and/or kinetic/thermal manipulation of the
networks/nanostructues to create nano-crystalline thin films. The eventual aim
of these activities will be to develop predictive tools for designing and
synthesizing materials with unusual properties/hardness so that a knowledge base
for "creating materials by design" will be obtained. To accomplish these goals
of the NIRT, a truly interdisciplinary and complementary research team has been
assembled. On a broader scale, a successful completion of this research will
lead to a knowledge base for designing and manufacturing nano-structured
superhard materials in the ternary C-B-N system with unusual mechanical and
physical properties for applications in machining, electronic devices, MEMS, and
functional/protective coatings. Graduate and undergraduate students and research
associate/post doc will be trained through participation on this research
project and their MS and Ph.D. theses. In addition, minority/women high school
and undergraduate students will also be mentored and exposed to this research.