* 0210165
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Integrating Statistical Machine Translation from Arabic to English with Syntactic and Semantic Analysis
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Kevin Knight, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/2004
* USD 25,000.00

0210165&lt;br/&gt;Knight&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. Kevin Knight, Information Sciences
Institute (ISI), University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California and
Dr. Ahmed Rafea, Computer Science Department, The American University in
Cairo(AUC), Cairo, Egypt. They plan to explore a new method for automatic
translation between Arabic and English. The so-called statistical machine
translation method exploits both fast computers and the existence of large
human-translated documents. The investigators plan to develop new models based
on bilingual texts that they will manually annotate. These annotations will show
how the translation process should move from Arabic into syntactic/semantic
structures and from there into English. In the first stage, a substantial
collection of United Nations documents translated into Arabic will be manually
annotated with morphological, syntactic and semantic information by graduate
students at the AUC. In the second stage, the annotated corpus will be used to
train morphological analyzers and parsers of Arabic, in order to automate
annotation in the second year of the project and to study the annotations of
parallel Arabic and English sentences for the development of syntactic and
semantic translation models. In the third and fourth stages of the proposed
research, existing learning algorithms will be investigated for their
suitability to integrate the developed models with statistical machine
translation systems developed at ISI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
&lt;br/&gt;Reliable automatic translation between Arabic and English may have
major impact on international commerce, technology, and science, but this
requires that translation quality be improved significantly. With the proposed
method, computers may gather vast amounts of translation knowledge automatically
from text, and apply that knowledge to translate new documents. This research
will require significant expertise in computer science, Arabic and English
linguistics, and statistical inference, which are available in the two
collaborating groups at USC and AUC. Dr. Knight is well known for his research
in the area of statistical machine translation and he will provide supervision
for the research performed by graduate students at ISI and AUC. Dr. Rafea has
excellent credentials in Arabic natural language processing and in conducting
collaborative research with U.S. universities. The task of addressing weaknesses
in current translation models will make higher translation quality possible and
will make practical use of machine translation more widespread. The research
will involve U.S. and Egyptian graduate students and will promote collaboration
between researchers in the US and Egypt. This project is being supported under
the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.&lt;br/&gt;