* 0210005
* NER:  Multi-nanolayered Bio-inspired Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Vladimir Tsukruk, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2004
* USD 105,000.00

Biomimetics allows one to tap into the ingenious designs of nature to inspire
new technologies. Recent developments in the advanced materials sciences have
given researchers unparalleled access to biological systems at all levels of
structural organization, including nanoscale organization under nearly in-vivo
conditions. In the framework of this general approach, The PI will focus on
testing basic principles governing the function, structure, and operation of
specially designed free-suspended polymer/inorganic, multi-nanolayered membranes
that can act as highly sensitive photothermal elements. The design proposed is
based on principles learned from recent studies of biological infrared receptors
highly sensitive to thermal flux. The main focus will be on the application of
these fundamental principles to the development of nano-structured materials
based on bio-inspired principles. The PI will determine if bio-inspired,
compliant nanostructures can be designed with unique nanothermal properties and
sensing capabilities comparable to biological receptors. He will fabricate and
test multi-layered, free-suspended compliant membranes with nanolayered
structural organizations composed of regularly alternating nanolayers of
inorganic nanoparticles and polymer interlayers. The membrane is designed to be
capable of significant reversible deformations, while providing the transduction
of mechanical stresses to an external detection scheme. He will identify, test,
and optimize assembly technologies (e.g., layer-by-layer self-assembly on
sacrificial supports or Langmuir-Blodgett transfer) for depositing compliant
membranes on micromachined, microelectronic surfaces, while preserving their
micromechanical and microthermal properties in a manner compatible with
prospective photothermal cell design. Perforated solid substrates will be
selected for membrane deposition. A critical issue addressed by this project is
the manner in which structural and chemical design principles employed by
biological receptors may be transferred efficiently to generate organized nano-
structured materials with enhanced thermal responsive properties.