* 0210321
* NIRT:  Nanostructured Surfaces with Long-Range Order for Controlled Self-Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,10/31/2006
* Frances Ross, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 10/31/2006
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project will develop a class of methods known as 'templated self-assembly'
that control the growth and self-assembly of nanostructures on surfaces. This
will enable formation of monodisperse nanoscale features in precise positions on
a substrate. This work will be an enabling technology in the design of new
devices that utilize the properties of quantum dots and other nanoscale objects,
in which the control of the sizes and spatial positions of the features is
paramount in optimizing performance. The objective is to use lithography to
modulate substrate surfaces with features of periodicity of order 100 nm, to
form templates for the growth and self-assembly of nanostructures. In this
process, lithography is not used to form the nanostructures themselves, but
instead is used to form a template that will 'seed' the formation of
nanostructures in particular locations. The nanostructures will be considerably
smaller in size than the period of the template. The goal of the project is to
develop the templated self-assembly of arrays of nanoscale semiconductor and
metal islands controlled by epitaxial strain, surface chemistry or topography.
The island formation will be achieved using both the deposition from the vapor
phase and by the spontaneous agglomeration of metastable coninuous sold films.
This work will be carried out by an interdisciplinary team of researchers from
MIT in collaboration with IBM and Sandia National Laboratories working with a
group of students and a postdoctoral researcher. The outreach involves a
communication effort designed to inform the general public about nanotechnology
through development of a web site and other scientific communication avenues,
including the involvement of undergraduate students as well as other activities
such as school visits.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The research will be focussed on
the templated self-assembly of arrays of nanoscale semiconductor and metal
islands controlled by epitaxial strain, surface chemistry or topography. The
resulting well-ordered nanoscale island arrays will have technological relevance
in devices that include optically active structures involving plasmon wires, and
patterned magnetic recording media. A range of other applications will also
benefit from the methods developed in this proposal; for instance optical
devices based on arrays of semiconductor quantum dots. The educational goals of
this work are to contribute to the public understanding of nanotechnology and to
the training of skilled researchers.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;