* 0210854
* NER:  Dynamics of Flagellar Polymorphism
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* John Kessler, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 07/31/2003
* USD 99,911.00

This is a Nanoscale Exploratory Research award. The general idea is to
understand the mechanism by which bacterial flagella "switch" between rotating
clockwise and rotating counterclockwise, with the longer-term goal of using this
information to develop nanoscale switches that can be used in practical or
commercial applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial flagella are remarkable
structures, nanometers in diameter, that possess mechanical and dynamical
properties unlike any known material on the macroscale. Composed of eleven
filaments self-assembled from the protein flagellin, they may interconvert
between multiple helical morphologies of both left-and right-handedness as a
consequence of monomer conformational transitions that change packing properties
on the subnanometer scale. These minute molecular rearrangements have important
consequences for cellular dynamics on a range of larger scales, especially so in
cellular motility. During chemotaxis, the multiple rotating flagella that
provide thrust to the cells bundle and unbundle as their rotary motors, embedded
in the membrane, episodically change rotational direction. When bundled, the
bacterium moves linearly; disintegration of the bundle upon motor reversal
creates a tumbling event that randomizes the cell's orientation. These motions
of "run "and "tumble "produce the random walks that underlie chemotaxis. The
motor reversal also initiates a propagating chirality reversal, turning a left-
handed helix that had been rotated counterclockwise into a right-handed helix
rotated clockwise. These interconversions occur not only from the torques of
rotary motors, but may also be triggered by fluid flow past
flagella.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known experimentally about the
nanomechanical properties of flagella and especially of dynamic polymorphism.
Very recently, Dr. Goldstein and his collaborators developed the first
theoretical model that explains the early, mostly qualitative, experiments on
chirality transitions produced by external flows. This continuum model
incorporates monomer packing multistability into a novel nonlinear extension of
elasticity theory, coupled via slender-body hydrodynamics to fluid flow. In this
way, it connects conformational transitions at the nanoscale to dynamics at the
cellular scale, and captures many of the key features of those experiments. It
also makes a number of sharp predictions regarding the initiation, frequency,
and velocity of chirality transformations, to date untested. This project will
use recent, important developments in fluorescent imaging methods for flagella,
coupled with optical trapping methods, to conduct the first experiments on
flagella under well-defined and controllable conditions of fluid stress or
external forces, creating a "low Reynolds number wind tunnel" for flagellar
dynamics. Concurrently, Drs. Goldstein and Kessler will extend the theoretical
approach to make quantitative contact with these experiments, using the latest
techniques they have developed for the study of the coupled partial differential
equations that describe overdamped bending and twisting of elastic filaments.
These studies will yield important information about the stress-induced
conformational transitions underlying polymorphism at the nanoscale, and perhaps
open the way toward the use of these molecular switches in microfluidics or MEMS
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;