* 0210373
* NER:  Computer Aided Design of Silicon-based Quantum Computers
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Mark Oskin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2004
* USD 90,761.00

Mark Oskin&lt;br/&gt;University of
Washington&lt;br/&gt;0210373&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum computers seem the
subject of science fiction, but their tremendous&lt;br/&gt;computational
potential is closer than we may think. Despite significant&lt;br/&gt;practical
difficulties, small quantum devices of 5 to 7 bits have been built&lt;br/&gt;in
the laboratory. Silicon technologies promise even greater
scalability.&lt;br/&gt;To use these technologies effectively, and help guide
quantum device&lt;br/&gt;research, computer architects need to start designing
and reasoning about&lt;br/&gt;quantum processors now. However, two major hurdles
stand in the way.&lt;br/&gt;First, compactly describable rules that characterize
silicon-based quantum&lt;br/&gt;computing technologies are not known. Second,
there does not exist an&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure to design, test, and evaluate
architectural alternatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant addresses both of
these&lt;br/&gt;items. First, we will formalize the design rules of a widely
discussed&lt;br/&gt;and likely quantum device technology. Second, we have
already begun to&lt;br/&gt;develop architectural abstractions for this
technology that can be composed&lt;br/&gt;together to form general-purpose
quantum information processors. Third,&lt;br/&gt;using these abstractions we
will develop an automated computer aided&lt;br/&gt;design tool that takes a
description of a quantum computing architecture and&lt;br/&gt;compiles it to a
device library of quantum cells. Finally, we will&lt;br/&gt;develop a simulator
that quickly estimates the cost-performance of
quantum&lt;br/&gt;systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research goals, once
accomplished, will serve as foundational&lt;br/&gt;resources for the development
of quantum computer architectures. In&lt;br/&gt;addition, by reasoning about
architectures we can begin to find the limits&lt;br/&gt;of current quantum
device proposals. These limits can be turned into&lt;br/&gt;research goals,
items that further quantum device research needs
to&lt;br/&gt;overcome.&lt;br/&gt;