* 0210970
* SGER:  Synthesis and Consolidation of Nickel Aluminide Powder
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Baburaj Eranezhuth, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/2003
* USD 49,041.00

The focus of the SGER grant is on a new processing technique based on mechanical
milling that involves chemical reaction during milling process. The method
eliminates the traditional leaching process that is usually required to isolate
the metal from by-product salts. The process involves introducing aluminum as a
reducing agent, in place of Mg, Ca or Na. The starting material is metal
chloride and the by-product aluminum chloride can be separated by vacuum
distillation in lieu of leaching thereby eliminating the usually noted surface
oxidation. The proof-of-concept will be checked in processing nickel aluminide
starting from nickel chloride with aluminum. The resulting powder is
consolidated by pressing at slightly high temperatures that will result in fine-
grained alloy. The production of NiAl by this new method will be very cost-
effective because of the low processing temperature and the valuable by-product.
The technique once proven and established will be applicable for other
aluminides that find extensive application as high-temperature structural
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new technique of using Al as a reducing agent
during mechanochemical reaction eliminates the usually required second step of
leaching that in general results in surface oxidation. This process once proven
effective can be adopted for processing of many other metal alloys with superior
purity along with substantial cost reduction.&lt;br/&gt;