* 0210843
* NIRT: A Nanometer-Scale Gene Chip
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Jean-Pierre Leburton, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Timothy M. Pinkston
* 06/30/2006
* USD 1,305,750.00

&lt;br/&gt;Timp,
Gregory&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0210843&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was
received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF
01-157, category NIRT. As research in nanotechnology extends its tools for
miniaturization and integration to nanometer dimensions (the scale of the
secondary structure in a protein or a DNA molecule), new vistas in biology and
information science are revealed, which require new multi-disciplinary
approaches to &lt;br/&gt;both research and education. One new question that
emerges is: Can biology be directly integrated with electronics to provide
information on physiology? Nature has provided an electrical interface between
biology and the environment through ion channels that can now be mimicked using
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is to develop a
revolutionary type of silicon integrated circuit that incorporates Metal-Oxide-
Semiconductor technology with an on-chip nanopore mechanism for probing the
electrical activity of DNA molecules. Ultimately, this biosensor might enable
fast, inexpensive &lt;br/&gt;characterization of the minimum volume of genetic
material, a single strand of DNA. A key constraint is to achieve the required
sensitivity. To accomplish these goals, an artificial ion channel (AIC) or
nanopore, will &lt;br/&gt;be used in conjunction with an amplifier built within
one micron from the nanopore, in order to process high-frequency electrical
signals occurring when single molecules diffuse through the channel. A membrane
having an AIC will be immersed into a buffer solution, and DNA molecules will be
pushed through the nanopore by the applied voltage bias a principle that has
been tested in a number of recent experiments. Preliminary tests have already
successfully demonstrated that ~2-nm diameter nanopores can be reproducibly
etched through a ~2-5-nm-thick SiO2 membrane, using a high energy focused
electron beam. High-quality, &lt;br/&gt;pinhole-free membranes are being used in
these experiments. The project will develop artificial ion channels for
ultrafast sequencing of single DNA strands. The AIC devices will also be applied
for direct measurements of electronic transport properties of DNA molecules.
This subject is important &lt;br/&gt;since the charge migration in DNA has been
linked to the DNA ability to develop and repair defects while being exposed to
ionizing radiation. Also, the desire of using single DNA molecules as building
blocks for electronic &lt;br/&gt;circuits motivates the quest for understanding
its transport properties. So far transport properties of DNA have been tested
either indirectly or when the molecule is removed from the buffer solution and
dried. The AIC device proposed here will be applied to measure directly the
long-range charge transfer along DNA, while the molecule is kept in its natural
environment in solution. The measurements will be compared with
&lt;br/&gt;first-principle atomistic simulations. The objective is to understand
basic mechanisms that control the charge transport in DNA this controversial
topic continues to be strongly debated in the community.