* 0210003
* Adsorption of Inorganic Carbon on Volcanic Rock: Implications for Global CO2 Budgets and 14C-Dating of Groundwater (Pilot Study)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Gregg Davidson, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2006
* USD 104,061.00

Davidson-&lt;br/&gt;0210003&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adsorption of inorganic carbon
on mineral phases has been of interest to researchers in many different fields
of study, but little is known about the role that adsorption on rock-forming
minerals may play in global CO2 sink, or how it may affect 14C dating in
groundwater. Preliminary results suggest that adsorption of CO2 could account
for a small but significant percentage of the terrestrial CO2 sink, and exchange
between the aqueous and adsorbed phase could influence 14C dating in
groundwater. The preliminary data comes from experiments with tuff (felsic
volcanic rock). Core samples were isolated from the atmosphere at the time of
drilling, and were later opened and heated under vacuum to extract inorganic
dissolved carbon (DIC) from water in the rock pores. Carbon recoveries in excess
of available DIC suggest that a sizeable reservoir of adsorbed carbon exists in
these rocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A pilot project is proposed to investigate CO2
adsorption and associated isotopic fractionation on five volcanic rock materials
representing suites of felsic and mafic minerals under dry, wetted, and
saturated conditions. Samples will be characterized for surface area,
porosymmetry and mineralogy before use. For dry and wetted experiments, crushed
rock will be preheated at 2000C to generating adsorption isotherms, and again at
6000C in order to quatify the effect of trace organic coatings that may be
present. Adsorption isotherms will be measured under drying conditions and in
the presence of a mono-layer of adsorbed water. Isotopic fractionation will be
evaluated by collecting head space gases after equilibration and measuring the d
13C of initial and equilibrated CO2. Isotopic exchange will be evaluated by
reintroducing CO2 with a unique d13 C signature and measuring head space gases
again after equilibration. Adsorption in saturated systems will be measured by
introducing CO2 into the head space of a saturated slurry and monitoring the
head space CO2 concentration and the pH to calculate the mass partitioned into
the aqueous and adsorbed phases. Isotopic fractionation and exchange will be
measured in the same fashion as for dry and wetted
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this work will be used as a first
step in estimating the magnitude of CO2 adsorption as a terrestrial sink of
atmospheric CO2, and the extent to which adsoption and exchange may alter 14C
activities in groundwater. The results will also be used to formulate a more
targeted study of adsorption sites and mechanisms. Educational impacts of the
study include student training at both the graduate and undergraduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;