* 0210053
* Small Grant for Exploratory Research: Understanding Political Intolerance: A Test of Deonance Theory
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2002
* Linda Skitka, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Paul J. Wahlback
* 12/31/2002
* USD 34,291.00

This project, submitted under the Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER)
program, will examine public attitudes and behavior following the attack on the
World Trade Center and the Pentagon. In particular, this study will explore
alternative accounts for why people become increasingly politically intolerant
during periods of real or perceived threats to national security. Although fear
is often suggested as an explanation for the link between threats to national
security and increased political intolerance, the fear hypothesis does not seem
to capture the full complexity of the citizens' reactions to perceived threat.
For example, people responded to the September 11 terrorist attacks not only
with increased political intolerance, but also with a paralleling need for
vengeance, and a heightened need to engage in prosocial behaviors like donating
blood - reactions that are less clearly rooted in fear. The researcher will test
the theory of deonance, which maintains that a motivated state of aversive
arousal creates a psychological pressure for the individual citizen to engage in
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that will be designed to restore a sense of
moral balance. The most emphatic ways people can restore a perception of
restored balance will be by expressing moral outrage (a composite psychological
reaction that includes the need to punish and ostracize those who violated the
moral order, using whatever means possible) and to engage in moral cleansing
(acting in ways to shore up those aspects of the moral order that have been
undercut by the transgression). Among other things, deonance theory predicts
that people who do engage in prosocial behavior following the terrorist attack
may have successfully restored a perception of moral order, and therefore will
be more politically tolerant than those who did not. This and other hypotheses
will be tested by re-contacting a national random sample of people who completed
measures of aversive arousal within the first 10 days after the terrorist
attack. The proposed survey will include measures of moral outrage, moral
cleansing, fear of future terrorist attacks, and political intolerance, and
should provide increased understanding of the psychological origin and function
of political intolerance.