* 0210717
* NIRT:  Computational Design and Optimization of Nanoscale Spintronic and Thermoelectric Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Barbara Jones, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael A. Lee
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,045,168.00

This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
Initiative, NSF 01-157, category Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team
(NIRT). The award is funded jointly by the Division of Materials Research and
the International Division, and involves researchers at Georgetown University
and IBM-Almaden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research project is
to develop and apply computational methods to help optimize spintronic devices
and to investigate novel proposals for thermoelectric coolers. Both types of
devices to be considered consist of ultrathin layers of different materials
stacked together, forming a heterogeneous system in which bulk properties are
strongly modified on the nanoscale by the presence of interfaces. Density-
functional methods and many-body techniques will be combined to study both
equilibrium and nonequilibrium properties of such systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The spintronics project is aimed at developing a better understanding of how to
efficiently inject spins from metals into semiconductors. This issue is key for
the design of improved spin transistors and spin filters. Computer algorithms
will be developed to self-consistently calculate the nonequilibrium steady-state
transport in nanoscale multilayer devices composed of ferromagnets,
semiconductors, insulators, and materials close to the metal-insulator
transition. The rearrangement of charge and spin near each interface will be
treated self-consistently. Density-functional methods will be employed to
evaluate materials-specific interface properties such as fermi-level mismatch
and charge and spin scattering lengths, which will then be used as input
parameters for the Keldysh nonequilibrium transport
codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the thermoelectric project, nanoscale
heterostructures composed of metals, semiconductors, and heavy-fermion, and
other strongly-correlated, materials will be investigated as potential
thermoelectric devices. This is an extension of ongoing work on
thermoelectricity in bulk materials and on modeling many-body effects in
Josephson junctions. The numerical renormalization group will be used to examine
equilibrium properties of systems described by the periodic Anderson model and
its combination with the Falicov-Kimball model. Transport properties will be
calculated using a linear response formalism. Density-functional calculations
will be used to determine properties of relevant interfaces and to estimate
parameter regimes for the lattice models. To date, experimental difficulties
have thwarted a sytematic study of nanoscale devices constructed from heavy-
fermion materials. The proposed computational modeling will help guide the
search for novel heavy-fermion-based-low-tempreature thermoelectric
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This university-industry collaboration will
provide valuable educational opportunities for postdoctoral researchers and
graduate students. The Georgetown graduate student will spend one year at the
IBM site as part of his/her training in Georgetown's Industrial Leadership in
Physics program. Postdoctoral researchers will also gain experience in both the
academic and industrial research environments. In addition, the project involves
international collaborations, particularly with Croatia, in which both senior
and junior personnel will participate.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was
received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Initiative, NSF
01-157, category Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT). The award is
funded jointly by the Division of Materials Research and the International
Division, and involves researchers at Georgetown University and IBM-
Almaden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research project is to
develop and apply computational methods to help optimize spintronic devices and
to investigate novel proposals for thermoelectric coolers. Both types of devices
to be considered consist of ultrathin layers of different materials stacked
together, forming a heterogeneous system in which bulk properties are strongly
modified on the nanoscale by the presence of
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This university-industry collaboration will
provide valuable educational opportunities for postdoctoral researchers and
graduate students. The Georgetown graduate student will spend one year at the
IBM site as part of his/her training in Georgetown's Industrial Leadership in
Physics program. Postdoctoral researchers will also gain experience in both the
academic and industrial research environments. In addition, the project involves
international collaborations, particularly with Croatia, in which both senior
and junior personnel will participate.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;