* 0210413
* Investigating Promoter Function in Vivo and the Role of Transposons as Control Elements
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Erich Grotewold, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Vicki B. Vance
* 08/31/2006
* USD 388,485.00

Most fundamental cellular processes are controlled at the level of
transcription. The extensive knowledge that has been acquired over the past
years on the in vivo properties of the trans-acting regulators is contrasted by
how little is still known about the in vivo organization, evolution and function
of cis-acting regulatory elements. Insertions of transposons have played a
crucial role in the evolution of eukaryotic promoters, but the fundaments on how
this has impacted gene expression is not known. Previous studies on the control
of maize flavonoid biosynthesis have provided the PI with unique tools to
investigate the structure and function of cis-acting regulatory elements in
their normal in vivo environment. As a model to understand promoter function in
vivo, the regulatory region of a structural gene of the pathway (A1) that has
been extensively dissected in vitro, and that is a target of at least two well-
defined regulatory systems, will be studied. The cis-acting regulatory sequences
that are important for the regulation of A1 in vivo will be established, by
determining the effect of mutations and deletions of these elements on the
expression of A1 in planta, and by exploiting the natural A1 allelic diversity
in the Zea. In at least two well-characterized cases, the regulation of A1
becomes under the control of different transposable elements, albeit in exactly
opposite ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique understanding of the regulation
of A1 makes it ideal to interpret transposable element gene control systems by
providing important insights into the molecular bases of epigenetic phenomena.
The PI will investigate whether the transposon insertions override the normal
regulation of A1, and also determine whether the transposons provide novel cis-
regulatory elements. Finally, the PI will examine which components of the
corresponding transposases participate in the novel regulatory patterns
displayed by the A1 alleles containing the transposon insertions. Taken
together, these studies should provide one of the most comprehensive in vivo
studies done on the regulatory region of a plant gene. Because of the uniqueness
of the genetic and molecular tools available, the findings derived from these
studies could be fundamental to the general field of regulation of gene
expression.