* 0210554
* NER:  Increasing the Strength, Surface Energy, and Wickability of Polymeric Nanofabrics by Exposure to a One Atmosphere Uniform Glow Discharge Plasma (OAUGDP)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* J. Reece Roth, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Julie Chen
* 07/31/2003
* USD 99,967.00

This project was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER. This exploratory research effort will
attempt to achieve a convergence of two frontier areas of Electrohydrodynamics
(EHD) (the sub-discipline of plasma physics that is concerned with the behavior
of electrically charged fluids in electric fields): electrospinning of
nanofabrics; and applications of the One Atmosphere Uniform Glow Discharge
Plasma (OAUGDP). Electrospinning is an EHD method for producing nanofibers and
nanofabrics that has been under active development at UT's Textiles and
Nonwovens Development Center (TANDEC). The OAUGDP, recently developed at the UT
Plasma Sciences Laboratory, allows glow discharges to be generated at one
atmosphere in air rather than at low pressure in vacuum systems. Nonwoven
nanofabrics made of elecrospun polymeric fibers with diameters less than 500
nanometers have a very soft hand, softer than eiderdown; their polymeric
materials are recyclable; and such fabrics are permeable to air and water vapor,
but not to microorganisms or fine particulates because of their small fiber
diameter. Polymeric nanofabrics have an enormous potential for quality garments,
filter media, and protective clothing that is impervious to microorganisms and
toxic particulates. Nanofabrics would make excellent garments were it not for
their relatively low strength, and a low surface energy that gives them an
uncomfortably low wettability and wickability. We plan to explore potential
applications of the OAUGDP to nanofabrics, including increasing the strength of
electrospun nanofabrics to useful levels; increasing the surface energy of
nanofabrics; making nanofabrics wettable; and making nanofabrics more
comfortable as garments by increasing their wickability.

The activity will take place at the University of Tennessee's Plasma Sciences
Laboratory (http://plasma.ece.utk.edu), which has established a reputation for
going beyond the technological water's edge to develop new technologies and
introduce them into industrial practice. The Plasma Sciences Laboratory has spun
off one company, Atmospheric Glow Technologies (www.a-gtech.com) to market
technologies based on the OAUGDP; the Plasma Lab has been visited by at least 20
Fortune 500 companies for technological assessment; it has obtained 9 patents on
the OAUGDP and its uses; and it normally has at least two company presidents
address the Plasma Science Seminar each semester to acquaint GRAs and other
associates with entrepreneurship. One of the PIs (P. Tsai) has long-standing
contacts with the Army, and has done work on the effects of plasma exposure of
camouflage and filter fabrics in the past. This relationship should assure
visibility of any results of this work that are of significance to the
Department of Defense or homeland security. With respect to the work in this
project, we expect to publish potentially useful results in the conferences and
journals that serve the textile industry. Particularly interesting or "classic"
data will appear in a future edition of the PIs three-volume book, Industrial
Plasma Engineering. The subject of this work is by nature interdisciplinary, and
will involve students from the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
and the School of Human Ecology where TANDEC is located. Award of this grant
comes at a particularly good time because when it starts, we will be joined by a
NSF-NATO Postdoctoral Associate, Dr. Jozef Rahel from Prof. M. Cernak's
laboratory at Comenius University in the Slovak Republic. Dr. Rahel will be
doing a plasma-textile project that will be synergistic with the current
project. It is anticipated that he will take the OAUGDP technology back to
central Europe, helping his country recover from the effects of the Cold War. We
normally send our GRAs to at least one professional society meeting a year to
present a poster paper on their work. We have women and minority GRAs on the
staff of the Plasma Lab, and some of our best work of the past ten years was
done by women GRAs or postdoctoral associates. Indeed, one of the latter, Dr.
Kimberly Kelly-Wintenberg, is now the CEO of our spin-off company. We have
attempted to make plasma science and our contributions to it visible by
presenting invited papers both internationally and within the USA, with 13 such
presentations in the past year. We also maintain an extensive website from which
complete texts of our 9 patents and archival conference and journal papers can
be downloaded.