* 0210850
* NIRT: Manufacturing of Novel Continuous Nanocrystalline Ceramic Nanofibers with Superior Mechanical Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Xiao Cheng Zeng, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,095,200.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. Nanostructured materials (NSMs) with
unusual and extreme properties will play a key role in many emerging
technologies. However, manufacturing of NSMs with the desired properties is
highly complex and currently is over-reliant on empirical data. In this
proposal, a novel manufacturing process producing a new class of ceramic
materials, i.e. continuous ceramic nanofibers, will be addressed. The novel sol-
gel electrospinning technique (U.S. patent pending), invented recently by two of
the PI's (Dzenis and Larsen), produces ceramic fibers of submicron diameters
with potentially extreme thermomechanical properties. This technique will be
analyzed and optimized for the production of nanocrystalline ceramic nanofibers
with superior mechanical properties, based on a comprehensive, multidisciplinary
research effort. The research team will develop an efficient and robust
computational methodology for simulating realistic nanocrystalline nanofibers
and their mechanical response at finite temperatures. A novel atomistic-
continuum modeling approach based on a hybrid Monte-Carlo finite element
technique will be developed and used. The models will be applied to design
strong nanofibers by predicting the effects of the chemical composition and
atomic structures of grain boundaries and defects on mechanical properties. The
results will be used to develop chemistry and to direct manufacturing of strong
nanocrystalline nanofibers. The achievement of the enhanced mechanical
properties of the resulting nanofibers will be demonstrated experimentally
utilizing novel mechanical characterization techniques based on scanning probe
microscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of this research, the new
nanomanufacturing method will be further developed based on the atomistic-
continuum modeling. New nanocrystalline ceramic nanofibers with superior
mechanical properties will be produced. The combined manufacturing and model-
based optimization will allow the mechanical properties of the nanofibers to be
tailored to specific needs of the end user. This general, modeling-driven
approach will be applicable to other nanomanufacturing processes and
nanomaterials. This technology will be a significant part of future
nanotechnology efforts. This research program will impact other key areas of
nanotechnology where radical improvement of mechanical properties is critical,
e.g., nanostructured membranes for ultrafiltration and other separation
processes, nanoreinforcing elements for nanocomposites, supports for
nanostructured catalysts, and many others. A multidisciplinary education plan
will include development of interdisciplinary graduate courses on materials
synthesis technology, computational materials science, and nanoscale materials
characterization. Graduate and undergraduate research assistants will work
within the various research groups on computational and experimental aspects of
the research. Planned interactions with researchers at national laboratories
will provide graduate and undergraduate students with additional educational
exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;