* 0210871
* The Articulation of Political Strategies and Regional Structure in the Teuchitlan Tradition of Western Mexico 2003 Season
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Christopher Beekman, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2004
* USD 78,009.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Christopher Beekman and his
colleagues will conduct archaeological field and laboratory research at the
ancient settlement of Navajas in the highland lake district of western Mexico.
The project brings together specialists in archaeology, palynology, phytolith,
and macrobotanical remains to carry out a coordinated investigation of a
stratified society in ancient Mesoamerica. This is part of a continuing program
of NSF funded research directed towards a better understanding of cooperation
and competition among elites in West Mexican society from around A.D. 100-900.
These issues are being addressed in the Tequila valleys of highland central
Jalisco, where a series of transitions back and forth between intensive
factional competition, and its apparent suppression in a consolidated polity,
offer an opportunity to study the mechanisms by which elite competition and
individual aggrandizement are being harnessed and redirected in a way that
promotes cooperation and the formation of a state. This is particularly
significant because these changes in local strategy relate to larger economic
changes in the region, as the increased use of imported goods that accompanies
local competition appears to coincide with the formation of long distance trade
networks to obtain those goods. Specifically, field research will focus on wide
area excavations across multiple structures and open spaces in public
architecture at the late settlement of Navajas, which will be used to complement
prior NSF funded research at the earlier settlement of Llano Grande. The
excavations will provide data regarding labor organization and the construction
of the public architecture, and the activities taking place both in public
spaces and within the more restricted structures. Laboratory analyses of
artifacts and soil samples conducted at several different universities will
follow up with three important tasks: to determine the origins of artifacts
recovered, to develop a refined chronology, and to test existing proposals that
activities within the public architecture may have related to agricultural
ritual. Dr. Beekman and his collaborators will focus on the following questions:
1) What changes occurred in the organization of labor and the association of
descent groups with sections of the architecture? 2) What activities took place
in these public spaces and how did this change between the periods of
consolidation and decline of this society? 3) To what degree may these very
local strategies by elites have corresponded to regional changes in economic or
political networks?