* 0210598
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Solid Free Form Fabrication (SFF) of Self-Bonded Silicon Carbide
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Ahmad Safari, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 24,990.00

0210598&lt;br/&gt;Safari&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. Ahmad Safari, Department of Ceramics
and Materials Engineering, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey and Dr.
Emad Ewais, Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute, Helwan,
Cairo, Egypt. The investigators plan to study the manufacture of self-bonded
Silicon Carbide (SBSiC) parts from silicon carbide powder via solid free form
fabrication technique (SFF). The same material will also be produced by hot
isostatic pressing (HIP) for comparative studies to benchmark the effectiveness
of the SFF process. The investigators will examine the application of these
forming techniques to the manufacture of complex shape objects, near-net shape,
fully or near fully dense components. The quality of the products will be
evaluated through studies of microstructure, physical, mechanical, thermal and
electrical properties. The results of this investigation will be analyzed and
reported. There will be a synergy between the research efforts of the U.S. and
Egyptian teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: In the manufacturing of advanced
ceramics the desired product performance specifications are difficult to achieve
because of the need for strict control of all steps during processing. Also, the
manufacturing of new ceramic parts by conventional processing requires lengthy
and costly design and building of molds. The advent of SFF technology in the
last decade has created an opportunity to drastically reduce prototyping time
and cost. SFF also lends itself to manufacturing of small quantities of tailor-
made specialty products. This project will examine the parameters of this
special technique, which gives the ability to obtain cost effective, iterative
design and control of the properties of ceramic parts. The results of this work
will be of benefit in educating engineers, students and researchers in this
field in the United States and in Egypt. Dr. Safari is an expert in the
manufacturing technique, while Dr. Ewais is expert in SiC. A postdoctorate at
Rutgers will participate in the research. This project is being supported under
the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.&lt;br/&gt;