* 0210656
* NER:  Bioelectronic Interfacing of Living Cells via Self-Assembled Microwires
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Peter Kilpatrick, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 02/28/2005
* USD 90,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioelectronic interfacing of living cells via self-
assembled microwires&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; We propose to develop a
new method for creating bioelectronic circuits that will allow targeting and
electrically interfacing specific molecules on the membrane of living cells,
incorporating the cells into larger electrical circuits. This method is based on
a new technique reported recently by one of the PIs (Science, 294, 1082, 2001)
that allows the assembly of long, electrically conductive microwires directly
from suspensions of metallic nanoparticles. The microwires are assembled via
dielectrophoresis, the particle mobility and interactions in alternating
electric field. We will devise techniques for controlled growth of microwires in
thin chambers and microfluidic channels, and will develop experimental and
theoretical tools for cell and wire manipulation in the electrical field leading
to cell interfacing. &lt;br/&gt; Bioelectronic interfacing is one of the
promising, yet underdeveloped, areas of nanoscience research. The success of
this project could lead to development of new sensors, where the response of
living cells to different toxins, biological or chemical agents is detected with
greater precision and sensitivity. It can also help in developing tools for in
situ interfacing of cells in living tissues (such as neurons). Current
techniques either let the cells sit on top of electrode arrays or impale them
via microelectrodes. In contrast, we will complete the connection between the
cells and the electrical circuits via nanoparticle self-assembly, a potentially
much more flexible and powerful approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;