* 0210681
* NER:   Biodegradable Green Nanocomposites for Automotive Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Amar Mohanty, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 12/31/2003
* USD 85,000.00

0210681 &lt;br/&gt;Drzal &lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to
the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Initiative NSF 01-157, category
NER.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Green nanocomposites are the wave of the future and
are considered as the next generation of materials. The lofty goals set by U.S.
Government for the creation of bio-based economy present significant challenges
to Industry, Academia and Agriculture. This proposal seeks to replace/substitute
existing petroleum derived polypropylene/TPO (thermoplastic olefin) based
nanocomposites from compatibilized clay reinforced cellulosic bio-plastic
through a novel approach for automotive applications. A new bio-based product
derived through nano-science approach from renewable resources; having recycling
capability and triggered biodegradability (i.e. stable in their intended
lifetime and would biodegrade after disposal under compost conditions) with
commercial viability and environmental acceptability is termed as sustainable
green nanocomposites under this high-risk exploratory research (NER) proposal.
The main objective of this proposal is to replace such petro-derived
nonbiodegradable polymers with renewable resource-based biodegradable polymers.
Compatibilization between the nanoclay and bioplastic is the key to achieving
success. A new maleated compatibilizer is targeted to effectively bind both the
clay and cellulosic bio-plastic in the compatibilized green
nanocomposites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected Results Our research has proved
the "proof of concept" on promising potentiality of cellulosic bio-plastic in
designing green nanocomposites for high impact and high strength applications.
From our preliminary data we find encouraging results where the coefficient of
thermal expansion (CTE) decreased by ~ 50% and water absorption decreased by ~
14% on reinforcement of cellulosic plastic with 5 wt.% as received commercial
clay. However with the presence of compatibilizer we expect to get much improved
properties of our targeted nanocomposites. The synergy to be gained by maleated
compatibilizer, bio-plastic development and novel processing will result in
making sustainable eco-friendly green nanocomposites of industrial attractions.
This intended research program through University-Industry interactions is
expected to create a consciousness among young graduate/undergraduate students
in adding knowledge of materials and process engineering of new green
nanocomposites and to create the growing importance of unique nano-technology to
generate eco-friendly affordable green materials for 21st century automotive
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected Results Our research has
proved the "proof of concept" on promising potentiality of cellulosic bio-
plastic in designing green nanocomposites for high impact and high strength
applications. From our preliminary data we find encouraging results where the
coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) decreased by ~ 50% and water absorption
decreased by ~ 14% on reinforcement of cellulosic plastic with 5 wt.%
as&lt;br/&gt;received commercial clay. However with the presence of
compatibilizer we expect to get much improved properties of our targeted
nanocomposites. The synergy to be gained by maleated compatibilizer, bio-plastic
development and novel processing will result in making sustainable eco-friendly
green nanocomposites of industrial attractions. This intended research program
through University-Industry interactions is expected to create a consciousness
among young graduate/undergraduate students in adding knowledge of materials and
process engineering of new green nanocomposites and to create the growing
importance of unique nano-technology to generate eco-friendly affordable green
materials for 21st century automotive industries.&lt;br/&gt;