* 0210762
* IA Tutorials and Workshops for Educators
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2004
* Cynthia Irvine, Naval Postgraduate School
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 11/30/2004
* USD 184,006.00

We will increase the capacity of the United States higher education enterprise
to produce professionals in the fields of Information Assurance (IA) and
computer security by hosting a two-year series of workshops for education in
Information Assurance. The target audience of the workshops is college-level
educators who have responsibility for teaching curricula that are, or could be,
related to Information Assurance issues. The format for each workshop is three
sequential sessions: a tutorial session, a refereed paper session, and a working
session. This sequence allows newer practitioners to become knowledgeable about
the basics of IA, provides an opportunity for experienced practitioners to
present new ideas for discussion, and allows both groups to interact in a
problem solving context to develop solutions for point issues presented by the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tutorial sessions educate faculty about the
fundamentals of information assurance and computer security and improves their
instructional capability in these areas. The paper session provides a forum for
presentation and discussion of recent pedagogical and technical advances in the
field. Activities in the working session encourage creative interaction
regarding current issues for education in Information Assurance. A significant
effect of the periodic gathering and commingling of experienced and
inexperienced practitioners is to enhance the sense of community for IA
educators, fostering collaboration and dialogue among institutions offering
courses and programs in Information Assurance. The multi-year format allows
faculty to spend time in their own environment and return to the workshop with
experiential questions and insight. The output of the workshops will include
model materials for classroom presentation and demonstration, as well as example
materials for laboratory experimentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A particular
emphasis is ensuring participation of demographic groups currently
underrepresented in the IA education community. The net effect of the proposed
activities is to directly increase the national capacity for education in
Information Assurance as well as to extend the knowledge and expertise of IA to
a range of participants that is more representative of the national
profile.&lt;br/&gt;