* 0210426
* NSE/NIRT:    Electron Transport Through Molecular Inorganic Clusters - A Convergent Approach Toward Molecular Electronic and Magnetic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Jeffrey Long, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,250,000.00

Park&lt;br/&gt;0210426&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in
response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering &lt;br/&gt;Initiative, Program
Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NIRT category. The proposal focuses on a
convergent multi-investigator experimental and theoretical program to
investigate fundamental electronic and magnetic properties of molecular
inorganic clusters and to explore their device applications. This proposal
represents the synergistic collaboration between (i) the synthesis of novel
inorganic clusters with diverse electronic and magnetic properties engineered
via judicious control of synthetic parameters, (ii) the fabrication and
characterization of prototype electronic devices built from individual clusters
and low-dimensional cluster arrays, (iii) the electronic and magnetic
characterization of cluster arrays using state-of-the-art measurements, and
finally (iv) the development of detailed understanding of cluster properties
using high-level theoretical calculations, which will, in turn, guide the design
of molecules and molecular electronic devices. The proposed research is firmly
grounded upon the expertise and strengths of participating PIs that have already
been demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synergy between their efforts is
expected to result in a fundamental understanding of the electronic and magnetic
properties of molecular magnetic clusters, which, in turn, may lead to the
applications toward novel molecular electronic and magnetic devices. The
proposed collaboration between synthesis and characterization efforts will
provide detailed experimental information on the electronic and magnetic
properties of new molecular magnetic clusters, which can then be fed back into
the cluster synthesis efforts to engineer desired characteristics. Moreover, the
interplay between theory and experiment will allow for the development of a
fundamental understanding of electron and spin motion in these clusters and will
therefore aid the design of clusters with novel properties and devices with new
functionalities. The PI's expect that a synergy between synthesis,
characterization, device fabrication, and theoretical calculations will
ultimately provide important insight into the viability of single-cluster memory
devices and spin-electronic (spintronic) devices using ordered inorganic cluster
arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research effort will provide powerful
educational opportunities for students at Harvard and Berkeley by exposing them
to a broad collaboration that encompasses synthesis, characterization, device
fabrication, as well as theoretical calculations. The collaboration between
Harvard, Berkeley, and IBM will also provide a unique setting in which
undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate students can participate in a
collaborative interdisciplinary research effort in nanoscience and technology,
while also being exposed to research at world-class academic and industrial
research institutions. This unique opportunity, which won't be available to
students without this collaboration, will surely broaden their vista and be of
aid in their career decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Nanoscale
Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) project is co-funded by the National
Science Foundation Divisions of Electrical and Communications Systems (ENG),
Chemistry (MPS), Materials Research (MPS), and Grant Opportunity for Academic
Liaison with Industry (ENG).&lt;br/&gt;