* 0210205
* NER:  Chemical Probing of Biosensor Nano-environments using Dynamic AFM
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* James Schneider, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

Biosensors are becoming increasingly important for genomic analysis, detection
of warfare agents, and medical diagnostics. To optimize the performance of these
devices, new tools must be developed to characterize the molecular-level
phenomena that underlie their function. This exploratory nanotechnology proposal
aims to develop a new method to measure nanoscopic properties of biosensor
surfaces, utilizing the ultrafine resolution of atomic force microscopy (AFM) in
dynamic mode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biosensors must perform two functions at
once. They must encourage the binding of specific analytes while discouraging
the binding of adventitious material. Typically, these goals are achieved by
building heterogeneous surfaces with antifouling polymers together with
receptors specific for desired analytes. To maximize yield without sacrificing
selectivity, an optimal density and thickness of polymer must be applied to the
surface. In this work, the PI hopes to measure the nanoscopic energy landscape
that a biomolecule traverses near the sensor surface in an attempt to guide the
rational design of biosensors. For a realistic measurement, both polymer steric
interactions and specific ligand-receptor interactions must be measured
simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamic AFM method involves oscillating
the AFM cantilever and measuring the amplitude attenuation as the sample
approaches the AFM tip. Amplitude attenuation is more sensitive to polymer
steric forces than deflection, so the sharp tips required for specific ligand-
receptor measurements can be used. Here, the PI will measure dynamic and
conventional AFM force curves in a model biosensor system. Using a theoretical
description of cantilever oscillation, we hope to demonstrate the sensitivity
and accuracy of the dynamic method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
project will have an impact on many fronts. First, the technique will provide a
unique nanoscopic probe of heterogeneous surfaces pertinent to biosensors. It
will also be able to measure polymer steric forces with nanometer lateral
resolution, with implications for lubrication and colloidal processing. Finally,
since epithelial and bacterial cell surfaces also contain specific adhesion
receptors together in a polymeric environment, the dynamic AFM force method may
emerge as a powerful tool in the study of cell-cell and cell-surface
adhesion.&lt;br/&gt;