* 0210229
* NIRT: Nanoreactor Processes for Manufacturing Oriented Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Paul Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,130,957.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. The Penn State team proposes a new
nanomanufacturing technology that utilizes carefully designed nanoreactor
systems to align, bond, and assemble oriented nanomaterials as they are
produced, rather than trying to manipulate them afterwards. This approach to
manufacturing with nanoscale control is based on the combined use of (1) nano-
fabricated chemical reactors and (2) nanoscale material assemblers. An integral
part of this approach will be the use of high resolution probes to guide, test,
and confirm the product and structure development. With the attainment of
controlled alignment, nanomaterials with novel properties and functions can be
assembled into usable materials that will play a critical role in advancing
future technologies. These include wires, tapes, sheets, composites, and
circuits with tailored characteristics. The production of these materials
requires innovative architectural methods to position, stitch, weave, coil, or
connect nanomaterials with precise control of alignment, composition, and phase
on the nanoscale. The principal tasks to be carried out during this NIRT grant
period are as follows: (a) fabrication of integrated nanochannel
reactor/processing systems that perform polymerization, transport, alignment,
and assembly, (b) production of aligned composite polymer fibers, tapes, and
bundles using initiator-based polymerization reactor systems, (c) production of
polymeric nanofibers and hollow tubes using anchored-catalyst systems, and (d)
conversion of oriented polyacetylene nanomaterials into carbon tubes, conducting
wires, and electronic devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize the full
potential of nanoscience, nanostructured materials must be produced in requisite
quantities with reproducible orientations, dimensions and properties by cost
effective means. They must be produced in a manner conducive to them being
further manufactured into usable, macroscale materials. Although the pace of
nanoscientific discoveries continues to increase, nanomaterials process and
manufacturing engineering - a key enabling science - have received little
attention. If this situation persists, nanoscience will remain a laboratory
curiosity and will not be transferred into a real technology benefiting society.
To address this problem, the Penn State team will try to develop
nanomanufacturing methodologies that can quickly be converted to mass-production
technologies. The realization of this approach will lead to mass production of
ordered polymeric nano-composite materials that cannot be made in any other way,
and fast, reproducible fabrication of nano-electronics devices. Cross-training
of students in the diverse fields required to carry out this research will
expand our nation's future capabilities in nano-science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;