* 0210339
* NER:  Nanoscale Electron Beam Stimulated Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Phillip Russell, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Julie Chen
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,688.00

This project was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER. The project will explore electron
stimulated deposition and etching as a alternative technique to selectively
deposit and etch nanoscopic features. The mechanisms and reaction kinetics for
the electron beam stimulated growth and etch processes will be elucidated using
standard precursor materials. Beam energy and current density measurements will
be performed and the energy flow will be modeled at the near surface region to
determine the contribution of thermal Joule heating versus electron dissociation
of the precursor molecules. The effect of gas phase electron scattering,
specimen charging, and secondary electron emission will be investigated to
understand the minimum pixel size that can be realized for this nanoscale
process.

This project is a collaborative effort between scientists at the University of
Tennessee (Philip D. Rack and David C. Joy) and North Carolina State University
(Phillip Russell) and will investigate nanoscale materials manipulation with
focused electron beams. The ability to manipulate materials at the nanoscale is
critical for the nanotechnology revolution that is occurring. To intelligently
design and or repair nanoscale devices requires techniques to selectively and
nanoscopically deposit and remove material in a controllable fashion. Current
techniques to selectively deposit or etch microscopic features utilize ion beam
deposition and etching, laser ablative etching using far field and near field
optics, and mechanical abrasion using a fine microtip. Of these techniques,
focused ion beam techniques are probably the most mature technology that has
been extended into the nanoscale. When using an ion beam to stimulate a
deposition or etch process, the gallium ions get implanted into the substrate,
which can significantly change the optical, electrical, or mechanical properties
of the substrate. Charging inherent to the ion-solid interaction also causes
proximity effects and can also lead to so-called "riverbed effects" which erodes
nearby features when the heavy ion beam is scattered and induces sputtering.
Electron beam stimulated deposition and etching is conceptually similar to the
existing focused ion beam approach and has been shown to be a viable technique
for depositing nanoscopic materials. The main advantages of using an electron
beams versus ion beams are reduced contamination and smaller spot sizes.