* 0210474
* QEIB:    Stochastic Nonlinear Population Dynamics:    Mathematical Models, Biological Experiments, and Data Analyses
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Jim Cushing, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2004
* USD 225,000.00

Cushing&lt;br/&gt;0210474&lt;br/&gt; The project entails a theoretical and
experimental study&lt;br/&gt;that examines nonlinear population dynamics
phenomena in the&lt;br/&gt;context of stochasticity and that addresses
fundamental concepts&lt;br/&gt;of how stochastic and nonlinear forces combine to
produce&lt;br/&gt;observed population phenomena. The methodology involves
an&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary effort that features a thorough integration
of&lt;br/&gt;biologically based modeling (deterministic and
stochastic),&lt;br/&gt;mathematical and numerical analyses of model dynamics,
and the&lt;br/&gt;derivation and application of statistical techniques
for&lt;br/&gt;connecting models with data (including parameter estimation
and&lt;br/&gt;model evaluation). The investigators study the
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;question about how (demographic) stochasticity at the
individual&lt;br/&gt;level propagates to the population level. A promising class
of&lt;br/&gt;models that incorporates both demographic and
environmental&lt;br/&gt;stochasticity is pursued. A variety of statistical
and&lt;br/&gt;mathematical questions that arise from these studies
are&lt;br/&gt;investigated. The validity of this modeling methodology
and&lt;br/&gt;accuracy of a priori model predictions is directly testable
by&lt;br/&gt;experiments. The project study includes an experimental test
of&lt;br/&gt;this modeling approach to demographic and
environmental&lt;br/&gt;stochasticity, using a laboratory model that the
investigators&lt;br/&gt;have successfully used in a wide variety of population
dynamics&lt;br/&gt;and modeling studies during the last decade. The
modeling&lt;br/&gt;methodology is also applicable to field populations and
the&lt;br/&gt;investigators pursue the development of field studies
with&lt;br/&gt;several researchers who have expressed interest in such
a&lt;br/&gt;collaboration. These collaborators include colleagues at (1)
the&lt;br/&gt;Center for Environmental Analysis at California State
University,&lt;br/&gt;Los Angeles in a project modeling the spatially
structured&lt;br/&gt;dynamics of seashore species, (2) the University of
California,&lt;br/&gt;Davis in a project to model a lupine-caterpillar-nematode
system,&lt;br/&gt;(3) Andrews University on mathematical/statistical models of
the&lt;br/&gt;distribution of marine birds and mammals on Protection
Island&lt;br/&gt;National Wildlife Refuge in the Strait of Juan de Fuca, and
(4)&lt;br/&gt;the Virginia Institute of Marine Science on nonlinear models
of&lt;br/&gt;the blue crab in the Exuma Cays.&lt;br/&gt; An understanding of the
dynamics of biological populations&lt;br/&gt;is fundamental to the understanding
of ecological and&lt;br/&gt;environmental problems. Mathematical models can be a
valuable&lt;br/&gt;tool that provides this understanding. They can also provide
the&lt;br/&gt;means to predict the future of ecosystems and the species
that&lt;br/&gt;they include. An accurate descriptive and predictive
capability&lt;br/&gt;gained through mathematical models provides not only a
basic&lt;br/&gt;understanding of ecological problems, but also the ability
to&lt;br/&gt;design programs for the assessment, management, and control
of&lt;br/&gt;ecosystems and for the solution of environmental problems.
A&lt;br/&gt;fundamental difficulty in the application of mathematical
models&lt;br/&gt;to ecological problems has been the lack of a close connection
of&lt;br/&gt;models with biological data. A key problem is the ability
of&lt;br/&gt;models to incorporate random effects and disturbances.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigators extend, analyze, and apply a modeling
methodology&lt;br/&gt;they have developed during a decade of experimental
studies, in a&lt;br/&gt;controlled laboratory setting, that addresses these
difficulties.&lt;br/&gt;The methods are not restricted to laboratory
populations,&lt;br/&gt;however, and the project also includes collaborations
with new&lt;br/&gt;colleagues for the purpose of applying the methods to
field&lt;br/&gt;studies of natural populations.&lt;br/&gt;