* 0210693
* NIRT:  Nanoscale Engineering of Inorganic-Organic Interfaces: Applications to Molecular Scale Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2002,07/31/2008
* Paulette Clancy, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,300,001.00

This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NIRT category. The proposal
focuses on developing novel chemical approaches to forming well-behaved and
robust interfaces between small organic molecules and both conducting and
insulating inorganic ultrathin films for applications in molecular scale
electronics. Much of the success of present day microelectronics is due to the
ability to integrate a variety of (mostly) inorganic materials into structures
useful for devices. For example, silicon dominates the field not because of its
intrinsic electrical properties, but because of the quality of the interfaces it
forms (e.g., the Si-Si02 interface). The work to be conducted here seeks to
develop organic-inorganic interfaces possessing equivalent or superior
properties, where small organic molecules form the active layers. The solution
lies in the development of chemically based approaches to the formation of the
critical interface between the inorganic layers (both metallic and dielectric)
and the organic layers. Success in this venture will require the application of
sophisticated synthetic organometallic chemistry, surface and interface science,
self-assembly and nanofabrication, and "chemically accurate' computer
simulation. The team that has been assembled at Cornell possesses expertise and
significant experience in all of these areas. The organic layers will typically
be formed by a process of self-assembly (in solution or in vacuo) on substrates
that have been patterned to expose selected areas comprised of metal (e.g., Au),
oxide (e.g., Si02), or nitride where the self-assembled monolayer will bind.
Study of patterned substrates is vital for the investigation of a number of
issues, from the fundamental to those related to device design and performance.
Ultimately the team seeks as a final set of goals: (i) development of novel
organometallic precursors for the formation of both conducting and insulting
layers that will interface seamlessly with the organic layer; (ii) development
of a fundamental understanding of the interface formation process, including the
effects of process variables such as temperature on the molecular scale
structure of the interface; (iii) demonstration of controllable device
properties for molecular scale electronics, given enhanced knowledge of the
interfacial chemistry and physics; and (iv) development of computer models that
can both predict the atomic scale structure of the interface, and the resulting
electronic properties. A final significant challenge put forward by the Cornell
team will be the development of a workshop on research ethics. From the
experience of working to develop this workshop the participants hope to build a
better understanding and recognition of responsible research conduct, and to
know the relevant philosophical underpinnings of ethics sufficiently well to be
able to make ethical choices in both the development and practice of their
research.