* 0210173
* NIRT: Deformation Mechanisms and Manufacturing of Nanostructured Materials Processed by Severe Plastic Deformation (SPD)
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Petr Krysl, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,000,000.00

This proposal aims to gain fundamental understanding of
the&lt;br/&gt;deformation mechanisms that operate in nanostructured metals
and&lt;br/&gt;alloys, in particular in those produced by severe plastic
deformation&lt;br/&gt;(SPD) methods. Based on this knowledge it further aims to
develop full&lt;br/&gt;capability to manufacture these materials in high quality
bulk forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extremely attractive (and rare) combination
of mechanical&lt;br/&gt;properties (high strength, ductility, fatigue
resistance) and&lt;br/&gt;manufacturability of these materials leads to a new
class of high&lt;br/&gt;performance alloys for structural uses. It is understood
that this&lt;br/&gt;combination of properties is due to the formation of nano-
scale grain&lt;br/&gt;sizes in these materials, but the mechanisms responsible
for the high&lt;br/&gt;strength combined with high ductility are not well
understood. This&lt;br/&gt;presents a fundamental obstacle to the optimization
of these&lt;br/&gt;materials, or to predictions of the performance of these
materials in&lt;br/&gt;applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integrated approach
with strong emphasis on manufacturing is&lt;br/&gt;proposed. On the theoretical
side, deformation mechanisms will be&lt;br/&gt;simulated with crystal-plasticity
aggregate models and with detailed&lt;br/&gt;models of the grains and grain
boundaries. The experimental program&lt;br/&gt;covers a wide a range of strain
rates and temperatures, texture&lt;br/&gt;development, and in situ transmission
electron microscopy and atomic&lt;br/&gt;force microscopy to directly verify
deformation mechanisms. The&lt;br/&gt;experimental results will provide
validation to the theoretical&lt;br/&gt;modeling and manufacturing process
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, simulations of the manufacturing
processes will enable&lt;br/&gt;process parameter optimization. A complete,
miniature, yet fully&lt;br/&gt;scalable, manufacturing facility will be designed
and implemented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significant impacts of the proposed
research are made possible by&lt;br/&gt;the acquired fundamental understanding
of the deformation mechanisms,&lt;br/&gt;and include advances in manufacturing
techniques to produce these&lt;br/&gt;highly desirable materials in bulk. The
miniature manufacturing&lt;br/&gt;facility will become a source of significant
quantities of&lt;br/&gt;nano-structured alloys. Finally, the proposal will
provide students at&lt;br/&gt;the UCSD and at local K-12 schools with
interdisciplinary education in&lt;br/&gt;a cutting-edge area of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;