* 0210738
* NER:  Electron Beam Emitter SPR for Biosensor Applications Nanoscale Exploratory Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* William Hunt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 80,000.00

In this project, we propose to investigate the feasibility of developing
biosensor nano-microarrays based on a novel type of surface plasmon resonance
device. In our approach, U.S. provisional patent 601,283,051 "Field Emission
Electron Beam Biosensor", nanoscale field emission electrodes will be used as
electron sources to excite surface plasmons in a thin metal film. Antibodies
will be immobilized onto the opposing side of the metal film and data on
molecular binding events will be extracted obtained via the collection of
spectral data associated with the surface plasmon resonance. We will refer to
the device as the eSPR for "electron-interrogated SPR." As the bias voltage on
the field emission electrode of the vacuum nano-electronic device is swept
through its range, the energy of the electron beam impinging on the metal film
is also swept and the amplitude of the reflected current represents a spectral
interrogation of the plasmon resonance. As is the case with commercial systems
that utilize optical excitation sources, such as the Biacore 3000, the nature of
the plasmon resonance is perturbed by the biomolecular interaction occurring in
the vicinity of the metal film. The overarching goal of our efforts will be to
produce small, portable or embedded biosensor micro-arrays with the capability
to detect a multiplicity, of biochemical targets simultaneously.

The objectives of our project will be as follows: Understand the physical
principles of electron-beam induced surface plasmon resonance biosensors Develop
design strategies and processing methods to transfer knowledge from the vacuum
microelectronic domain to eSPR sensors that have nanoscale dimensions.

Commercially available emitter arrays currently being developed for flat panel
display devices will be reviewed and characterized to determine suitability for
use in this eSPR application. Additional eSPR device characterization will be
done with software model tools such as CFD- ACE from CFD Research Corporation.

It has been known for approximately fifty years 1 that an electron beam can
excite a surface plasmon resonance in a metal-dielectric structure. In practice
the use of an electron beam to induce a surface plasmon resonance as a sensing
device has remained largely an unexploited area because of the equipment needed
and the complications of volatile organic materials in a vacuum. A review of the
literature has revealed no studies of this type for eSPR. The reward is
significant advancement in biosensing capabilities with the eSPR device. The
development of micro-emitter arrays produced by standard microelectronics
processing methods now brings the possibility of very small sizes, throw away
costs and custom configurations which mitigate the vacuum-biological mixing
problems. The advent of a low cost, high sensitivity, hand-held or smaller,
multi-detector would undoubtedly find wide spread applications in both the
consumer and industrial markets. The realization of such a biosensing device
would be a significant advancement over current sensors which neither small in
size nor inexpensive to produce and operate. The risk is due to the fact that
the field of biosensing utilizing electron beam emitters is unexplored. Without
relevant research having been previously conducted knowledge gained from optical
SPR devices must be selectively transferred to an electron beam device. The very
nature of a device that contains both vacuum microelectronics and biological
material presents difficulties but contains large rewards in size and cost
reduction if successfully combined.