* 0211131
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: In the Name of Guadalupe: Politics and Citizenship among Mexicans in New York
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Thomas Abercrombie, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/2003
* USD 10,560.00

This study, to be conducted by a doctoral candidate of cultural anthropology at
New York University, will examine the relationship between religiosity and
emerging notions of citizenship among Mexicans in New York City. It will
investigate the ways in which members of this population challenge dominant
notions of citizenship and translate devotional practices into political
activism. Specifically, this investigation examines Mexican immigrant
involvement in non-profit organizations that have emerged from Catholic
confraternities and subsequently converged into a citywide migrant association.
The modes of social organization and discourses of participants in two parish-
based confraternities and a city-wide non-profit umbrella organization are
analyzed to test the hypothesis that members of these organizations are
redefining rights, citizenship and identity by renegotiating the symbols of
faith and nation, mobilizing the space of the church, and participating in
activities normally reserved for citizens with typically material aims such as
immigration rights, social services and political/economic equity. This study
will contribute to anthropological theories on religion and transnational
citizenship, and to an understanding of immigrant integration generally and
Mexican-American integration specifically.