* 0211976
* RUI: Osteology and Phylogeny of Early Tertiary Perissodactyls (Mammalia) of Eurasia
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Luke Holbrook, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 132,383.00

ABSTRACT

Osteology and Phylogeny of Early Tertiary Perissodactyls (Mammalia) of Eurasia

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Holbrook at Rowan University to study how
different groups of perissodactyls are related to one another. Perissodactyls
are a group of mammals that includes the living horses, rhinoceroses, and
tapirs, as well as a host of fossils that date back to as early as about 55
million years ago. Although perissodactyls are well known, their origins and the
pattern of their evolution is not well understood. One reason for this is that
fossil perissodactyls are known from many parts of the globe, and few studies
have even attempted to cover this broad geographic distribution in their
investigations. Another reason is that, for many years, teeth were the only
specimens known for most fossil perissodactyls, so most analyses limited
themselves to studying tooth characteristics. This study will therefore
accomplish two goals. First, it will provide the most extensive combination of
data from North American and Eurasian perissodactyls, covering the two most
important areas of early perissodactyl diversification. Second, it will include
data from previous neglected areas of perissodactyl anatomy, specifically the
skull and the postcranial skeleton.

During the course of this study, Dr. Holbrook and his students will examine
specimens of fossil and living perissodactyls found in museums throughout North
America and Eurasia, including collections in the United States, the United
Kingdom, France, Belgium, Germany, Russia, and China. They will examine teeth,
skulls, and other elements of the skeletons of these specimens looking for
features shared by different perissodactyls that will help elucidate their
relationships. Ultimately, these data will be analyzed by computer in order to
determine the best supported hypothesis of relationships. Once the pattern of
perissodactyl evolution has been investigated, Dr. Holbrook and his colleagues
will use this information to investigate other questions regarding perissodactyl
evolution, in particular how perissodactyls came to be distributed on the
various continents through geologic time.

Throughout the course of this study, undergraduate students will be working
with Dr. Holbrook and learning a great deal about the process of science and the
techniques of vertebrate paleontology. This background will prepare the students
for postgraduate study, including academic training as scientists. The results
of this work will ultimately be presented at national and international
scientific meetings and published in scientific journals.