* 0211487
* Proposal for a Workshop on Research Directions for Communications After the Internet and Cellular Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2002,04/30/2002
* Bernd-Peter Paris, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Julia Abrahams
* 04/30/2002
* USD 33,093.00

In the future, communications systems are expected to be characterized
as&lt;br/&gt;ubiquitous, pervasive, very mobile, and highly distributed, among
other at-&lt;br/&gt;tributes. In contrast to current systems, such as cellular
systems or the&lt;br/&gt;current Internet, the reliance on central network
components will be much&lt;br/&gt;reduced and ad hoc methods for forming
networks will become more preva-&lt;br/&gt;lent. Additionally, the number of
connected devices, including both sensors&lt;br/&gt;and actuators as well as
processors, will increase dramatically and many&lt;br/&gt;network devices will
operate autonomously. Massive quantities of data of&lt;br/&gt;various highly
structured formats will need to be accessed and distributed&lt;br/&gt;across
these networks. Wireless and wireline systems will interconnect
with&lt;br/&gt;optical fiber and free space communications media.&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop is intended to bring together a distinguished group
of&lt;br/&gt;research scientists/educators and industry and government experts
to discuss&lt;br/&gt;and identify critical research in communications to support
this vision. The&lt;br/&gt;workshop will provide an opportunity to interact with
experts from related&lt;br/&gt;fields, primarily computer science, working on
different aspects of future&lt;br/&gt;communication systems. A list of invitees
for this workshop is provided in&lt;br/&gt;the appendix.&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
aims to identify research challenges and opportunities as-&lt;br/&gt;sociated
with the emerging vision for future communications systems. We&lt;br/&gt;expect
a report to come out of the workshop reflecting the themes discussed.&lt;br/&gt;