* 0211733
* Developmental Genetic Analysis of  Fertilization Pathways in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Barbara Wakimoto, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 09/30/2005
* USD 239,999.00

0211733&lt;br/&gt;Wakimoto&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fertilization begins with the
initial contact of the sperm and the egg and ends with the joining of the
paternal and maternal chromosomes in the embryo. The normal development of all
sexually reproducing organisms requires the exquisite coordination of the
activities of the sperm and egg during fertilization. Current knowledge of the
mechanisms underlying fertilization has been obtained largely from morphological
and biochemical studies of marine invertebrates and mammals. These studies have
led to the discovery of a handful of molecules with confirmed roles in sperm-egg
interactions in these organisms. The aim of the proposed project is to exploit
advantages of a genetic system to identify functionally important fertilization
molecules and pathways. A collection of male sterile lines of Drosophila
melanogaster will be used to identify molecules expressed in sperm and essential
for successful fertilization. Mutations that disrupt the sperm-egg binding or
sperm activation after entry into the egg will be the focus of more extensive
phenotypic and genetic mapping studies. These studies will define the types of
genes that disrupt fertilization and their specificity during development.The
proposed project will also involve the continued characterization two members of
the "earliest developmental arrest" class of paternal effect genes. Mutations
sneaky and space needle produce identical paternal effect defects, with mutant
sperm failing to undergo the changes associated with activation after entry into
the egg. The function of the Sneaky protein, a member of a newly discovered
class of plasma membrane proteins, will be studied by localizing the wild type,
tagged and mutated versions of the protein fusions. The effects of other
paternal effect mutations, including space needle, on Sneaky function and
localization will be analyzed to identify interacting molecules. Genetic and
molecular mapping studies of the space needle gene will be performed to identify
the gene and begin studies the function of its protein product. These studies
work toward developing Drosophila into a powerful experimental system to
investigate sperm-egg interactions. The results should be informative for
assessing the degree to which the molecular pathways of fertilization are
conserved among animals and used to mediate other cell-cell interactions during
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall aim of the proposed research is
to understand the molecular mechanisms of sperm-egg interactions during
fertilization. Dr. Wakimoto's strategy takes advantage of a collection of mutant
strains of Drosophila in which males produce motile sperm that fail in the
fertilization response. These mutants will be used to identify the molecular
pathways that lead to successful sperm-egg binding and sperm activation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) To assess the number and types of mutants that are
defective in sperm-egg interactions, they will:&lt;br/&gt; a) complete the
phenotypic classification of putative fertilization defective and paternal
effect mutants, &lt;br/&gt; b) determine the number of genes represented by the
mutations through genetic complementation analysis and recombination
mapping,.&lt;br/&gt;2) To determine the molecular function of two genes, sneaky
(snky) and space needle (spnl), which are required for sperm activation after
entry into the egg, they will:&lt;br/&gt; a) define the subcellular localization
and the functional domains of the Sneaky protein, the best characterized member
of this class,&lt;br/&gt; b) assay the effects of another snky-like mutation,
space needle (spnl) on the localization, modification and function of the Sneaky
protein,&lt;br/&gt; c) complete the phenotypic characterization and mapping of
spnl mutations toward identifying its protein
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;