* 0211432
* International Conference on Questionnaire Development, Evaluation, and Testing Methods; Charleston, SC; November 2002
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* William Smith, American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2003
* USD 20,000.00

The International Conference on Questionnaire Development, Evaluation, and
Testing Methods (QDET) will be held in Charleston, South Carolina from November
14-17, 2002. The conference is the ninth international conference in a series
devoted to survey methodology. The QDET conference will foster scientific
research and critical commentary on questionnaire evaluation methods that can
lead to improved methods, better understanding of the error properties of survey
questions, and improvements in survey measurements. The conference will also
serve to document and communicate recent advances in the field and increase
their use by survey practitioners, in the U.S. and abroad. There will be 22
invited papers and approximately 65 contributed papers with presenters coming
from Italy, Finland, New Zealand, Sweden, Israel, France, Germany, Canada,
Slovenia, the Netherlands, and the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An edited
volume of 22 invited papers is expected to be published by John Wiley &amp;
Sons. It will be advantageous to the survey research field to have a single
volume that includes contributions from those researchers who have been
instrumental in developing, applying and/or evaluating the new questionnaire
development and evaluation techniques. This volume will be valuable in
university settings to train future survey methodologists and survey
practitioners and in organizational settings to provide a reference volume that
describes and provides guidance on current best practices in questionnaire
development, evaluation, and testing.&lt;br/&gt;