* 0211375
* Environmentally Benign Synthesis of Aromatics from Carbohydrates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* John Frost, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2006
* USD 345,000.00

The focus of this research is to create new synthetic routes for the preparation
of resorcinol and phloroglucinol from glucose. A pathway using the intermediacy
of gallic acid/pyrogallol, 2-deoxy-scyllo-inosose/hydroxyhydroquinone or
myo-2-inosose/1,2,3,4-tetrahydroxybenzene will be explored as will a pathway
involving the intermediacy of hexahydroxybenzene and pentahydroxybenzene derived
from myo-inositol and myo-2-inosose. Microbes will be constructed that are
capable of high-yielding, high-titer conversions of glucose into gallic acid,
myo-inositol, 2-deoxy-scyllo-inosose and myo-2-inosose. Also, experiments will
be conducted to compare the microbial synthesis and reaction in near-critical
water of 3-dehydroquinic, 3-dehydroshikimic and protocatechuic acids as routes
for the synthesis of catechol from glucose. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
renewal award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Dr. John W. Frost of the Department of Chemistry at Michigan
State University. Professor Frost will focus his work on devising methodology to
prepare aromatic chemicals from carbohydrate precursors. These methods will
allow for the replacement of toxic starting materials such as benzene. The
research has broad and important potential impact for the chemical industry and
for the environment in general. The research also provides an excellent training
ground for graduate students and postdoctorals.