* 0211732
* Targeting Induced Local Lesions in Genomes (TILLING) for Plant Functional Genomics
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Steven Henikoff, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
* Standard Grant
* TEST user
* 08/31/2004
* USD 568,551.00

There exist numerous genome-scale methods for obtaining mutations useful for
functional analysis. In traditional genetics, random mutagenesis is followed by
phenotypic analysis. However, the availability of large-scale genomic and cDNA
sequence data encourages reverse genetic approaches. In plants, reverse genetics
based on transposon mutagenesis or directed anti-sense inhibition have succeeded
in some cases, but the methods can be labor-intensive and
unreliable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TILLING is a new reverse genetic strategy that
combines random chemical mutagenesis with PCR-based screening of gene regions of
interest. This provides a range of allele types, including missense and knock-
out mutations, which are potentially useful in a variety of gene function and
interaction studies. TILLING is especially suitable for plants, even for those
that lack well-developed genetic tools. A low-cost high-throughput TILLING
method has been developed and applied to screening mutagenized Arabidopsis
populations. This effort has resulted in the Arabidopsis TILLING Project, which
provides allelic series of point mutations in genes of interest to members of
the general Arabidopsis community. Concomitantly, the TILLING team also
introduced interactive web-based tools needed to identify gene regions most
suitable for TILLING, to design optimal PCR primers for mutational screening,
and to analyze the resulting mutations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful
delivery of several hundred sequenced mutations in Arabidopsis genes encourages
the application of TILLING technology to crop plants. One goal of this proposal
is to establish a high-throughput rice TILLING service utilizing mutagenized
rice populations from the International Rice Research Institute and others. A
second goal is to utilize the TILLING facility and resources for dissemination
of TILLING technology to the broader plant biology
community.&lt;br/&gt;Accomplishment of these goals should contribute to the
understanding of gene functions for both crop plants and model organisms, and to
the improvement of the plant genomics infrastructure for research and education.
TILLING technology has potential benefits for agriculture, where methods are
needed for crop improvement that avoid the expensive regulatory process required
for transgenics and that are widely acceptable to consumers.&lt;br/&gt;