* 0211431
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Djungar Mountains Archaeology Project: Modeling Prehistoric Pastoral Nomadism and Landscapes of Eastern Kazakhstan
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Fredrik Hiebert, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2003
* USD 11,900.00

Under the direction of Dr. Fredrik Hiebert at the University of Pennsylvania,
Michael Frachetti will conduct comprehensive archaeological survey and
archaeological excavations in the Koksu River Valley of Eastern Kazakhstan. This
work will serve as the basis for his doctoral dissertation, in which he is
developing new models to explain the emergence of pastoral nomadism during the
Bronze Age in Central Asia. Humans have inhabited the steppe regions of Eurasia
for more than 10,000 years. In the Western Eurasian steppes, sheep, goats,
cattle, and horses were domesticated by the 4th millennium BC, and nomadic
pastoralism (as a distinct way of life) is thought to have emerged from settled
agricultural contexts in western Eurasia during the 1st millennium BC. In
contrast, the nature and evolution of mobile pastoralism during the Eneolithic
and Bronze Age in the Eastern Eurasian Steppe Zone remains generally
unexplained. More specifically, the ambiguity in identifying the factors that
distinguish a "nomadic" adaptation from any other pastoral lifestyle in this
region has resulted in a scholarly assumption that some form of nomadic
pastoralism characterized the ancient political economy of the steppes, without
a clear archaeological definition of "nomadism" in a prehistoric context. Thus,
the primary objective of Mr. Frachetti's project is to understand the ecological
and social conditions that affected the strategies of Bronze Age groups in
prehistory, by formalizing a new landscape methodology for studying mobile
societies. Frachetti suggests that the main stumbling block in accurately
understanding prehistoric nomadism (as substantially different from ethnographic
cases) is that site-based archaeological studies of nomadic camps have been
unable to provide a useful framework for discerning the patterned lifeway of
mobile pastoralists. The Koksu River Valley is particularly well suited for new
studies of Bronze Age nomadic lifeways since it contains a rich archaeological
record, as well as sharp contrasts in seasonal climate and resources. Frachetti
proposes an archaeological approach that considers the habitation ecology, the
geography of ritual and ideological features, and the associations between
archaeological monuments, landscape manipulation, and marking of group or
individual identity, as aspects of life by which nomadic pastoralism
fundamentally differs from other political economies. Through detailed
archaeological survey and excavation, environmental sampling, spatial analysis,
and GIS simulation, landscape archaeology parses mobile pastoralism into various
defining elements that are systemically related, though temporally and
culturally contingent and unique. He suggests that ground-up modeling of various
kinds of landscapes (ecological, ideological, political etc.) will more
accurately depict the complex factors that conditioned pastoral strategies
during prehistory. Conceived in this way, the landscape approach serves as the
vital link between theoretical questions concerning nomadic strategies at
different places and times, and the analytical techniques available to
archaeologists for discerning mobile pastoralism in prehistory. The proposed
Djungar Mountains Archaeology Project will make broad contributions to
archaeological theory and method, as well as provide new data. Most importantly,
it will provide a grounded model of the development of pastoral nomadism in
Eastern Central Asia during the Bronze Age. At the broader level, Frachetti's
collaborative project will foster international relationships between American
and Kazakh archaeologists, and open the door for future relationships between
scientists from the United States and other Central Asian republics.