* 0211207
* Computer Engineering Course for K-12 Teachers Assisted by First-Year ECE Undergrads
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* James Patton, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 124,593.00

A sophomore-level course will be designed that introduces computer engineering
fundamentals to pre-service science and math teachers in a highly interactive,
hands-on environment, using active, cooperative learning methods. In cooperation
with existing efforts, it will also be adapted to appeal to in-service teachers
seeking a Masters degree in science or math education. It will illustrate how to
use microprocessor based, mini-data acquisition systems, and robotics to create
projects demonstrating physics and math concepts satisfying the Maine Learning
Results and other national education standards. These materials will be
distributed over the web.

A unique aspect of this effort will be the recruitment and engagement of honors-
level first-year Electrical and Computer Engineering and pre-service College of
Education students to help develop curricular content that will interest middle
and high school students. In-service teachers will be included in the
development of pedagogy that efficiently conveys the engineering material to
future science and math teachers.

This project will introduce the engineering application of science and math, as
well as providing a bridge between such informal science innovations as First
Robotics, First Lego League, Bot Ball, etc. and the classroom environment. The
major benefit, however, to the engineering establishment will be the application
of and emphasis on engineering concepts to the science/math K-12 infrastructure.
Through this course, pre-service and in-service teachers will be equipped with
the tools to illustrate engineering principles and how they relate to concepts
normally taught in conventional science and math courses.