* 0211163
* Fundamental Study on Inhitibiting Exothermic Reactions Under Adverse Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2005
* USD 253,384.00

Exothermic reactions are used in the chemical, petrochemical, and pharmaceutical
industries. Control of these reactions is important because the loss of control
can lead to thermal runaways, which can cause accidents with environmental
damage, injuries, and sometimes fatalities. A way for dealing with runaway
reactions is inhibition which involves injecting small quantities of an
inhibitor into a reactor or storage vessel at the earliest stage of a
runaway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the study of reaction
rates, temperatures, and pressures under adverse conditions, such as loss of
cooling, loss of agitation, and unusual kinetics. The studies will use (1) a new
simulation model with three mixing zones to characterize runaway reactions with
perfect mixing versus imperfect mixing, (2) computational fluid dynamics models
to copmater the effects of agitation under turbulent and micromixing conditions,
and (3) design of experiment (DOE) methods to effectively identify methods to
inhibit runaways. The results will ultimately also be used to highlight future
problems and limitations when reactions are faster and reactors are
smaller.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge created by
this project could ultimately improve the chemical industry's safety performance
and image. In addition, the PIs plan to develop chemical process safety
educational material for use in undergraduate chemical engineering courses, a
mechanism for introducing safety related issues into the curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;