* 0211505
* Mathematical Analysis of Systems with Multiple Components and Multiple Time Scales
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Nancy Kopell, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Michael H. Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2008
* USD 849,634.00

The investigator studies systems with multiple interacting components that
together create rhythms. The systems come from neural, chemical, and gene
regulatory contexts. There are two main themes. The first is reduction of
dimensions, investigating the circumstances under which large-dimensional models
behave like much lower-dimensional differential equations or maps. Some of that
work uses geometric singular perturbation theory to investigate how systems with
multiple degrees of freedom "condense" to essentially lower-dimensional systems,
at least locally in phase space. Another set of issues related to reduction of
dimension concerns fast partial synchronization. The second theme concerns how
interaction of many components in a system can lead to the suppression of
activity in some of the components. Two examples of this to be studied come from
a chemical pattern formation and neural systems, each with some type of global
inhibitory feedback. Systems with many separate but interacting components arise
in a large variety of applications, including biotechnology, chemical
engineering, and neurobiology. In general, such systems have a large number of
degrees of freedom, and are usually investigated by numerical simulation.
However, simulations alone do not provide a deep understanding of why the
systems behave the way they do, or how they can be manipulated. Reductions of
equations to smaller systems can be very useful. But without a principled way to
do the reductions, one does not know how much of the behavior of the large
system is lost. This project concerns methods to find such principled
reductions, using mathematical tools that enable one to investigate
circumstances under which parts of the dynamics behave like that of systems with
a much smaller number of degrees of freedom. Other tools to be used allow one to
understand how only some subset of the components can be involved at a given
time, even though all components are coupled. The methods are applied to
problems from neural, chemical and gene regulation systems. The project also
provides interdisciplinary training opportunities for students and postdocs.