* 0211353
* Solid State NMR Studies of Disordered Solids: Ionic Conductors and Battery Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Clare Grey, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/2006
* USD 404,167.00

This project is aimed at the development and application of Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) and Molecular Dynamics simulations as tools that will permit a
more rational design of materials with improved ionic conductivities. For
example, NMR will be used to investigate the role that local structure plays in
controlling the physical properties of solid state ionic conductors and battery
materials such as calcium-doped yttrium titanium oxide. A combination of
fluorine-19 NMR and molecular dynamics simulations will be used to predict and
then test experimentally the effect of different modifications and structural
features on fluoride-ion conduction in fluorite-related phases such as lead tin
fluoride and barium tin fluoride. Molecular dynamic simulations will be used to
examine the effect of doping such cations as sodium, potassium, aluminum, and
zirconium into these structures and then test the molecular dynamics simulations
by NMR. This project has a very strong educational component for
underrepresented groups in that the PI participates in a number of university-
wide efforts to encourage young women to remain in the physical sciences. Also,
there is a unique educational dimension due to international collaborative
activities with groups in the United Kingdom on MD simulations and Estonia on
the development of NMR instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moderate to fast
ionic conduction is critical for a wide range of devices and applications such
as fuel cells, sensors, and solid state electrolytes and cathode materials in
batteries. Training students in the areas of mechanisms of conduction and the
search for new, improved, and more environmentally friendly materials for energy
related applications makes them very competitive in the industrial
sector.&lt;br/&gt;