* 0211214
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Surface Modification for Advancing New Separation Processes and Environment Protection
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Samuel Farrah, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

0211214&lt;br/&gt;Farrah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. Samuel Farrah, Professor in the
Department of Microbiology and Cell Science and in the Engineering Research
Center for Particle Science and Technology (ERC/PS&amp;T) at the University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida and Dr. Nagui Abdel-Khalek, Central Metallurgical
Research and Development Institute, Helwan, Cairo, Egypt. The two scientists
plan to investigate mechanisms involved in the application of biologically
active species to achieve better solid/solid and solid/liquid separations, with
the specific aim of separation of phosphate from its associated carbonates
during flotation process and the dewatering of slimes of extremely fine
particles. The final objective is to develop a predictive methodology that can
be used to optimize the process by determining the performance of various
bacteria, their adsorption behaviors on the mineral surfaces, and the surface
properties of the bacteria and the minerals. The tasks of the project include
microbial sample collection, growing and characterization of microorganisms,
fundamental study of the adsorption of microorganisms onto apatite and dolomite
minerals and clay sample, flotation of phosphate samples of different
composition from the U.S. and from Egypt, and economic evaluation of the
processes. The two teams will share responsibilities in these
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This project aims to advance new processes
for solid-liquid separation and also for solid-solid separation, particularly
for those minerals of similar surface properties such as separation of apatite
from dolomite and/or calcite. Flotation of dolomitic phosphates in both
countries is not yet commercialized. The United States and Egypt are both major
producers of phosphate, which generates huge amounts of slime as waste from
different industries. Advancing new technologies that depend on surface
modification of minerals through application of microorganisms during flotation
or flocculation of fine and ultrafine particles will enhance their separation
with high selectivity, with reduced adverse environmental impacts. The
ERC/PS&amp;T and the CMRDI have the necessary facilities and resources to
conduct this research. The results of this study are expected to benefit both
countries, especially if the developed processes are be applied to other
materials. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund
Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;