* 0211453
* Collaborative Research:   Nonlinear Nonlocal First Order Hyperbolic Problems in Population Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Azmy Ackleh, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2003
* USD 118,157.00

The investigators consider a general system of nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;nonlocal
hyperbolic equations describing the dynamics of several&lt;br/&gt;interacting
populations. The goal of the project is to develop&lt;br/&gt;theories on the
existence-uniqueness, long-time behavior, and&lt;br/&gt;numerical approximation
of solutions to the hyperbolic system. A&lt;br/&gt;combination of analytical and
numerical methods is used to&lt;br/&gt;understand the dynamics of the complex
proposed model. To study&lt;br/&gt;existence and uniqueness of solutions to this
system, two major&lt;br/&gt;approaches are adopted. The first approach to study
the&lt;br/&gt;well-posedness of solutions is via the finite difference
method&lt;br/&gt;used for classical conservation laws. The second approach
to&lt;br/&gt;investigate the well-posedness and long-time behavior
of&lt;br/&gt;solutions is based on the monotone approximation and
comparison&lt;br/&gt;results that have been successfully established for
the&lt;br/&gt;semilinear case by the investigators. Although similar
approaches&lt;br/&gt;have been used in studying other nonlinear partial
differential&lt;br/&gt;equation models, their applications to special cases of
the&lt;br/&gt;general nonlinear and nonlocal model considered in this
project&lt;br/&gt;have only been carried out by the investigators. In addition,
a&lt;br/&gt;numerical methodology is developed for an inverse
problem&lt;br/&gt;governed by the proposed nonlinear nonlocal system of
equations.&lt;br/&gt;It uses a connection between real data and the model to
estimate&lt;br/&gt;unknown parameters. Meanwhile, a numerical package is
developed&lt;br/&gt;for simulating the proposed model.&lt;br/&gt; Many
populations and their interactions with the environment&lt;br/&gt;have been
modeled using the structured population approach, where&lt;br/&gt;the structures
of interest are induced by internal&lt;br/&gt;characteristics such as age or
size. For example, size-structured&lt;br/&gt;population models with distributed
rates have been successfully&lt;br/&gt;used to describe the dynamics of
mosquitofish in California rice&lt;br/&gt;fields. The structured population
approach has also been used to&lt;br/&gt;model the dynamics of hierarchically
structured populations in&lt;br/&gt;which the differences between individuals
have a direct effect on&lt;br/&gt;the availability of resources. Another
application is the&lt;br/&gt;predator-prey interaction between zooplankton and
phytoplankton&lt;br/&gt;within the context of algal aggregation. Generally
speaking, in&lt;br/&gt;order to analyze, manage, and control the dynamics of
a&lt;br/&gt;population, it is necessary to understand the
interactions&lt;br/&gt;between the population evolution and its environment. In
this&lt;br/&gt;project, the investigators study a general structured
population&lt;br/&gt;model. Due to its complexity, a combination of analytical
and&lt;br/&gt;numerical methods is developed to investigate the dynamics
of&lt;br/&gt;such a population. In particular, a numerical package to
simulate&lt;br/&gt;the proposed model is provided. Furthermore, certain
techniques&lt;br/&gt;are introduced to estimate the growth and mortality
for&lt;br/&gt;individuals within the population from field data. Because of
the&lt;br/&gt;generality of the proposed model, the results help to
answer&lt;br/&gt;questions about nonlinear phenomena in population dynamics.
In&lt;br/&gt;addition, the resulting numerical method can be used
by&lt;br/&gt;population biologists to investigate the dynamical behavior
of&lt;br/&gt;general population models.