* 0211100
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:   Biodiversity of Aerobic and Anaerobic Alkalithermophiles &amp; Their Industrial Enzymes, Form Alkaline Lakes (Wadi el Natron) &amp; Hot Springs
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Juergen Wiegel, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

0211100&lt;br/&gt;Wiegel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: &lt;br/&gt;This award
is for support of a joint research project by Dr. Juergen Wiegel, Department of
Microbiology, the University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia and Dr. Osama Sobieh,
Biotechnology Institute, Mubarak City for Scientific Research and Technological
Application, Alexandria, Egypt. This project has two main goals: first,
elucidation of the biodiversity of the multifaceted (elevated temperatures,
alkaline pH, and (partly) high salt at the same time) extremophiles from Wadi el
Natron and hot springs in Egypt and the characterization of the novel bacteria
and second, production of industrial enzymes from these extremophiles at the
bench scale, i.e., screening for the desired industrially important enzymes,
optimization of production yields and expression of the target genes in a
mesophilic host to aid in the purification of the thermophilic/stable proteins.
Several of these harsh environments have been only superficially studied and
only very few microorganisms have been isolated from them so far. This is
especially true for the Natron Lakes of Wadi el Natron between Cairo and
Alexandria and hot springs close to the Red Sea, both expected to harbor unique
microorganisms. Only recently a novel group of extremophiles, the anaerobic
alkalithermophiles, has been established by one of the PIs and not much is known
about these bacteria &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: &lt;br/&gt;Many
biotechnological and industrial applications (e.g., laundry detergents) require
enzymes, which are stable at elevated temperatures in a highly alkaline milieu.
This research will identify organisms from a natural source in a foreign country
that can produce enzymes at these extreme environments. This collaborative
project will foster scientific and educational exchanges between US and Egypt
scientists in the area of biodiversity and industrial enzymes, and will support
the participation of a U.S. graduate student in this international cooperative
effort.&lt;br/&gt;