* 0211007
* Collaborative Research: Genetics of Speciation Factors in Drosophila Mojavensis
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Mohamed Noor, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 04/30/2005
* USD 258,940.00

Individuals typically choose to mate with others of the same species by using
several genetically based behavioral or chemical cues. The investigators seek to
identify the parts of the genome that are associated with these behaviors and
chemicals to test various evolutionary hypotheses of species formation. They
propose to execute this research in populations of the fruit fly species
Drosophila mojavensis, a member of the cactus-yeast-Drosophila model system,
because of its association with and infestation of cactus rots. Previous studies
in this and other Drosophila species have shown that olfactory cues (pheromones)
and auditory cues (courtship wing vibrations) are the cues that individuals use
to select mates. The investigators will use DNA-based markers to identify the
locations of genes influencing these traits. This approach will ensure that
these genetic analyses will be performed on individuals reared on their natural
host plants, as recent studies have shown a dramatic effect of rearing
substrates on these traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research
will begin to reveal the number and locations of genes that are responsible for
the beginnings of species formation. Thus, this work will provide insights into
the fundamental evolutionary processes that regulate biodiversity on
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;