* 0211748
* Organization and Trade
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2008
* Elhanan Helpman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2008
* USD 408,724.00

The nature of international trade has been changing. Historically, trade has
consisted largely of an exchange of raw materials and finished goods. But now,
"international production sharing is becoming more the norm. Improvements in
technology have made possible the division of the production process into an
ever finer set of activities, so that specialized components and business
services can be produced in various locations before being combined into a final
product. Meanwhile, falling trade barriers, declining communication and
transportation costs, and improvements in the legal conditions in many countries
have made the internationalization of economic activity increasingly viable.
Indeed, the process of international production sharing may well be the
essential feature of modern "globalization." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Globalization
encompasses a variety of organizational arrangements, including the outsourcing
of various components and business services in arms-length relations, the
establishment of foreign subsidiaries to undertake activities such as assembly
and marketing, the entry into long-term and possibly exclusive licensing
agreements, and the establishment of joint ventures for production and
marketing. In this project, the principal investigators are developing
theoretical models of foreign investment and trade that incorporate decisions
about organizational form. They are studying firms' choices about whether to
obtain a component or service by self-provision or subcontracting together with
their choices about where might be the best place to source or manufacture
components. As the project progresses, the authors also will consider hybrid
organizational forms, such as "relational contracts" (self-enforcing long-term
agreements) and joint ventures (where decision-making authority may reside with
one party or the other depending on the contingencies that arise). After
developing their new models of trade and foreign investment, the authors will
use them to address important policy issues, such as whether international
production sharing has contributed to the adverse trends in income distribution
in the United States and Europe and whether globalization hinders the ability of
governments to regulate industry. Further, they will investigate whether the
internationalization of economic activity necessitates greater intergovernmental
cooperation in the WTO (or elsewhere) in non-traditional areas such as standards
and regulation.&lt;br/&gt;