* 0211216
* Ecological Rates of Change: Monitoring Recent Changes in Biospheric Activity Using Tree Rings and NDVI
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Gordon Jacoby, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mark R.  Walbridge
* 08/31/2005
* USD 240,000.00

Satellite measures indicate an overall greening of northern forest ecosystems
between the early 1980s and the late 1990s. This greening, which indicates
higher rates of tree growth, is consistent with rising temperatures, which may
be caused by atmospheric increases in greenhouse gases. To validate these
findings, this research project will compare satellite-based estimates of
increasing growth and greening to tree-ring records from selected sites across
the circumpolar zone of northern forests. Satellite data will be summarized
using a standard measure of greenness in vegetation: the Normalized-Difference
Vegetation Index (NDVI). The following questions will be investigated: 1. How
are tree rings related to NDVI? 2. Can tree rings be used to validate intra and
interannual variability in NDVI? 3. Can tree rings be used to validate trends in
NDVI? 4. Do tree-ring and NDVI indices provide distinct information which, when
combined, improve our understanding of biospheric activity? 5. Is there any
evidence that increases in the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide have
directly enhanced the growth of forests north of 40oN? &lt;br/&gt;This project
will increase understanding of the complex links between global change and
ecosystem function and process. Satellite and other observations of the earth
system are accumulating rapidly, but the interrelations are exceedingly complex
and it is essential that their interpretation include a ground data perspective.
The validation of NDVI estimates of forest biomass sinks using ground
measurements from tree rings can eventually aid nations concerned with meeting
commitments for the Kyoto Protocol. This project will be multidisciplinary in
that it will bring together members of the ecosystems/paleoclimate community,
involved in ground measurement analysis of vegetation, and the remote sensing
community, involved in the processing and interpretation of satellite
measurements. It is anticipated that the synergy of this integrated approach
will significantly improve understanding of terrestrial biospheric activity for
northern latitudes and for the globe.&lt;br/&gt;