* 0211579
* A Re-evaluation of the Earthworks at Tikal, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* David Webster, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2004
* USD 68,492.00

Dr. David Webster will use National Science Foundation funding to investigate
the largest known set of ancient fortifications in the Maya Lowlands of
Mesoamerica. When these fortifications were discovered at Tikal, Guatemala, in
1966, the Classic Maya were widely regarded unique among ancient civilizations
for their apparent lack of intense warfare. The earthworks reported at Tikal
were interpreted as defenses that protected not only the monumental architecture
at the site core, but also a larger region of about 120 sq km where the bulk of
the sustaining population lived. &lt;br/&gt; Because Classic Maya inscriptions
could not be read in the mid-1960s, these earthworks constituted early
convincing evidence contradicting the "peaceful Maya" conception. They also
intrigued archaeologists who faced a vexing problem: how can the boundaries of
ancient Maya settlements or polities be detected where ruins extend more or less
continuously over vast regions? At Tikal the Maya themselves provided us with
just such boundaries. &lt;br/&gt; Subsequent evidence for warfare soon appeared
at other Classic sites, such as the earthworks at Becan, excavated by Webster in
1970. Even more important was an avalanche of deciphered inscriptions after
1980, which are full of references to war between Maya kingdoms. Historical
chronicles from many centers now reveal great geopolitical struggles between
Maya "superpowers" (Tikal among them) and their associated coalitions.
&lt;br/&gt; Ironically, the Tikal earthworks have been entirely neglected by
archaeologists since they were first reported. Such neglect is particularly
serious because they were initially described and mapped only in a very
superficial way, and we have only the poorest grasp of when they were first
constructed or when they were used. No one has even confirmed the existence of
the southern earthwork, which might be better called a rumor. Despite this
paucity of information, the earthworks loom large in reconstructions of Tikal's
military struggles and the demographic and territorial character of the polity.
&lt;br/&gt; Our project, slated for the dry season of 2003, represents the first
phase of a larger effort to better document these intriguing features. We plan
to map the entire northern earthwork (about 9 km long) determine how it connects
(or not) with large swamps on the east and west, and also record all associated
settlement remains. We also hope to locate the more distant and elusive southern
earthwork, and at least verify its basic features. Results will set the stage
for future excavations to better reveal how the earthworks were constructed, and
how and when they were used. We especially hope to eventually associate use of
the fortifications with recorded episodes of warfare.&lt;br/&gt; Our research
will provide Mayanists with an important test of the congruence between
historical and archaeological data, and the implications of these data for
conflict, demography, and political organization. It will also interest all
archaeologists concerned with how to detect warfare in prehistoric contexts.
Most importantly, it will help us to better understand how war and conflict
among the ancient Maya fits into our larger comparative perspectives about the
role of warfare in the evolution of all ancient civilizations.&lt;br/&gt;