* 0211969
* Phylogeny and Biogeography of the Fern Genus Elaphoglossum (Elaphoglossaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* John Mickel, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2005
* USD 263,387.00

0211969&lt;br/&gt;Moran, Mickel, and Motley&lt;br/&gt; The fern genus
Elaphoglossum contains about 650 species and is one of the world's largest fern
genera. Most species occur in the American tropics, particularly in Central
America and the Andean countries. This three-year grant will enable scientists
at The New York Botanical Garden to continue their collaborative taxonomic study
of the genus. Using evidence from DNA sequences and morphology, they will
produce an evolutionary tree to the species and use this tree as a framework for
addressing questions about evolution and biogeography. Examples of some
evolutionary questions they will pose are: What are the main evolutionary groups
within Elaphoglossum? How does the evolutionary tree obtained from DNA studies
compare to a previous classification system based on morphology? Did certain
critical morphological characters evolve once within the genus, or did they
arise several times? Examples of biogeographic questions are: How many different
introductions of Elaphoglossum species have occurred onto the Hawaiian Islands,
and what were their geographic source areas? What are the evolutionary
relationships between the species in the American tropics and Africa-Madagascar?
To answer these questions, it is necessary to collect samples of the species in
various parts of the world. Field trips will be taken to species-rich countries
in Latin America, such as Ecuador and Bolivia, and several colleagues will be
collecting plants in the tropics of Africa, Madagascar, and Asia. The samples
will be used to study morphological characteristics and to extract and sequence
DNA, all aimed at providing data to construct an evolutionary tree. &lt;br/&gt;
This research will address major evolutionary and biogeographic questions about
one of the world's largest groups of ferns. The results should provide a useful
basis for comparison to other groups of plants. One spin-off of this project is
that many new species will be discovered and provided with scientific names. The
study will have educational benefits to the post-doctoral scientist and graduate
students involved in the project, including training in both laboratory methods
for studying DNA and fieldwork in the American tropics. Dr. Moran teaches the
Tropical Plant Systematics course (both English and Spanish versions) in Costa
Rica for the Organization for Tropical Studies, and will involve students in
this course in field projects relating to the proposed research. Several members
of the New York Chapter of the American Fern Society will grow spores to study
the characteristics of the gametophytes (the sexual phase of the life cycle) and
will thus be involved in the project. The public and scientists will be informed
about activities and results on the project's web site, the "Elaphoglossum
homepage" maintained at the New York Botanical Garden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;