* 0211923
* Comparative Analyses of Resistance Gene Evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Richard Michelmore, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,545,036.00

We will utilize a comparative genomics approach to understand the evolutionary
forces and genetic events that have determined the outcome of the interactions
between a major group of bacterial pathogens and diverse crop species. A broad
range of genetic mechanisms has been shown to influence the evolution of disease
resistance in plants. It is becoming apparent that different mechanisms may have
been important at different stages and influence different parts of the
resistance protein and that resistance genes may exhibit different rates of
evolution. These different rates of evolution may be indicative of different
characteristics of the pathogen ligands detected and suggest different
efficacies in disease control strategies.

We will characterize related series of bacterial proteins involved in
pathogenicity, the plant targets they interact with, and the plant resistance
genes that detect these genes. This will be done by: 1) identifying the majority
of the so-called "Type III effector" genes in four strains of strains and
species of the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas; 2) determining the genetic
variation in the plants ability to detect these effector proteins by analysis of
diverse germplasm of lettuce, tomato, and Arabidopsis as well as a less detailed
analysis of at least five other crop species; 3) isolating a subset of the plant
targets of these effectors from Arabidopsis and the crop species; 4)
characterizing the rates and evolution of known and novel resistance genes as
well as the genes encoding the target proteins and to correlate the rates of
evolution with the prevalence and fitness contribution of the ligands detected.
This will provide a related series of these three interacting determinants of
resistance and a matrix of the interactions between them. This will also provide
insights into the basis of non-resistance and the potential durability of
resistance genes.

Understanding the molecular determinants of disease resistance has practical as
well as fundamental importance. Lettuce and tomato are two of the top ten most
valuable crops in the US and disease resistance is one of the most
agriculturally important traits targeted in crop improvement programs.
Understanding the molecular basis of specificity in plant-pathogen interactions
and the events resulting in resistance will provide new possibilities for
developing more durable disease resistance in pants and decrease the use of
chemical protectants.