* 0211683
* Conference on Environmental and Physiological Integration of Long-Distance Transport Processes in Plants, Petersham, Massachusetts, October, 2002
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Noel Holbrook, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Herbert
* 08/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

This award supports a conference on Environmental and Physiological Integration
of Long-Distance Transport Processes in Plants, to be held at the Harvard
Forest, Petersham, MA in October 2002. The goal of this conference will be to
review and synthesize new ideas and insights in the area of long distance
transport in plants, emphasizing both the biophysics of transport through the
xylem and phloem and the emerging area exploring interactions between the two.
In the past, xylem transport has been viewed largely in terms of physical
processes, while movement in the phloem has been studied primarily with
reference to membrane transport and osmotic regulation. There is now greater
appreciation for the role of living cells and biochemical processes in the
xylem, as well as the need to understand the hydraulic components involved in
carbohydrate movement. Thus, the time is ripe for a conference that brings
together these two converging areas and explores the ways in which these two
pathways influence each other. The funds provided by this award will support the
participation (travel and housing) of a diverse group of scientists, including
women and scientists early in their research careers. Vascular transport plays
an important role in understanding both how plants respond to drought and the
mechanisms by which they control patterns of carbon allocation required for
growth. By bringing together individuals with expertise in long-distance
transport processes, we believe that this conference and the resulting
proceedings (to be published as a book by Academic Press) will have lasting
value by virtue of stimulating new insights, revealing new research
opportunities and opening the door for new collaborative efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;