* 0211206
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  A Reference Grammar of Wanano
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Jule Garcia, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2005
* USD 18,487.00

This research is partially supported by the Office of International Science and
Engineering of NSF. Under the direction of Dr. Barbara Fox and Dr. Jule Gomez de
Garcia, Ms. Kristine Stenzel will collect data for her doctoral dissertation.
She will conduct linguistic research on Wanano, a language of the Tucano
language family spoken by approximately 1600 people living in the northwest
region of the Amazon rainforest. Wanano is an endangered language that has yet
to be fully described. Ms. Stenzel's fieldwork with the Wanano will involve
direct elicitation of linguistic data, transcriptions of oral histories and
folktales, as well as the recording of everyday conversations. She will produce
a reference grammar of Wanano including features of Wanano phonology,
morphology, and syntax. The grammar will take into account recent research in
each of these areas and place Wanano in a cross-linguistic context. It will also
overview the current sociolinguistic situation of the Wanano people. The grammar
will be written within the framework of Basic Linguistic Theory with the overall
goal of providing accurate information about the language so that researchers
working within a variety of theoretical frameworks may find it accessible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is significant to three inter-related areas
of linguistics: language description, linguistic theory, and language
preservation. First, Ms. Stenzel's research will provide a detailed description
of an endangered and underdescribed language. As the language family to which
Wanano belongs is also underdescribed, this research will shed light on some of
the poorly understood structures of the family, including tone, evidential
marking, and word order. Second, Ms. Stenzel's analyses of textual and
conversational data will be of use to linguists working on cross-linguistic
comparisons. It is especially significant that most of the analyses will be
based on conversational data, since some current grammatical theory suggests
that conversational syntax provides a new window on the organization of grammar.
Finally, this project will provide the community of Wanano speakers with a
version of the grammar translated into Portuguese and modified for non-
linguists. This grammar will enhance the Wananos' efforts to preserve their
language and cultural heritage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;