* 0211264
* Pattern Formation in Homogeneous and Micro-Structured Chemical Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Oliver Steinbock, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Raima Larter
* 06/30/2005
* USD 284,500.00

Oliver Steinbock of Florida State University is supported by the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to examine pattern information in homogeneous
and micro-structured chemical systems, and to develop novel experimental
methodologies for control of the underlying spatial coupling. The chemical
origins of the anomalous dispersion in the 1,4-cyclohexanedione Belousov-
Zhabotinsky (CHD-BZ) reaction will be investigated, and the results utilize to
formulate a reaction model capable of reproducing experimental observations from
stirred reaction systems. Combined numerical and experimental approaches will be
used to distill the characteristic features of spatially extended media, and
also to analyze the interplay of attractive and repulsive interactions between
traveling oxidation pulses and the resulting shock-like front dynamics. In other
studies, the CHD-BZ reaction will serve as a model for chemical self-
organization in large arrays of coupled micro-reactors. Recently developed
methodologies, such as soft photolithography, will be applied for construction
of custom-made arrays in which each reactor will hold a polymer-bound CHD-BZ
volume of less than 100 picoliters. These reactor arrays will be employed to
examine a broad spectrum of chemical instabilities that give rise to novel wave
structures and Turing-like patterns. Results are expected to lead to
experimental strategies to control reactions on micro-patterned reactor chips
and a thorough understanding of the rules that govern spatial coupling of
localized "lab-on-a-chip" processes. Ultimately, the outcomes will contribute
valuable information for systematic exploration of compartmentalized reaction-
transport systems of the sort that are successfully exploited by living matter
for a variety of complex syntheses and sensors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project is highly interdisciplinary because its fundamental results
will aid in the analysis of complex systems in biology and elsewhere. In
particular, the outcomes will impact the diverse fields of neurophysiology,
engineering, and statistical physics. Moreover, the development and fabrication
of spatially coupled micro-reactor arrays is expected to have promise for future
applications in advanced combinatorial chemistry. The manufactured reactor
arrays will be made broadly available to other research groups for their use.