* 0211094
* Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Course on Cell & Developmental Biology of Xenopus; April 2003 - 2006; Cold Spring Harbor, New York
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 08/31/2006
* USD 90,000.00

0211094 Grodzicker

Dramatic progress has been made in the fields of cell and developmental biology
in recent years, largely due to the application of new technical approaches to
classical problems. This has led to the need for advanced courses to train new
investigators to study those animal models, such as Xenopus, that have been
important in making new discoveries. Funds are being sought to continue the Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory course on "Cell and Developmental Biology of Xenopus"
which has been taught for eleven years as part of an integrated set of courses
in a number of areas of modern biology. This course provides extensive
laboratory exposure to the biology and manipulation of embryos from the frogs
Xenopus laevis and Xenopus tropicalis. Xenopus is a vertebrate uniquely suited
for studies of early development since large numbers of embryos, from
fertilization onward, can readily be obtained. Development is rapid and the
large size of the embryos facilitates their micromanipulation. This allows
analysis (at the single cell level if necessary) of such important issues as
maternal regulation and embryonic inductions that are not feasible in mammalian,
avian or fish embryos. The course is suited both for those who have a knowledge
of molecular biology and developmental biology, but have had no experience with
Xenopus, as well as those with some Xenopus experience who wish to learn newly
developed, advanced techniques. The specific areas that will be covered are (1)
Care and handling of Xenopus adults, removal of oocytes, induction of ovulation,
egg collection, testis isolation, and in vitro and natural fertilization; (2)
Stages of embryonic development and anatomy; (3) Whole mount in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry, including double probe staining; (4)
Microinjection of eggs and oocytes with lineage tracers, antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides, mRNA and DNA constructions; (5) Use of oocytes to make
conditioned medium containing growth factors; (6) Micromanipulation of embryos,
including induction and transplantation assays; (7) Oligonucleotide antisense
techniques for "knock-out" of maternal molecules; (8) Preparation and use of
cell cycle extracts for construction of transgenic embryos; and (9) Use of
Xenopus tropicalis as a genetic model.

It is anticipated that the basic organization of the course and much of the
course material will remain unchanged during the proposed period of support.
However, fast-developing topics, such as new promoter sequences for use in
transgenesis and the availability of transgenic and mutant lines, will be
discussed and integrated into the course as the field progresses.