* 0211020
* Collaborative Research: Preceramic Chronology in the Norte Chico Region of Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Winifred Creamer, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2005
* USD 72,620.00

The present project represents the first phase of a planned long-term
investigation into the very beginnings of civilization in the Western
Hemisphere. In an area on the north-central coast of Peru, known as the "Norte
Chico" ("Little North") a remarkable culture arose in the 3rd millennium B.C. In
three small adjoining valleys, Supe, Pativilca and Fortaleza, a complex of more
than 20 major archaeological ruins have been recently discovered, all dating
roughly to the time between 3000 and 1800 B.C. With enormous platform mounds,
round ceremonial plazas and extensive areas of socially stratified residences,
these sites appear to be the earliest florescence of centralized, hierarchical,
complex societies anywhere in the Americas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
on this project will explore sites in two of the valleys, Fortaleza and
Pativilca with two primary goals: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Determine the
specific chronology of occupation and monument construction at each of the major
sites. All of the sites identified for testing share one significant
characteristic: they all lack ceramics. While there are interesting implications
to the absence of ceramics in terms of technology, it has more immediate
importance in terms of dating these sites. Since ceramics were introduced to
Peru in the century between 1900 and 1800 B.C., sites without ceramics can be
inferred to generally date prior to 1900 B.C. While this provides a useful tool
in the basic identification of the early sites, it is insufficient to make
assessments about whether the sites were occupied all at the same time or
sequentially over the span of a thousand years. Precise dates are needed to
determine whether the monumental platform mounds were constructed in a single
massive building event or numerous smaller events over a long period of time. In
order to answer these central questions about chronology a specific effort will
be made to obtain materials for Carbon 14 dating from different parts of each
site and from within the monuments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. A second subsidiary
goal is to obtain samples of artifacts and tools as well as plant and animal
remains in order to begin reconstructing the economy, technology and lifeways of
the people who belonged to this precocious early civilization. In the absence of
ceramics, the analysis of stone tools assumes central importance. Yet, to date,
there has been no work done on the myriad stone tools that litter the surface of
these sites - scrapers, blades, knives, drills, pounders, grinders, hoes and
picks. An attempt will also be made to reconstruct diet. While all later
civilizations in the Americas had staple diets based largely on maize (corn),
this New World crop was not introduced in Peru until well after all the Norte
Chico sites were abandoned. Inhabitants appear to have survived on a wide mix of
fruits and vegetables with a heavy dose of anchovies, sardines and shellfish
thrown in for protein. Because there is excellent preservation on the Peruvian
coastal desert, plant and animal remains are found in abundance in the trash
midden areas. To obtain collections of stone tools and the plant and animal
remains test pits test pits will be excavated in different parts of each site
associated with various kinds of residential architecture and reflecting the
full extent of the site area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of the
project is to provide an archaeological window into the past to examine the very
beginnings of an early culture that ultimately gave rise to the Inca and their
predecessors in Peru.&lt;br/&gt;