* 0211115
* Collaborative Research: Effects of Soil Borne Resources on the Structure and Dynamics of Lowland Tropical Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Joseph Yavitt, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/28/2006
* USD 266,032.00

Despite current interest in tropical forests as key components of the global
carbon cycle and as centers of biodiversity,we remain largely ignorant of the
inter-relationships among forest attributes
(e.g.,dynamics,diversity,structure),and the physical properties of the
environments in which these forests grow.In recent years datasets have become
available describing growth,mortality and recruitment of approximately 10%of the
global diversity of tropical tree species.These data result from the development
of a network of large-scale forest dynamics plots coordinated by the Center for
Tropical Forest Science (CTFS),and established using methods identical to those
used to survey and census the 50-ha Forest Dynamics Plot on Barro Colorado
Island (BCI),Panama. Just as data from the BCI plot have played a prominent role
in our understanding of the community-level consequences of ecological processes
played out at local scales,we will show how these plots now provide an
unprecedented opportunity to examine a venerable question in tropical
ecology:How do soil-borne resources influence the variation in forest structure
and demographic turnover rates observed among plots,and among habitat types
within plots? To achieve this objective we propose three sets of measurements.At
nine plot sites we will characterize variation in soil-moisture availability
through the year and throughout the plots using a hydrological model
(TOPMODEL).This model predicts soil-moisture saturation deficit based on
rainfall,stream-flow data and local topography. Second,at five plots currently
lacking soils data we will sample soil-chemical properties within
standardized,topographically-defined habitat types.Third,at the same plots we
will perform seedling growth experiments using mycorrhizal and non-mycorrhizal
pioneer species to assess plant-availability of soil nutrients for each habitat
type.These measurements will allow us to address questions at two spatial
scales.At the among-plot scale we will be able to ask how stem density and basal
area,as well as community-wide patterns of growth,mortality and
recruitment,correlate with moisture availability and soil fertility.At the
within-plot scale we will ask whether species exhibit specialization to
particular hydrological niches,and whether habitat types differ in soil
fertility,in turnover rates,and in local species richness.Resolution of these
broad questions concerning correlations among soil-borne resources and
characteristics of the vegetation will in turn permit us to refine future
hypotheses aimed at understanding the mechanistic basis for interspecific
variation in demographics and distribution. This study will provide the first
standardized large-scale measurements of the environmental context within which
tropical forests grow.Our trans-continental approach to testing questions of
ecosystem function and community organization has rarely been attempted,but it
will be essential if we are to improve our understanding of the biogeographic
and biophysical limits to our ecological generalizations.Understanding how
variation in water and nutrient availability determines forest
structure,composition and dynamics,and potentially influences local diversity
through niche partitioning,will be essential to predicting future vegetation
responses to climate change and will also provide a first step in guiding
management to protect forest diversity.Wide dissemination and application of the
results of this project is ensured by the active participation of in- country
collaborators,and by data sharing through CTFS.