* 0211172
* Continued Development and Application of 40Ar/39Ar Dating for Archaeometric Research
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/2006
* USD 269,497.00

Argon dating is extremely important to paleoanthropologists because it can be
used over almost the entire last 6 million years; this is the period when
hominids emerged and developed. Many significant archaeological and
paleontological sites are located in volcanic regions such as Eastern Africa and
contain strata which can be dated by this technique. With National Science
Foundation support the Berkeley Geochronology Center (BGC) will continue to
develop the technique of 40Ar/39Ar dating and apply this technique to a series
of significant paleoanthropological sites. The BGC has collaborated with
researchers at a number of sites in Africa, Europe and Asia, and with NSF
support such projects will be continued and expanded.&lt;br/&gt;The 40Ar/39Ar
dating method is based on the radiometric decay of a fraction of natural
potassium in geologic materials over time. The products of the decay include
40Ar, which remains trapped in certain types of geologic materials, such as
crystals within volcanic rocks. Measurement of the amount of 40Ar that has
accumulated in a rock or mineral, combined with knowledge of the material's
potassium content, yields the age of crystallization. In 40Ar/39Ar dating, the
material to be dated is irradiated in the core of a nuclear reactor for minutes
to days, in order to transmute some of the potassium to an artificial isotope of
argon. Then, both the artificial isotope, which stands in for potassium, and the
radiogenically produced argon, can be measured at the same time in a highly
sensitive and accurate mass spectrometer.&lt;br/&gt;The facilities at BGC
include three fully automated dating systems, each of which is capable of dating
anywhere from a single small crystal of geological material weighing less than a
milligram, to hundreds of milligrams, by the 40Ar/39Ar method.&lt;br/&gt;As in
the past, Archaeometry support will be vital both to maintaining routine
availability of 40Ar/39Ar dating for the archeological and paleoanthropological
communities, as well as advancing the capabilities of 40Ar/39Ar dating methods.
Though routine in many regards, evolving technology permits continued
improvements in the method's capabilities,. Such improvements pay large
scientific dividends by expanding the scope of problems that can be solved. The
principal motivations for this development effort are to: 1) sustain routine
access to high-quality 40Ar/39Ar data for archeological and paleoanthropological
research worldwide; 2) continue refinement of 40Ar/39Ar methods to improve
precision and accuracy, particularly in dating younger, smaller, or less
potassic materials, and 3) replace or augment old equipment to maintain high
levels of productivity and scientific excellence.&lt;br/&gt;Grant funding will
be focused primarily in three areas: 1) replacement of a Nd-YAG with a CO2 laser
for heating geological materials on one of our Argon extraction lines, 2)
installation of a robust UPS power supply that will permit uninterrupted lab
operation in the face of increasingly frequent power outages, and 3)
modernization of the computer control systems on our automated extraction
line/mass spectrometer combinations. The benefits of converting to a CO2-laser
based heating system are derived primarily from an ability to incrementally heat
large amounts of feldspar with a broad laser beam with uniform energy profile,
while accruing the benefits of extraction-line blanks that are many times lower
than the conventional resistance-furnace heating device currently in use.
Enabling the laboratory to weather short power outages (&lt; 1hr in duration)
will provide for continued efficient operation of three extraction lines while
protecting equipment from the occasionally devastating effects of sudden power
loss. Modernization of the computer control systems is necessitated by
obsolescence of software and hardware components, and is essential if innovation
is to continue.&lt;br/&gt;