* 0211196
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Modeling and Management of Process Induced Shape Distortion in Sheet Forming Processes
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Ahmed Sherif El-Gizawy, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 25,000.00

0211196&lt;br/&gt;Elgizawy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. A. Sherif El-Gizawy, Department of
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at the University of Missouri, Columbia,
Missouri and Dr. Maher Younan, Department of Mechanical Engineering, the
American University of Cairo, Cairo, Egypt. The main goal of the work is to
develop an understanding of the interactions between sheet-forming process
variables and resulting properties, based on characterization and space-time
evolution of process-induced damage. The investigators plan to develop an
effective method for characterization and management of process-induced
distortion in sheet forming. The nonlinear finite element method (FEM) is
combined with an optimization scheme based on Genetic Algorithm (GA) for
defining the process condition for global minimization of distortion in sheet
metal products. The developed numerical model will be verified experimentally
using high strength sheet materials. Implementation of the proposed approach in
the stamping industry will increase the robustness of forming processes and
improve the quality and consistency of stampings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
&lt;br/&gt;Process-induced distortions due to spring-back, wrinkles, and
excessive localized thinning alter the product geometry from the designed one,
and cause difficulties in joining and assembly of sheet products as in the cases
of auto-body and airframe assemblies. The work is expected to yield models that
can be used for design, control, and optimization of processes for fabrication
sheet metal products. The PI's novel approach is based on a combination of FEA
and genetic algorithms. The successful demonstration of the results could lead
to commercial solutions for one of the major outstanding problem in design of
sheet forming dies: predicting and avoiding springback problems. This
collaborative research will integrate modeling with experimental observations to
determine the effects of different process parameters to characterize and manage
process-induced distortions, and will provide unique training for conducting
engineering research for graduate and undergraduate students in both Egypt and
the United States. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund
Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;