* 0211303
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Globalization, Gender and Inequality in Rural Greece
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Gerald Sider, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00

0211303&lt;br/&gt;Sider&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses on
changes that have occurred over the last two decades concerning the social
organization of labor in agricultural communities of Greece. Since the early
1980's Greek agriculture has become increasingly dependent on immigrant labor.
At the same time women, who were traditionally an important source of labor in
the subsistence economies of Greek villages, have been increasingly incorporated
into the formal economy. Both these developments reflect the growing integration
of Greece into transnational and global networks of exchange, particularly since
its entry into the European Union, and have often been represented as the
modernization and democratization of the Greek countryside. However, these
developments also represent a fundamental transformation in the reproduction of
social inequality from an older discursive framework centered on gender and
kinship to a newer discourse centered on ethnicity and citizenship. This
research project will examine shifting discourses of inequality in a rural Greek
community as it has changed from a dependence on gendered, kin-organized labor
to immigrant labor. Using methods of participant-observation and discourse
analysis, the student will map out the relationship between the construction of
gender and national ideologies and the mobilization of agricultural labor. The
student will collect data both on how people think about inequality and on how
social stratification is organized in order to uncover the processes by which
social inequality is being reproduced at the local level. The project will
advance our understanding of contemporary processes of globalization and their
implications for local social organization. It will also advance our
understanding of the roles of gender and ethnicity in Mediterranean social
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;