* 0211864
* Collaborative Research: Modeling and Computational Analysis of Cell Communication in Drosophila Ogenesis
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Cyrill Muratov, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael H. Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2005
* USD 104,378.00

Muratov 0211864 Shvartsman 0211755 In this collaborative project the
investigators combine mechanistic modeling, computational analysis, and
experimental techniques of developmental genetics to analyze cell communication
networks in the development of the Drosophila egg (oogenesis). They focus on the
patterning events mediated by the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR),
during which a localized source of the EGFR ligand is modulated in space and
time by a distributed network of autocrine loops to produce a biochemical
blueprint specifying the formation of a pair organ. The investigators develop
mechanistic models of EGFR signaling in Drosophila oogenesis. These models are
necessary to directly test consistency of the proposed regulatory mechanisms, to
make the experimentally verifiable predictions, and to guide the design of
future experiments. The models should explicitly account for the key components
of the EGFR system: the receptor, four of its ligands, ligand processing
proteins, and intracellular signaling cascades. The nonlinear reaction-transport
models of spatially distributed EGFR signaling networks are analyzed using a
combination of numerical simulations, asymptotic techniques, and bifurcation
analysis. The tests of model-based predictions rely on experimental advantages
of Drosophila genetics. Signaling through the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
EGFR is essential in a number of developmental processes across species, from
fruitflies to humans, and is extensively studied at the molecular level. The
main goal of the project is to develop modeling and computational tools
necessary to describe reaction-transport processes in developing epithelial
layers. In the context of Drosophila, the investigators aim to capture a large
number of phenotypic transitions in eggshell morphology that have been observed
following quantitative manipulations in the doses of the regulatory genes. This
leads to a class of mathematical problems that are also relevant in other
biological and physico-chemical settings. Given the highly conserved nature of
EGFR systems, it is possible that the proposed analysis of patterning events in
Drosophila oogenesis may be used to understand the role of EGFR in the formation
of branched epithelial structures in the development of higher organisms. The
project has a significant educational component: it brings together and trains
students and postdocs in biology, engineering and mathematics.