* 0211036
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  A New Quality of Service Video Conferencing Model Across the Internet
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Magda El Zarki, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 30,000.00

0211036&lt;br/&gt;Elzarki&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: &lt;br/&gt;This
award is for support of a joint research project by Dr. Magda El Zarki,
Department of Information and Computer Sciences at the University of California
at Irvine, Irvine, California and Dr. Hussein Eissa, Computer and Systems
Department at the Electronics Research Institute (ERI), Cairo, Egypt. The
project addresses videoconferencing over the Internet. The two investigators
plan to develop a particular model for a differentiated services (diffserv)
architecture and to evaluate this model through simulation. They will explore
the implementation of the diffserv architecture in the OPNET simulator, and
study the performance of the architecture with both real-time and non-real-time
traffic. They plan to analyze the video/audio characteristics by using
videoconferencing applications &amp; capturing the generated packets to draw the
packet PDF curves (packet size and packet interarrival time). The new proposed
model is to guarantee the required quality by using some of the Diffserv simple
blocks at edge devices. It also uses the IP Multicast mechanism where possible,
to save more network resources. The new model is to rely on shaping the out-of-
profile streams, dropping packets in case of real-time marked packets, and re-
marking packets in case of non real-time marked packets. By implementing these
simple blocks in the edge devices, the overload on the core routers will be
minimized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
better understanding of video/audio streams over the Internet. and should
advance the state of art in multimedia networking. The project will lead to a
strong collaboration between the U.S. and Egyptian institutions. The
collaboration between the two PIs is likely to be productive since they have had
prior interaction, while Dr. Eissa was carrying out his doctorate research in
the year 2000 in the United States. The visits by the staff from UC at Irvine
and the ERI will be beneficial to the two institutions, and will help graduate
students in Egypt, especially with the experimental and simulation component
tasks. &lt;br/&gt;