* 0211681
* 2002 Physical Metallurgy Gordon Research Conference, Plymouth, New Hampshire, July 21-26, 2002
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Carlyle Storm, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2003
* USD 8,050.00

This grant supports the 2002 Physical Metallurgy Gordon Research Conference
(GRC), to be held July 21-26, 2002, at Holderness School in Plymouth, NH. The
primary goal of this conference is to bring together new and established
researchers to generate an understanding of the most important emerging research
directions related to the role of interfaces in physical metallurgy. Like most
Gordon Conferences, the Physical Metallurgy GRC assembles a 80 - 100 scientists
and engineers for five days in a casual setting that is isolated from outside
distractions with ample time for discussion and interaction. The conference will
consist of eight sessions with two or three speakers per session. One session is
reserved for late-breaking topics and posters. The speakers and chairs represent
a diverse group of experts from leading institutions around the world. All of
the NSF funds are used to pay for registration and travel expenses for graduate
students and post-doctoral researchers to attend the conference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last few years have seen an explosion of new
experimental and simulation techniques that provide novel atomic-scale
resolution descriptions of interfaces, quantification of microstructure, and
observation of interfacial phenomena heretofore unknown. Perhaps most exciting
are recent developments that have led to materials processing to achieve desired
distributions of interfaces and to exploit unique interfacial characteristics to
synthesize materials designed to match particular property profiles. The 2002
Physical Metallurgy GRC examines the latest advances in this multidisciplinary
field within the context of selected research presentations and ample open
discussion.&lt;br/&gt;