* 0211466
* Gordone Research Conference on Environmental Sciences: Water to be held at the Holderness Scvhool in New Hampshire from June 23-28, 2002
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Deborah Swackhamer, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 04/30/2003
* USD 8,800.00

0211466 Swackhamer The Gordon Research Conference on Environmental Sciences:
Water will be held at the Holderness School in New Hampshire from June 23-28,
2002. The primary objective of this conference is to present, discuss, and to
kindle new research approaches and directions at the interfaces between
chemistry, toxicology, and environmental engineering. The conference is unique
in the field of environmental engineering, due to its informal and intimate
setting, cutting- edge science, interdisciplinary nature, and small number of
participants. This particular Conference has been a forum for the consideration
of critical or even controversial ideas that have frequently led to the
development of new research agendas. In general, the Conference has a long
record of stimulating advanced research in industrial laboratories, colleges and
universities, research foundations, and government laboratories, and
establishing linkages amongst these communities of scientists and engineers. The
conference consists of nine formal sessions having 2-3 speakers each, with
discussions in each session led by a leading scientist/engineer in the field.
Speakers include established experts as well as promising younger investigators,
and are from the United States, Canada, and Europe. Several poster sessions are
also offered to maximize exchange and interactions among participants. At the
last session of the conference, two exceptional posters are selected and the
authors are invited to give short oral summaries. Graduate student attendance
and participation in the poster sessions is strongly encouraged. The session
topics include: Bioavailability and Reactivity, Reaction Mechanisms,
Heterogeneous Particles, Arsenic and Selenium Cycling, Mercury Cycling,
Frontiers in Biogeochemistry, PAH Exposure and Effects, Emerging Contaminants of
Concern, and Environmental Modeling. ***