* 0211327
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Cultural Analysis of Assisted Reproduction Practices in Argentina
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Judith Farquhar, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/2003
* USD 6,000.00

Assisted reproduction practices- laboratory and clinical techniques that enable
genetic human reproduction- are becoming increasingly prominent in Latin America
as viable and preferred options for creating a "family of one's own."
Significantly, Latin America is not the only "Third World" region where the
research and development of reproductive technologies are proliferating. Yet
biotechnologies are often assumed to be culturally neutral, bringing a standard
form of scientific modernity to any setting in which they appear. This
dissertation project, conducted by a student of cultural anthropology from the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, will focus on the community of
reproductive medicine specialists in Buenos Aires so to examine the social
processes and motivations guiding the acceptance and production of assisted
reproduction practices in Argentina. Through ethnographic methods of participant
observation, semi-structured interviews and archival research, this project will
investigate the local specificities of assisted reproduction: how do these
procedures engage and respond to particular ideas about science, modernity and
religion, values of genetic inheritance and parenthood, and economic and
political pressures. Because reproductive medicine is a fast-growing field with
far-reaching social and ethical consequences, it is important to understand the
processes by which reproductive technologies are enacted locally according to
social, political, and economic circumstances. This project will contribute a
culturally-nuanced analysis that will inform both academic and policy
discussions on the ethical, legal and social implications of assisted
reproduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;