* 0211499
* Transatlantic Transport Research Activities of the STAR Thematic Network
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* William Black, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2006
* USD 275,690.00

Transportation is a critical facet of contemporary life. Transportation is
essential for the conduct of economic activities and for the facilitation of the
movement of people, goods, and services that affect the activities of people and
institutions in myriad ways. Transportation also is a major source or pollution,
however, and the search for new transportation systems and approaches is a major
priority for the development of more environmentally friendly, sustainable is a
major goal in developed nations. This award will continue support for the STAR
(Sustainable Transport Analysis and Research) thematic network that involves
geographers, transportation engineers, and other transport-related researchers
from the U.S. in an evolving network of counterpart researchers from European
nations who are active in the emerging STELLA (Sustainable Transport in Europe
and Links and Liaisons with America) network. STELLA has received major support
from the European Community. STAR is designed to enable U.S.-based researchers
to actively engage in discussions, development of white papers, and other
activities to stimulate collaborative international research on transportation
and related themes in Europe, North America, and other developed nations. The
cooperative work between STELLA and STAR has three primary objectives: (1) to
create an institutionalized platform of exchange of scientific information, for
pooling experience, and for facilitating research cooperation among European and
North American transportation researchers; (2) to foster increased
understandings of causes and backgrounds of mobility behavior in the two
continents, with special emphasis on policy impacts; and (3) to foster and
created conditions for comparative research in Europe and North America
regarding behavioral motives, innovative strategies, and policy analyses
associated with efforts to develop more sustainable transport. STELLA and STAR
will focus their efforts over the next three years on five functional focus
areas: (1) Globalization, E-Economy, and Trade; (2) ICT (Information and
Communication Technology), Innovation, and the Transport System; (3) Society,
Behavior, and Private/Public Transport; (4) Environment, Safety, Health, Land
Use, and Congestion; and (5) Institutions, Regulations, and Markets in
Transportation. The majority of the funds provided through this award will
support the participation of U.S. scientists in annual working group meetings
associated with each of these five focus areas as well as overall cooperative
linkages between STELLA and STAR leaders. This award complements a substantial
award made by the European Community to support comparable activities engaging
European transport researchers. This award renews support for activities
undertaken with support from NSF Award BCS-0002695.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
STAR network will facilitate communication and collaboration among
transportation researchers in the U.S. and Europe. The cooperation of
researchers in the STAR and STELLA networks will help to identify major research
problems that need attention, and the workshops, seminars, exchanges, and other
activities undertaken by these networks will help build research teams and
foster development of research designs to make substantial progress in
addressing critical questions of national significance. In addition to advancing
scholarly research on sustainable transportation, STAR and STELLA will promote
research that has great practical utility.&lt;br/&gt;