* 0211008
* The Link Between Information Technology Research and Education, Teaching and Learning; Menlo Park, CA; March 4-7, 2002
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2004
* Nora Sabelli, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 02/29/2004
* USD 125,000.00

EIA 0211008 Sabelli, Nora SRI International

Title: The Link Between Information Technology Research and Education, Teaching
and Learning

The principal investigator (PI) of this proposal is seeking support for an event
in early March 2002 that is a combination of a principal investigator's meeting
for ITR awardees and a workshop for senior researchers and young investigators
in learning technologies. The purpose of the event is to reflect upon the
experiences, culture, and community of research in the learning technologies to
develop ideas that would inform a CISE-focused learning technology initiative in
FY 2002.

Conversations with and observations of many recent ITR, CRLT, LIS, and KDI
awardees have revealed that there is a kind of tacit knowledge involved in
building communities of researchers and practitioners in the emerging learning
technology field. Often, such tacit knowledge becomes apparent as a project
matures and thus its study and capture may be unjustified at the time of
proposal submission. Since learning technology has such strong practical
threads, tacit knowledge gained from theory building and research should inform
practice to reduce the time required for research and theories to find their way
into real-world learning environments.

There is reason to believe that the event as proposed will offer a much needed
venue to discuss this tacit knowledge and the role CISE should have in expanding
research and practice in learning technology. Collaboration, reflection and
introspection, diversity of stakeholders, and long-term sustainability are some
of the topics expected to be explored within the contexts of simulation,
visualization, and modeling; distance and online learning; embedding learning
assessment and analyzing learner data; cultural, cognitive, and social dynamics;
and virtual laboratories and remote instrumentation.

I strongly recommend that the proposal be funded the level of $125,000.



