* 0211269
* Organosulfur Natural Products Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2003
* Rabi Musah, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 11/30/2003
* USD 18,000.00

This project will explore the chemistry of unusual organosulfur compounds of
natural origin. Initially, new organosulfur compounds from a variety of plants
in the allium (garlic and onion) genus from Africa, South America and the Middle
East will be isolated, identified and characterized. Synthesis and study of the
organic reaction chemistry of these new organosulfur compounds will then be
investigated. Thermal decomposition of the natural products will also be studied
since this study will be relevant to the fate of the plant constituents upon
cooking.

With this Minority Research Planning Grant award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Rabi A. Musah of the
Department of Chemistry at the State University of New York at Albany. Dr. Musah
will work on the isolation, identification, and characterization of new
organosulfur compounds from a variety of plants in the allium (garlic and onion)
genus from Africa, South America and the Middle East. The synthesis and study of
the organic reaction chemistry of these new organosulfur compounds will then be
investigated. Thermal decomposition of the natural products will also be studied
since this study will be relevant to the fate of the plant constituents upon
cooking. Other plants within the allium genus are known to contain compounds
with a host of biomedical science applications so there is a high probability
that new compounds with biological activities will be discovered as a result of
this work. Students trained during the course of this work will gain skills
needed by the speciality chemicals and pharmaceutical industries.