* 0211755
* Collaborative Research: Modeling and Computational Analysis of Cell Communication in Drosophila Ogenesis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Stanislav Shvartsman, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2005
* USD 155,900.00

Muratov&lt;br/&gt;0211864 &lt;br/&gt;Shvartsman &lt;br/&gt;0211755&lt;br/&gt; In
this collaborative project the investigators combine&lt;br/&gt;mechanistic
modeling, computational analysis, and experimental&lt;br/&gt;techniques of
developmental genetics to analyze cell&lt;br/&gt;communication networks in the
development of the Drosophila egg&lt;br/&gt;(oogenesis). They focus on the
patterning events mediated by the&lt;br/&gt;Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
(EGFR), during which a localized&lt;br/&gt;source of the EGFR ligand is
modulated in space and time by a&lt;br/&gt;distributed network of autocrine
loops to produce a biochemical&lt;br/&gt;blueprint specifying the formation of a
pair organ. The&lt;br/&gt;investigators develop mechanistic models of EGFR
signaling in&lt;br/&gt;Drosophila oogenesis. These models are necessary to
directly test&lt;br/&gt;consistency of the proposed regulatory mechanisms, to
make the&lt;br/&gt;experimentally verifiable predictions, and to guide the
design of&lt;br/&gt;future experiments. The models should explicitly account for
the&lt;br/&gt;key components of the EGFR system: the receptor, four of
its&lt;br/&gt;ligands, ligand processing proteins, and intracellular
signaling&lt;br/&gt;cascades. The nonlinear reaction-transport models of
spatially&lt;br/&gt;distributed EGFR signaling networks are analyzed using
a&lt;br/&gt;combination of numerical simulations, asymptotic techniques,
and&lt;br/&gt;bifurcation analysis. The tests of model-based predictions
rely&lt;br/&gt;on experimental advantages of Drosophila genetics.&lt;br/&gt;
Signaling through the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor EGFR&lt;br/&gt;is
essential in a number of developmental processes across&lt;br/&gt;species, from
fruitflies to humans, and is extensively studied at&lt;br/&gt;the molecular
level. The main goal of the project is to develop&lt;br/&gt;modeling and
computational tools necessary to describe&lt;br/&gt;reaction-transport processes
in developing epithelial layers. In&lt;br/&gt;the context of Drosophila, the
investigators aim to capture a&lt;br/&gt;large number of phenotypic transitions
in eggshell morphology&lt;br/&gt;that have been observed following quantitative
manipulations in&lt;br/&gt;the doses of the regulatory genes. This leads to a
class of&lt;br/&gt;mathematical problems that are also relevant in other
biological&lt;br/&gt;and physico-chemical settings. Given the highly conserved
nature&lt;br/&gt;of EGFR systems, it is possible that the proposed analysis
of&lt;br/&gt;patterning events in Drosophila oogenesis may be used
to&lt;br/&gt;understand the role of EGFR in the formation of
branched&lt;br/&gt;epithelial structures in the development of higher organisms.
The&lt;br/&gt;project has a significant educational component: it
brings&lt;br/&gt;together and trains students and postdocs in biology,
engineering&lt;br/&gt;and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;