* 0211011
* The Many Foundations of Newtonian Dynami
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Lawrence Sklar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 07/31/2004
* USD 109,998.00

SES 0211011&lt;br/&gt;The Many Foundations of Newtonian
Dynamics&lt;br/&gt;Lawrence Sklar, University of
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From its earliest days Newtonian dynamics has been
formulated in terms of a variety of foundational principles. The initial varied
foundations proliferated in the 18th and 19th centuries, and this variety of
possible foundational versions of the theory was augmented by a number of
important additional reconstructions of the theory's first principles in the
20th century. Some of these alternative foundations of the theory were motivated
by considerations of mathematical simplicity or elegance, or were generated
primarily out of the desire to find versions of the theory particularly suitable
for problem solving in novel ranges of applications of the theory. But a number
of the alternative foundations were strongly motivated by the desire to provide
resources that would help resolve long-standing interpretive issues with the
theory.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project provides some discussion of the
historical development of the panoply of alternative foundations for the theory.
The primary goal of the research, however, is to explore a number of
philosophical, methodological and interpretive issues that reveal how the
possibility of alternative reconstructions of the theory plays its role in
ongoing interpretive debates. The PI focuses on a number of foundational
structures for the theory, including contemporary axiomatizations, contemporary
Machian versions of the theory, and versions of the theory that rely on using
spacetime concepts from relativistic theories, to reconstruct Newtonian dynamics
and gravitational theory, and contemporary foundations based on extremal
principles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three specific issues are to be treated.
First, exponents of alternative axiomatizations of Newtonian dynamics have taken
deeply opposed attitudes toward the concept of "force" in the theory. Is force
an uneliminable component of the ontology required by the theory, or can its
place be given a completely representationalist account? How do the new
axiomatic reconstructions play into the (very old) debate? Second, three
separate foundational reconstructions can play important roles in the famous
debates about the nature of space and time, debates reaching back to the
controversy between Leibniz and Newton at the very beginnings of the theory.
Structuralist axiomatizations provide a newly coherent approach to a
representationalist version of the theory that can be used both by
substantivalists and relationists to back up their claims. Third, the spacetime
versions of the theory relying on apparatus retro-fitted to the theory from
special and general relativity provide a new context in which the old
ontological debate can gain new insights. Contemporary Machianism provides,
perhaps, the version of the theory most suited to the relationist. But its
nature and its relation to the orthodox theory opens up many interesting
questions about what it is to iointerpretli a foundational
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contemporary formalizations of the theory that
ground it in an extremal principle allow us new insights into the question of
the legitimacy of such modes of explanation as fundamental to a theory, rather
than as mere derivatives from a causal mode of explanation. &lt;br/&gt;