* 0211952
* Phylogeny of Didelphid Marsupials, a Taxon-Dense Approach Using Data from Nuclear Genes and Morphology
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Sharon Jansa, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2005
* USD 106,000.00

A grant has been Sharon Jansa at the University of Minnesota and Dr. Robert S.
Voss at the American Museum of Natural History, New York to study the
evolutionary history of South American didelphid marsupials (Didelphimorphia:
Didelphiadae), commoly known as New World "opossums." The16 extant genera of
didelphid marsupials comprise 75 species and represent the most diverse
surviving lineage of the old endemic mammalian fauna in South America; today
these species constitute the only substantially intact radiation of marsupial
mammals outside Australasia. While didelphids have long been of interest to
biogeographers and comparative biologists, their evolutionary history remains
poorly understood. The principal goal of this project is to infer the historical
relationships among didelphid marsupials in order to provide a secure framework
for interpreting their evolution and historical biogeography. We will collect
and analyze DNA sequence data from five, slowly-evolving nuclear genes with a
wide range of biochemical functions for a core group of 42 species representing
all 16 genera of didelphid marsupial. The resulting 8 kilobase dataset will be
the largest comparative molecular dataset for these species and will provide
critical data for reconstructing their evolutionary
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among other applications, the results of this
study will contribute to historical biogeographic research in South America,
provide a framework for understanding the morphological evolution of marsupials,
and inform the future use of didelphid exemplars in comparative biology and
palaeontology. In addition, the resulting database of DNA sequences will provide
materials for understanding gene function and the dynamics of molecular
evolution in mammalian radiations. Didelphid marsupials have long been
overlooked in studies of mammalian systematics and molecular evolution. The
results of this study will fill a conspicuous gap in our understanding of
mammalian evolutionary biology.awarded to Dr. &lt;br/&gt;