* 0211605
* Physiological and Biochemical Investigations on the Phototropins: Plant Blue Light Receptors
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Winslow Briggs, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 08/31/2005
* USD 200,000.00

The phototropins (phot1 and phot2) are a unique family of plant photoreceptors
that bind two molecules of flavin mononucleotide (FMN) as their chromophores.
Blue and UV-A light cause rapid autophosphorylation of these photoreceptors. In
all plans thus far investigated, phot1 is associated with the plasma membrane
and preliminary evidence indicates that phot2 is as well. The phototropins
participate in phototropism (growth toward a blue or UV-A light source), light
perception for chloroplast movement (avoidance by mutual shading in high light,
moving to maximize light interception in low light), stomatal opening, rapid
inhibition of growth of dark-grown seedlings, and likely solar tracking in those
species that have that response. The FMN chromophores are bound tightly in
specialized domains designated LOV1 and LOV2 (domains found in signaling
proteins that respond to Light, Oxygen, or Voltage). The phototropin LOV domains
undergo a unique photochemistry involving light-activated formation of a flavin
triplet state that decays within microseconds to a metastable signaling state, a
cysteinyl adduct at the C94a) carbon of the FMN. This signaling state decays to
the dark state in a few seconds or minutes depending on which LOV domain is
involved. The project will explore how this identical initial photochemistry
(adduct formation) and biochemistry (autophosphorylation) can activate such
different processes, some requiring cell-cell communication and other entirely
cell autonomous. It will also explore the roles of the individual LOV domains in
these various processes. We already know that only LOV2 is required for full
autophosphorylation in phot1, but that either LOV1 or LOV2 can mediate
phosphorylation of phot2. We also know that LOV2 is sufficient to restore the
phototropic response in a null phot1 mutant but do not know for any of the other
responses. Sorting out the roles of the two phototropins and of the individual
LOV domains in each of the responses is the first major goal of the project. A
second major goal is to determine the cellular and subcellular distribution of
phot2 (we already have this information for phot1), information basic to an
understanding of its function. Finally we hope to identify downstream reacting
partners in one or more of the responses and determine where the signaling
pathways diverge for the different responses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
phototropins are vital to normal plant growth and development for several
reasons: first, phototropism is a mechanism to insure maximal harvest of light
energy for photosynthesis, clearly of importance in maximizing plant growth for
whatever purpose-food, structural materials, fiber, production of medicinal
drugs, etc. Second, for plants like cotton that have leaves that track the sun
and remain at right angles to the direction of the incident sunlight the sun's
angle changes, solar tracking of mature leaves serves the same function:
maximizing photosynthesis and hence plant growth. Third, leaf expansion is an
absolute requisite for photosynthesis. In the absence of the phototropins,
leaves are dwarfed and curled, and severely impaired in their function. Fourth,
the capacity to regulate the position of the chloroplasts in the leaf cells is
essential a) to maximize photosynthesis by minimizing mutual shading in dim
light, and b) to prevent photodamage to the chloroplasts by maximizing mutual
shading in very bright light. Finally, light regulation of stomatal opening
controls the rate at which carbon dioxide is taken in for photosynthesis
balanced against loss of water. Without this regulation, normal photosynthetic
function would be severely impaired. Thus along with the other known plant
photoreceptors, the phytochromes and cryptochromes, the phototropins play a
vital role in plant development and homeostasis. Their role in human welfare is
clearly a major one. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;