* 0211034
* Ceramics, Colonialism, and Household Practice at Zuni Pueblo, New Mexico, A.D. 1300-1900
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Barbara Mills, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2005
* USD 98,425.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Barbara Mills and her colleagues
will conduct one year of laboratory analyses to investigate the effects of
European colonization at Zuni Pueblo. Zuni was the first Pueblo area reached
during the Spanish entradas of the 16th century and is an excellent example of a
Native American community lying on the frontier of colonialism. Like other
Pueblo areas, population decline, settlement coalescence, religious repression,
economic oppression, and the adoption of new foods and technologies all took
place at Zuni while under Spanish, Mexican, and American governance. Although
the Zuni area has enormous potential for looking at the processes of colonialism
from an archaeological perspective, past work was conducted prior to modern
systematic methods of excavations and analysis. A recent excavation project
conducted by the Pueblo of Zuni has resulted in the first systematic collection
of materials from one of the contact period Zuni Pueblos - Zuni Pueblo itself.
Zuni Pueblo (Halona:wa) has been continuously occupied since the late 13th
century and it provides a unique context to investigate the processes of
colonialism in a Native American community. This project will support analyses
of the large collection of ceramics, supplemental funding for botanical
analyses, and travel for the faunal and botanical analysts to come to Arizona to
participate in an advanced seminar on the project. Dr. Mills's research will
include the analysis of ceramic assemblages from over six centuries of
occupation at Zuni Pueblo, focusing on the following research objectives: (1)
establishing a baseline chronology for the project; (2) investigating the timing
and rate of change in Zuni diet and cuisine; (3) evaluating the impact of
colonialism on the organization of household labor; and (4) exploring how Zuni
identity was constructed and maintained through material culture. Intensive
ceramic analyses will be conducted over one year, including analyses of
production technology, changes in vessel forms, chemical analyses of food
residues, and design analyses. The ceramic data will be compared to the results
of pollen, macrobotanical, and faunal analyses for a comprehensive analysis of
how diet and food preparation changed through time. This research is important
for several reasons. It will provide the Zuni people with information about
their past that is only accessible through archaeological research. It will also
provide important insights into how cultures in contact interact, including
changes in diet and cuisine, labor, and identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;