* 0211626
* Interfacial Water from Molecular to Mesoscopic Scale
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Ken Dill, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing grant
* raima larter
* 02/28/2005
* USD 274,185.00

Alenka Luzar of the University of California, San Francisco, is supported by the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program for theoretical research
directed toward assessing time scales of water dynamics in restricted
environments on different length scales ranging from molecular events of
hydrogen bond dynamics to kinetics of surface-induced evaporation on a
mesoscopic scale. On the molecular scale, a new methodology to analyze hydrogen
bond kinetics will be developed and applied to solutions of selected amino acids
and alanine-based oligopeptides with varying chain length. This effort will
utilize a combination of formal theory and molecular dynamics simulations, and
will involve direct collaboration with neutron scattering experimentalists. On
mesoscopic scales, the development of powerful umbrella sampling/Monte Carlo
algorithms, in conjunction with a coarse-grained model of confined aqueous
systems, will enable calculations of activation barriers for capillary
evaporation at increased surface separations. This effort aims to extract a
scaling law for the barrier height in order to bridge the gap between
macroscopic measurements and limited-size model systems. Finally, in a related
project, the occurrence of spontaneous liquid-vapor microphase transitions in a
hydrophobic pocket will be explored in molecular dynamics simulations. Outcomes
from this research are expected to impact disciplines concerned with dynamic
aspects of interfacial water and hydrophobicity, ranging from colloids and
materials science to biophysics.

Understanding the molecular aspects of water dynamics in restricted geometries
is central to variety of problems in biophysics and cell biology. This research
is expected to impact a number of fields where the effects of water are
important, from the development of new bioactive compounds and improved optical
fibers to research into biological structures such as proteins and self-
assembling materials studied in nanotechnology. As well, research outcomes will
assist in the design of surfaces that have optimized dewetting ability. Such
surfaces are promising for practical applications such as rain-repellent
coatings.