* 0211848
* Relationship Among Host Tree Species Diversity, Soil Fertility, and Carbon Availability in Maintaining Belowground Ectomycorrhizal Community Structure and Function
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Joan Henson, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2006
* USD 299,981.00

Integrated studies of interactions among plants, microbes, and the soils they
inhabit are&lt;br/&gt;critical to our understanding of ecosystem function. We
propose to use a combination of&lt;br/&gt;biochemical and molecular-genetic
methods to determine effects of artificial defoliation of&lt;br/&gt;Pinus
contorta (lodgepole pine) on structure and function of ectomycorrhizal
(EM)&lt;br/&gt;communities in pure P. contorta and mixed P. contorta/Picea
engelmannii (Engelmann&lt;br/&gt;spruce) stands. We will defoliate only the pine
in both pure P. contorta and mixed P.&lt;br/&gt;contorta/P. engelmannii patches
formed within mixed stands by small-scale disturbance. We&lt;br/&gt;will then
determine how defoliation affects EM fungal community structure, activities
of&lt;br/&gt;enzymes that break down litter, and enzymatic function of soil
fungal communities. We will&lt;br/&gt;sample across a soil fertility gradient
created by a transition from relatively nutrient-rich&lt;br/&gt;andesite,
through a transition zone created by glacial activity, to nutrient-poor
rhyolite. By&lt;br/&gt;doing so, we will determine how interactions among carbon
flow to roots, tree species&lt;br/&gt;diversity, and soil fertility influence
ectomycorrhizal fungal diversity and function, for the&lt;br/&gt;first
time.&lt;br/&gt;Our preliminary data from this system indicate that defoliation
of pine only in a patch of mixed&lt;br/&gt;pine/spruce can 1) significantly
affect the EM community of mixed P. contorta/P. engelmannii&lt;br/&gt;stands,
and 2) affect the EM of non-defoliated spruce. Our data also show that soil
fertility plays&lt;br/&gt;a pivotal role in influencing EM community structure,
and the work of others demonstrates that&lt;br/&gt;soil fertility can moderate
effects of defoliation and insect herbivory. We will be the first
to&lt;br/&gt;investigate how alteration of carbon flow to roots affects EM
community structure, EM&lt;br/&gt;enzymatic function, and below-ground function
in a mixed tree species forest, and the first to&lt;br/&gt;combine these factors
with soil fertility. We will conduct this study in Yellowstone
National&lt;br/&gt;Park, the centerpiece of the 11-million acre Greater
Yellowstone Ecosystem, which includes&lt;br/&gt;several National Forests in
three states. By using a combination of biochemical and
molecular&lt;br/&gt;methods, we will provide the most comprehensive picture of
these aspects of ecosystem function&lt;br/&gt;to date. Thus, we will add greatly
to our understanding of a pristine, economically important,
and&lt;br/&gt;geographically dominant ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;Our
education/outreach and broader impacts will be far-reaching. For example,
Cullings is&lt;br/&gt;adjunct at a Hispanic-Serving Institution and will teach
classes and seminars there, and students&lt;br/&gt;from that institution will be
invited to participate in the study. In addition, Cullings is a
member&lt;br/&gt;of the Ames Native American Advisory Council, an
education/outreach organization within&lt;br/&gt;NASA dedicated to bringing
science education to reservations. Henson has volunteered for 12&lt;br/&gt;years
as an ASM minority educator/lecturer, and has been a preceptor for NIH
(Institutional&lt;br/&gt;Student Minority Development) and NSF (Minority Access
Program, Science and Engineering&lt;br/&gt;for All) minority education grants.
In addition, and for the past 10 years her lab has hosted&lt;br/&gt;Native
American high school students and teachers through the American Indian
Research&lt;br/&gt;Opportunities (AIRO) program on campus. Her group also
assists YNP park personnel with their&lt;br/&gt;microbiology brochures and
videotapes for the general public, and maintains a Web site
about&lt;br/&gt;their work in Yellowstone (www.montana.edu.hotfungi). Henson
also participates in ASMs on-&lt;br/&gt;line science mentoring project. Students
from all programs will be recruited to participate in this&lt;br/&gt;project.