* 0211404
* Collaborative Research: Nutritional Investments in Children, Adult Human Capital, and Adult Productivities
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* John Maluccio, International Food Policy Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2005
* USD 127,029.00

The principal objective of this research is to advance understanding of the
significance of early childhood nutrition for education and health and for
economic productivity of adults in developing countries. Previous empirical
studies on these important topics are limited because they do not have data that
follows individuals from infancy and early childhood to adulthood and because
they do not deal persuasively with estimation problems that arise because
nutrition reflects past behaviors and because some characteristics, such as
innate healthiness and ability, are not observed. This study is examining rich
data collected by the Nutrition Institute for Central America and Panama (INCAP)
in rural Guatemala to investigate the impact of childhood nutrition for
individuals who are 25-40 years old when data are collected in 2002/3, but who
were 0-7 years old during the initial longitudinal data collection in 1969-1976.
These special data and appropriate estimation techniques are used to test three
groups of hypotheses: (1) Controlling for relevant community, household,
parental, and individual characteristics, better nutritional status in young
children is causally and positively associated with: (i) school achievement and
intellectual functioning; (ii) adult migration, health, and labor productivity;
and (iii) spouse characteristics and assets acquired through marriage. (2)
Through its effects on accumulated physical and intellectual capital, better
nutrition during early childhood is causally and positively related to: (i)
higher occupational mobility; (ii) higher productivity in agricultural and non-
agricultural employment; (iii) greater consumption; and (iv) higher levels of
material well being. (3) The economic rate of return to resources used to
improve childhood nutrition, incorporating costs in addition to impacts and
their respective time patterns, is high in such a
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall significance of the project is very
substantial. Malnutrition is pervasive in developing countries, currently
affecting about a billion people and is thought of have major negative effects
on education, health and economic productivities. But there have been no
previous economic analysis of effects of early childhood nutrition on adult
education, health and economic productivities using data that follow individuals
from early childhood into adulthood. Therefore the project estimates are very
informative about the magnitudes of effects of early childhood nutrition and of
a range of health and educational policies on adult health, education and
productivity. They, thus, strengthen the knowledge basis for policy formulation
that might improve significantly the welfare and the productivity of many of the
poorest people in developing countries.&lt;br/&gt;