* 0211547
* A Set of Maize Transgenic Lines for Localized Mutagenesis Based on the Ac-Ds Transposon System Mutagenesis Based on the Ac-Ds Transposon System
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2002,09/30/2004
* Hugo Dooner, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* TEST user
* 09/30/2004
* USD 140,612.00

The goals of this NSF Plant Genome project are to demonstrate that the
transposon Ac (Activator) can be used as a gene identification and isolation
tool, as well as a mutagen, in the complex maize genome, and to develop the
necessary tools to facilitate that use. The first goal was met in the initial
phase of this project where Ac was shown to insert exclusively in or close to
genes and to be, therefore, an excellent gene-searching engine in the highly
repetitive maize genome. A highly embryogenic bz wx inbred line was developed
and transformed with Ac* and Ds* constructs that had been modified to facilitate
the PCR isolation of the transposon-adjacent sequence. The main goal of the
second phase of this project is to create a comprehensive set of transgenic
lines that will serve as starting points for the production of future insertion
libraries. This phase will occur in two well-defined stages. The first will be
to demonstrate the germinal transposition of an engineered Ac* or Ds* element
and the ready isolation of DNA adjacent to the transposon. The second will be to
identify a method of maize transformation that will enable the production of a
useful set of transposon lines for localized mutagenesis. Once the above two
objectives have been met, the last stage of the project to produce a set of 124
transgenic lines with a uniquely marked element at evenly spaced locations in
the genome will be initiated. In that set, most genes in the maize genome will
be within 7 cM of a launching platform and will be, therefore, realistic targets
in a localized transposon mutagenesis experiment. These lines will be deposited
in the Maize Stock Center and will serve as starting materials for the
generation of future insertion libraries by interested scientists.&lt;br/&gt;