* 0211829
* Workshop on Tools and Instrumentation for Nanoscale Research and Manufacturing, Grenoble, France, June 12 - 14, 2002
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2003
* Franz Himpsel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 04/30/2003
* USD 42,400.00

The NSF-EC workshop in Grenoble entitled Workshop on Tools and Instrumentation
for Nanoscale Research and Manufacturing is one of four joint events between the
NSF and the European Commission (EC) held in 2002. The emphasis in this workshop
is on tools and instrumentation for nanoscale research and manufacturing. The
workshop will explore the synergy between instrumentation for nanoscale
research, and its role in the areas of advanced materials and manufacturing in
the U.S. and Europe. Information about the workshops are on
http://www.nsf.gov/home/crssprgm/nano/start.htm. In addition, two of the other
workshops in this series are The Puerto Rico Workshop on Nanomanufacturing and
Processing, which is on the web at http://www1.eng.iastate.edu/nsf2002/nsf-
ec.html and The Workshop on Societal and Educational Impacts of Nanotechnology
which is posted at http://www.nsf.gov/home/crssprgm/nano/start.htm. %%%
Materials research is a huge driving force for innovations that serve to educate
and train future scientists and engineers, while advancing economic growth and
social progress. Frontier areas of nanoscience and technology are generating
scientific breakthroughs that revolutionize existing technologies as well a
create new ones in areas that include health and medical services,
transportation, environmental protection, energy efficiency, civil
infrastructure, information technology, and homeland security.