* 0211281
* Moderate and High Resolution Spectroscopy of Reactive Chemical Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Terry Miller, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2006
* USD 733,655.00

In his project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Miller will conduct spectroscopic detection and
characterization experiments on reactive chemical intermediates. The methods
used are medium resolution, vibronically resolved and high resolution,
rotationally resolved spectroscopy, based on laser-induced fluorescence (LIF)
and cavity ringdown spectroscopy (CRDS) techniques. The systems under
investigation are alkyl peroxy radicals discovered by the principal investigator
during the previous grant cycle.

Chemical reactions proceed from initial reactants to the reaction products
usually along one of several possible reaction pathways. The reaction
intermediates are generally characterized by different short lifetimes.
Knowledge of these reaction intermediates, the relative likelihood of their
occurrence and their lifetimes plays an important role in predicting the flow of
chemical reactions. The systems chosen for investigation are important to the
chemistry of the atmosphere, some industrial process, and to our general
understanding of reactive molecules. This research is designed to detect and
characterize such intermediates. Students and postdoctoral research associates
participate in this research. They thereby acquire important knowledge and
skills in preparation for entry into the scientific/technological workforce. In
his project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Miller will conduct spectroscopic detection and
characterization experiments on reactive chemical intermediates. The methods
used are medium resolution, vibronically resolved and high resolution,
rotationally resolved spectroscopy, based on laser-induced fluorescence (LIF)
and cavity ringdown spectroscopy (CRDS) techniques. The systems under
investigation are alkyl peroxy radicals discovered by the principal investigator
during the previous grant cycle.

Chemical reactions proceed from initial reactants to the reaction products
usually along one of several possible reaction pathways. The reaction
intermediates are generally characterized by different short lifetimes.
Knowledge of these reaction intermediates, the relative likelihood of their
occurrence and their lifetimes plays an important role in predicting the flow of
chemical reactions. This research is designed to detect and characterize such
intermediates. Students and postdoctoral research associates participate in this
research. They thereby acquire important knowledge and skills in preparation for
entry into the scientific/technological workforce.