* 0211577
* RUI: Cycloaromatization of arenediynes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Keith Russell, Northern Kentucky University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 08/31/2006
* USD 169,000.00

The PI's group will first synthesize a number of ten-membered ring enediynes
where alkene is part of an aromatic ring or heterocycle. Thermal reaction
conditions will then be used to induce Bergman cyclizations of these molecules
and the rates and activation energies of these reactions will be measured. The
alkene containing components of the endiynes will be varied so that
tautomerization, charge dependence, etc (ie electronic effects) on the rates of
these reactions can be studied experimentally. The co-PI's group will perform
high level calculations to theoretically determine how the electronic character
of the ene is related to the experimentally determined rates of these
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. K.C. Russell of the
Department of Chemistry at Northern Kentucky University and Dr. Carol A. Parish
of the Department of Chemistry at Hobart William Smith College. Drs. Russell and
Parish will study a chemical reaction known as the Bergman cyclization. The
Bergman cyclization is a chemical reaction which is central to the mechanism of
action of a number of anticancer antibiotics. Understanding the electronic
effects of changing the structures of the molecules which participates in this
type of reaction may one day have revelance in understanding clinical chemistry.
Students trained during the course of this work will gain experience in
experimental and theoretical and organic chemistry and be aquiring skills needed
by the pharmaceutical and speciality chemical industries.