* 0211600
* C-RUI:  Identification of Genes Regulating Cell Wall Integrity in Aspergillus nidulans
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Terry Hill, Rhodes College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2006
* USD 562,861.00

An essential determinant of fungal growth and development is the fungal cell
wall. Little, however, is known about the mechanisms by which the wall is
constructed or developmentally modified. The goal of this research is to
characterize a newly identified set of genes (Cal genes) in the model
filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans, whose primary phenotype
(hypersensitivity to the wall-compromising agent Calcofluor) has been correlated
with the presence of structural defects in cell walls. Presumably, the
functional alleles of these genes play roles in synthesizing or transporting
wall constituents, in wall maturation and modification, or in signal
transduction pathways that regulate wall metabolism. The work will proceed in
three phases. In Phase I the number of available cal mutants will be increased
by standard genetic methodology (six cal mutants have been identified to date,
but the screening shows no signs of saturation), and extensive phenotypic
profiles will be established for all mutants with regard to effects on cell wall
chemistry, timing and morphology of spore germination, hyphal morphology,
cytokinesis (septal placement), and the mitotic cycle. The objective of Phase II
is to identify each of several Cal genes by 1) transforming cal mutants with
cosmid or plasmid vectors carrying genomic (wild type) DNA and sequencing those
inserts that cause phenotypic rescue, 2) identifying the complementing genes
through transposon-mediated inactivation of each candidate open reading frame,
and 3) determining the phenotypic effect of null mutations via targeted gene
replacement. In Phase III, Cal gene products will be localized within the cell,
either by construction of fusions between Cal genes and a green fluorescent
protein gene or by epitope tagging and immunocytochemistry (EM and
LM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many fungi play important roles as producers of
commercial products or as pathogens of plants and animals, and our ability to
manipulate fungi to our advantage is limited by how well we understand the basic
mechanisms of their growth and development. This research will increase our
knowledge of fungal growth and development by identifying novel genes that
affect cell wall integrity. Because undergraduate college students will play
active, central roles in all aspects of this research, the project will also
advance undergraduate education in the sciences and provide talented young
people with experience relevant to making a choice to pursue research careers.
&lt;br/&gt;