* 0211512
* New Methods and Applications for the Dynamic Characterization of Proteins by the Combination of NMR Spectroscopy and Computer Simulations
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Rafael Bruschweiler, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2004
* USD 387,668.00

The objective of this research is to study protein dynamics by nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) and computational approaches. NMR relaxation parameters are now
routinely measured for the protein backbone, but less so for protein side
chains. While side-chain relaxation studies have mainly focused on methyl group
relaxation, the majority of side-chain carbon atoms belong to methylene
moieties. If not partially deuterated, dipole-dipole cross correlations
generally make their relaxation behavior and their interpretation difficult. New
relaxation experiments are developed that efficiently suppress dipole-dipole
cross-correlated relaxation in fully carbon-labeled proteins. The relaxation
data will be interpreted in terms of reorientational eigenmode dynamics (RED)
analysis that integrates NMR relaxation data with molecular dynamics simulations
for studying motional correlation effects in the ns and sub-ns time scale range.
Until recently, slower time-scale dynamics of proteins in the hundreds of ns to
ms range have been very hard to assess for spins that do not show exchange
broadening. The advent of residual dipolar couplings is now opening up this time
window for comprehensive experimental investigations. By applying and improving
the recently introduced model-free approach that uses dipolar coupling data in a
variety of alignment media with different alignment tensors, protein dynamics on
these slower time scales will be investigated for the protein backbone as well
as for the side chains. The dynamics information will be retrieved in the form
of averaged spherical harmonics that define an order parameter as well as the
anisotropy of motion. Realistic analytical motional models will be developed to
characterize motions of local protein fragments as well as collective motions
involving amino-acid groups and whole secondary structural elements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural dynamics of proteins play an important role in
biochemical processes. Detailed information on protein dynamics at an atomic
level is of fundamental importance for understanding their function. The overall
goal of this research is the exploration and development of new experimental and
computational methods for a comprehensive description of complex protein
dynamics on widely different time scales and to demonstrate their applicability
to biologically relevant systems. &lt;br/&gt;