* 0211372
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Professional Ethics: An Ethnographic Study of Clinical Bioethics In the U.S.A. and Canada
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Eugenia Georges, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 04/30/2004
* USD 14,000.00

This dissertation research by an anthropology student will study how
professional identity is established and negotiated by clinical bioethicists in
medical settings in the US and Canada. Using methods of participant observation,
structured and informal interviews, the student will study bioethicists at a
teaching hospital in Houston Texas, members of the National Rural Bioethics
Project in Missoula Montana, the Joint Centre for Bioethics at the University of
Toronto, Canada, and in rural teaching hospitals in Regina and Saskatoon,
Saskatchewan, Canada. The student will test hypotheses dealing with differences
in the roles of knowledge, skills, and character in credentialing professionals
in the US and Canada; the different role of stakeholders and resource managers
in the credentialing process in the two countries; the contextual and
interpersonal nature of authority negotiation of these non-medical specialists
in medical settings; and the multiple roles bioethicists will play in resolving
problems of daily practice. In addition to contributing to the training of a
young social scientist, this research will advance our understanding of how the
ethical dimensions of medical care are worked out in real life, and how non-
medical authorities gain legitimacy when they act as patient advocates in a
medical setting.