* 0211364
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant-- Reconstructing Middle Sican Fuel Use in the La Leche River Valley, Lambayeque, Peru (C.E. 950-1050)
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2004
* Izumi Shimada, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2004
* USD 11,557.00

Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Reconstructing Fuel Use from
Archaeological &lt;br/&gt;Charcoal from the Middle Sican Period, Lambayeque,
Peru (C.E. 950-1050).&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction of Drs. Lee Newsom and Izumi
Shimada, Mr. David J. Goldstein will collect data for his doctoral dissertation.
He will continue his participation with the Sican Archaeological Project, a
23-year effort headed by Dr. Shimada to reconstruct the prehistory of the
Lambayeque and La Leche River Valleys. Mr. Goldstein will be the first
scientist-in-residence at the newly constructed National Sican Museum in
Lambayeque, Peru, to complete the analysis of 3 seasons of excavation at Huaca
Sialupe a Middle Sican period metal and ceramics workshop. In particular, he
will be investigating the charcoal remains from metal furnaces, ceramic kilns,
and domestic hearths to reconstruct the use of fuel resources during the period.
In conjunction, he will conduct two-months of systematic forest resource
surveys, in the spring and fall, to collect comparative botanical materials to
complete his analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present state of forest
preservation in the area is dire. The area is sparsely covered by dry tropical
forests that presently face destruction in light of agricultural clearance and
fuel wood harvesting. This clearance is problematic as the local forests enhance
soil fertility and raise the groundwater level. It is thought based on
experiments carried out by Mr. Goldstein and Dr. Shimada's interdisciplinary
team, that Middle Sican metal production severely impacted forest resources in a
similar manner in the past. This threat, due to the fuel intensive nature of
ceramic and metal production, may have lead to forest conservation measures
during the Middle Sican, including measured fuel apportioning between different
industries. Through a comparison between the different fuel-use contexts at
Huaca Sialupe, and other sites in the area, he aims to pattern how and which
fuels were used in each context during this period. At the same time he will
utilize a methodology that will investigate the ancient forest ecology in the
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Goldstein will employ an approach developed by
Dr. Newsom based on traditional wood anatomy methods to look at the functional
growth anatomy of woody plants to identify the plants used as fuel and interpret
the growth ecology of these plants. To date, no studies of the ancient
environment adequately describe the stature, extent, and composition of forests
present in the area in antiquity. This research will permit the reconstruction
of the forest materials available to ancient artisans through comparisons with
modern specimens and anatomical wood keys. Ideally, the study will yield
information on the manner in which humans extracted fuel resources from an
ecosystem that is viewed as fragile in the present day. Mr. Goldstein's research
is a foundation work for the development of regional forest resource history,
and will demonstrate how people used their available resources to provide fuel
to satisfy their economic and subsistence needs in light of marginal resources.
Potentially, this investigation will allow local development projects to argue
for patterned conservation measures in the area in an effort to preserve the few
remaining areas still covered by forest today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;