* 0211526
* Collaborative Research: Spatially and Temporally Explicit Breeding Structure Analyses for a Tropical Dry-Forest Tree Species, Enterolobium cyclocarpum
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* James Hamrick, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2007
* USD 349,999.00

&lt;br/&gt;0211526&lt;br/&gt;Hamrick &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes to natural
landscapes can have profound effects on population densities and spatial
distributions of organisms, greatly modifying natural breeding patterns. Two
novel genetic analyses will examine spatial and temporal variation in the
breeding patterns of natural and human-modified populations of the tropical dry-
forest tree, Enterolobium cyclocarpum, located in Guanacaste Province, Costa
Rica. The availability of seed collections dating from 1995 provides a unique
temporal dimension to these analyses. Studies of the pollination ecology of this
species will supplement the genetic analyses allowing more informed
interpretations of the genetic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has
several broader impacts. First, it will determine if human-induced habitat
modifications significantly modify breeding patterns of tropical trees to such
an extent that natural levels of genetic diversity can't be maintained. Second,
temporal analyses will demonstrate whether studies of a few reproductive events
adequately describe breeding patterns of a long-lived tree. These comprehensive
studies should also assist the development of effective landscape management
plans that consider the spatial extent of natural breeding populations. Finally,
comparisons of the two genetic analyses should determine whether the less
resource-demanding approach dependably estimates breeding parameters. If so,
this could provide a major breakthrough for landscape-level studies of pollen
movement patterns in a wide variety of plant species.&lt;br/&gt;