* 0211687
* Quorum Sensing Mediated Regulation of Exopolymer Synthesis in Pantoea stewartii: A Critical Factor in Surface Attachment, Biofilm Formation, and Host Invasion
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Susanne von Bodman, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2006
* USD 352,001.00

&lt;br/&gt;Quorum Sensing (QS) is a conserved mechanism of population density-
dependent gene regulation. In Gram-negative bacteria, this generally involves
the release and perception of self-produced acyl-homoserine lactone (AHL)
signals. A grant has been awarded to study the mechanism of quorum sensing
control of capsular polysaccharide (CPS) synthesis in the Stewart's wilt
pathogen, Pantoea stewartii. subsp. stewartii. The critical regulatory
components of quorum sensing in P. stewartii are the EsaI acyl-homoserine
lactone synthase and the cognate EsaR response regulator. Disruption of the esaI
gene leads to CPS deficiency, while the inactivation of the esaR gene leads to
CPS overproduction, or hypermucoidy. Both conditions disrupt the normal
development of Stewart's wilt disease in maize. EsaR, a LuxR homologue,
functions by gene repression and AHL-dependent derepression in the control of
its own expression. Presumably, quorum sensing by repression plays a role also
in the control of CPS synthesis. The current model predicts that EsaR represses
CPS synthesis by direct repression of genes encoded by the cps regulon or other
biosynthetic functions that may contribute to the hypermucoid phenotype.
Alternatively, EsaR may govern CPS synthesis indirectly through intermediary
transcription factors. The first objective of this project is to define relevant
transcript start sites upstream and within the cps gene system to identify
potential EsaR contact sites. A consensus EsaR binding sequence will be
established to aid the localization of such sites in absence of defined lux box-
like DNA targets. Second, a comparative analysis of the fatty acid and
exopolymer composition of the wild type and hypermucoid strains will be used to
determine whether deregulated CPS synthesis is primarily a function of the cps
gene system and/or alternate biosynthetic pathways. Third, exhaustive transposon
mutagenesis of the hypermucoid mutant strain using a Tn5-based transposon with a
promoterless green fluorescent protein reporter function will be used to isolate
nonmucoid, fluorescent strains. Strains showing enhanced or depressed
fluorescence after introduction of a functional esaR gene will be analyzed and
characterized by reverse genetics to identify structural and/or regulatory genes
critical for capsule synthesis and control by EsaR. Finally, two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis will be employed to profile EsaR-controlled protein products.
The expected results will generate a comprehensive understanding of a seemingly
unconventional quorum sensing control mechanism and contribute to a novel
perspective on the role of surface polymers in plant and animal pathogenesis.&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;