* 0211785
* Functional Characterization of Two Distinct TCR Beta Genes of Teleosts
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Melanie Wilson, University of Mississippi Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 07/31/2005
* USD 240,000.00

The TCR beta chain constant (TCRBC) regions of both channel catfish and bicolor
damselfish are encoded by two substantially different genes in contrast to the
situation in mammals where these two genes are extremely similar. The objective
of this project is to test the hypothesis that these major differences in fish
TCRBC are important for immune functions. Determination of V region usage and
expression of the two TCRBC in catfish will indicate whether the two genes use
the same V region repertoire and whether cells expressing these genes are
compartmentalized within host tissues. Development of monoclonal antibodies
directed toward the two TCRBC gene products as well as antibodies to catfish CD3
epsilon and zeta family members (zeta and Fc-gamma) will be used in
immunoprecipitation and Western blot analyses to differentiate members of the
TCR receptor complex. Cloning of catfish lymphoid cells lines expressing
different TCRBC region genes will allow in vitro comparisons of antigen-binding
and receptor signaling processes using uniform cell populations. To identify the
membrane associated accessory molecules used by cells bearing the different TCR
receptors and to determine the initial signaling events following ligation of
the TCR, two types of experiments will be done. First, the composition of immune
synapses will be defined following receptor ligation using antibody reactive
with TCR complex members or cholera toxin. Secondly, the generation of
intracellular signals including tyrosine phosphorylation and calcium
mobilization will be measured. If differences in accessory molecules or
signaling capacities are observed, hybrid genes formed from C region exons of
both TCRB will be used to distinguish which portion of the C region influences
the observed differences. Thus, these experiments will determine whether
divergent TCRBC segments have the ability to recruit or activate different
signaling peptides. Regardless of the outcome, these experiments will define the
TCR complex used in catfish. The phylogenetic significance of two very divergent
TCRBC genes is unknown, but is potentially important for understanding the
evolution of immune reactivity in all vertebrates. This project will determine
whether the C regions of the two TCRB proteins have different regulatory
functions or merely serve as scaffolds for assembly of TCR alpha/CD3/zeta and
for holding the variable region distal to the membrane.

Two substantially different T cell receptors are used by lymphocytes from
certain fish species whereas those used by mammalian cells are essentially
identical. The goal of this research is to understand the impact of these fish T
cell receptor differences on immune and host defense functions. This project
will determine whether or not the different T cell receptors are capable of
using the same antigen-binding segments, and thus directing immune function
toward similar pathogens. The research will also determine whether the two
different T cell receptors use the same mechanisms to communicate with the
inside of the cell, thus influencing the type or magnitude of ensuing response.
At present, the significance of these fish T cell receptor differences is not
known, but may be important for understanding changes in host defense
capabilities during evolution.