* 0211056
* Structure and Dynamics of Polymer Blends Exhibiting Strong Intermolecular Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* James Runt, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

The first objective of this effort is a quantitative investigation of
crystallization and structure formation in model polymer blends directly at the
lamellar level, using tapping mode atomic force microscopy. A number of
questions that are key to developing a complete understanding of polymer
crystallization, in the neat state and in melt-miscible blends, will be
addressed. For example, does lamellar growth proceed uniformly, or are local
growth rates time-dependent and variable from lamella to lamella? How are the
answers to this and other fundamental questions influenced by the presence of a
high Tg, amorphous polymer diluent? To supplement the experimental work,
findings will be compared with predictions of a finite element model. The second
objective of the project is to develop insight into the dynamics of miscible
polymer blends exhibiting intermolecular hydrogen bonding, as probed by
dielectric spectroscopy. There has been little research in this area,
particularly with respect to the influence of intermolecular interactions on the
fragility of the glassy state and the dynamics of hydrogen bonding. The
motivation for this work was partly shaped by current interest in
thermoreversible networks and hydrogen-bonded, self-assembling supramolecular
structures. The focus of the dielectric experiments will be on model binary
blends of copolymers in which the number of intermolecular hydrogen bonds can be
systematically varied by changing copolymer composition. Certain blends in this
study will satisfy the assumptions of the LRC model for the dynamics of
reversible networks, and will provide a good test of the model. Finally, with
the support of an NSF - MRI grant, a hybrid instrument is under development that
will be capable of performing simultaneous dielectric and two-dimensional
infrared spectroscopic measurements. This new instrument will undoubtedly have
an important impact on the research described above.&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this research will have broad impact on our understanding of both crystalline
polymers and polymer blends, areas of great importance in the industrial sector.
In addition to the direct educational impact on graduate and undergraduate
students involved in the research activity, research results will be
incorporated into graduate level courses taught by the PI. Research findings
will be disseminated through publication in peer-reviewed journals, as well as
through presentations by the PI and group members at major scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;