* 0211697
* The Role of Terpene Synthases in Floral Scent Emission in Arabidopsis thaliana and Related Species
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Eran Pichersky, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2006
* USD 402,256.00

Arabidopsis thaliana is the most important plant model organism, and the
sequence of its entire complement of genes is now known. Although it is
generally believed that A. thaliana flowers mostly self-pollinate, we have
discovered that the flowers emit scent volatiles of the terpene class of
compounds, and previous reports do suggest that an undetermined level of cross-
pollination does occur in nature. The A. thaliana genome has 33 genes with
homology to known terpene synthases (TPSs), and we have shown that under normal
conditions, five of these genes are expressed exclusively in flowers, and 14
more are expressed in flowers as well as in some other tissues. In this project,
Dr. Pichersky's lab will characterize the floral scent of A. thaliana plants
from different environments, characterize the activity of the enzymes encoded by
all the flower-expressed TPS genes, perform a detailed examination of the
tissue-specific expression of these TPS genes throughout the plant, identify
insect visitors to A. thaliana flowers, and estimate the level of cross-
pollination caused by such visits. Related species that are more noticeably
scented will also be compared. This project is an interdisciplinary
investigation of the biosynthesis of floral scent and its effect on the success
of cross-pollination, encompassing methods from molecular biology to
biochemistry to ecology. The results will provide detailed understanding of an
important plant life trait that has hitherto been little understood. This new
knowledge will also be highly applicable to crop plants, many of which depend on
cross-pollination for seed and fruit set. Knowing how scent genes are activated
in the A. thaliana model system will facilitate the discovery and manipulation
of scent genes in important crop plants to enhance scent production and attract
beneficial pollinators. Finally, the project will provide excellent
interdisciplinary training and education for graduate and undergraduate students
both in the PI's lab and in formal courses, and the PI will continue to
disseminate the results to the general public in addition to reports in
scientific journals.