* 0211985
* Population Dynamics in Variable Environments
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Henry Wilbur, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2005
* USD 194,999.00

Three mechanisms that promote the persistence of populations in uncertain
environments are: 1) a variable age at maturation, 2) repeated reproduction, and
3) dispersal between populations. The project will study 18 amphibian species
that breed in a complex of 32 natural sinkhole ponds. All individuals of 7
species are photographed whenever they are captured. Computer-assisted matching
of these images yields data for capture-recapture models to estimate population
sizes and vital rates. These estimates will allow direct evaluation of
population dynamics and persistence in uncertain environments under realistic
assumptions. &lt;br/&gt;The detailed model for the most common focal species,
Ambystoma opacum, will guide construction of an individual-based model for
Ambystoma tigrinum, a species listed as endangered in several states. Population
dynamics in spatially and temporally varying environments comprise an important
area of population biology because they determine the context of life history
adaptation and population differentiation. This study is also important because
population ecology is the foundation for community ecology and for the
development of plans for managing populations for harvest, pest control, or
conservation action.&lt;br/&gt;The request for imaging equipment is supported
within this award as part of NSF's Facilitation Awards for Scientists and
Engineers with Disabilities, a funding mechanism that enables scientists with
disabilities to more fully engage in the research process. The project will
support doctoral and post-doctoral research. Undergraduates will be employed as
field assistants during the summer. &lt;br/&gt;