* 0211666
* Development of UW-PNNL Collaborative Curriculums in Nano-Science Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Fumio Ohuchi, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 06/30/2006
* USD 370,718.00

The overall goal of this proposal is to develop a prototype for a new type of
collaborative education&lt;br/&gt; that meets broad and expanding needs in the
areas of nanoscience and nanotechnology that will build on the research and
educational strengths of the University of Washington (UW) and Pacific Northwest
National&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory (PNNL) and their newly formed UW-PNNL Joint
Institute for Nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is primarily
targeted to speed up undergraduate and graduate entry into
the&lt;br/&gt;nanotechnology field and enhance education and research by
developing a new series of&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary nanotechnology courses
taught via a combination of local and remote&lt;br/&gt;instruction. These
courses will be taught by faculty at the University of Washington
and&lt;br/&gt;by researchers at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and be
taken by students at both&lt;br/&gt;locations, as well as other locations around
the state, region, and country. Some of the&lt;br/&gt;course offerings will be
specifically oriented to making introductory
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;nanotechnology courses available to students at
smaller undergraduate institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;Additional
nanotechnology offerings will attract undergraduates into the
nanotechnology&lt;br/&gt;program and train future leaders for industry by
providing hands-on research experience&lt;br/&gt;and contact with faculty and
researchers both within and outside of the UW. They will&lt;br/&gt;broaden the
nanotechnology curriculum and provide opportunities for students to
explore&lt;br/&gt;individual research projects and to collaborate with each
other and with faculty and&lt;br/&gt;researchers at both locations. The program
will contribute to the interdisciplinary PhD&lt;br/&gt;program in nanotechnology
and other relevant sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The courses to be developed
will increase distance learning curriculum offerings, while&lt;br/&gt; also
providing a new model of teaching/learning that can be adopted in other
disciplines&lt;br/&gt; and across other geographies to enhance research,
education, and faculty/student collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;