* 0211117
* Acquisition of a Reactive Sputtering System for Magnetic Oxide Thin Film Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Christopher Leighton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2003
* USD 155,000.00

This award from the MRI program supports the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
with the acquisition of a reactive sputtering system for magnetic oxide thin
film research and education. The ultra high vacuum system will incorporate d.c.
and r.f. sputtering methods at high substrate temperatures, with controlled
oxygen partial pressures. A novel gas injection mechanism will be employed to
yield the largest possible control over the ratio of inert gas pressure to
oxygen pressure, amenable to the deposition of a wide variety of epitaxial
oxides. This, along with a load locked sample introduction chamber and multi-
sample access will provide a highly flexible system with relatively high
throughput as well as the capability to grow conventional metallic and
insulating samples. The system allows growing novel magnetic oxide materials of
current and future interest. Possibilities include the deposition of
heterostructured samples involving combinations of non-magnetic metals,
ferromagnetic metals and magnetic oxides and tunnel barriers. Thin film
cobaltites, LaFeO3 exchange, and antiferromagnet/ferromagnet superlattices will
be studied. In addition to the research opportunities the instrument will also
support a unique educational tool for the training and education of graduate and
undergraduate research students.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award from the MRI
program supports the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities with the acquisition of
a reactive sputtering system for magnetic oxide thin film research and
education. The system allows growing novel magnetic oxide materials of current
and future interest. Possibilities include the deposition of heterostructured
samples involving combinations of non-magnetic metals, ferromagnetic metals and
magnetic oxides and tunnel barriers. Thin film cobaltites, LaFeO3 exchange, and
antiferromagnet/ferromagnet superlattices will be studied. In addition to the
research opportunities the instrument will also support a unique educational
tool for the training and education of graduate and undergraduate research
students.&lt;br/&gt;