* 0211490
* Collaborative Research: Roots of Agriculture in Southern Arabia and Mid-Holocene Environmental Changes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Eric Oches, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 84,825.00

With the support of the National Science Foundation, Dr Joy McCorriston (The
Ohio State University), Dr. Eric Oches (University of South Florida), and their
colleagues and students will conduct three seasons of field research in the
Hadramawt region of southern Yemen in order to investigate environmental and
cultural impacts of the middle-Holocene (ca. 5,000 years ago) monsoon decline
and accompanying aridification. Changing middle-Holocene climatic patterns in
southern Arabia forced people in the early stages of developing agricultural
subsistence economies to adapt their cultivation technologies, water management
practices, and herding strategies to an increasingly arid landscape. Specific
research objectives include: (1) reconstruct human economic behaviors in the
southern Arabian uplands during the wetter early- to middle-Holocene, (2)
provide wider regional context for high-resolution archaeological and
palaeoecological records by comparing sequences from different highland areas
(Wadi Sana and Wadi Idim), and (3) develop high-resolution chronology for the
archaeological and sedimentary record of environmental changes associated with
the middle-Holocene climatological shift in precipitation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary team headed by an archaeologist
(McCorriston), geologist (Oches), and Yemeni ethnographer (Bin .Aqil) will
reconstruct the archaeological record of human behavior in the context of
sedimentary and fossil records of vegetation, hydrology, and climate.
Archaeological excavations will focus on rock-shelters, pit-house dwellings, and
water management structures that have been identified in previous fieldwork and
are dated by radiocarbon and artifact typology between ca. 9,000 - 5,000
(calendar) years ago. The team will conduct research and train interdisciplinary
students through archaeological survey and excavation, ethnoarchaeology,
artifact analysis, paleovegetation studies, sedimentological analysis, and
paleohydrological reconstruction. Efforts will be made to include Yemeni
researchers and students in field studies in order to provide archaeological and
geological training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of the study will be used to
develop conceptual and GIS (Geographic Information Systems) models to explain
the cultural and environmental factors involved in the adoption of agriculture
in the changing middle-Holocene paleoenvironments of southern Arabia and to
contribute toward paleoenvironmental knowledge of a little-known region. The
research areas in southern Yemen, with their good preservation of all-but
abandoned landscapes once shaped by early Holocene human and environmental
processes, provide an unparalleled context to resolve Arabia's role in the
spread of early agriculture and its record of past climate and environmental
changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;