* 0211254
* Time-Resolved Measurements of Secondary Structure Formation in Single-Stranded Polynucleotides
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2007
* Anjum Ansari, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2007
* USD 730,500.00

The goals of this project are to obtain quantitative information on the
intrachain dynamics of single-stranded polynucleotides, and to determine how
these dynamics influence the kinetics of secondary structure formation. The
kinetics will be monitored using transient absorbance measurements with ~ 10
nanosecond time-resolution after a laser temperature-jump. The experiments are
designed to fill a big gap in the folding studies of RNA molecules, namely the
time-scales and pathways associated with the collapse of a single-stranded chain
and the formation of nucleating hairpins, which occur on time-scales of several
nanoseconds-to-microseconds. Previous measurements on hairpin formation have
been limited to microsecond time-resolution and have failed to provide a
complete picture. In particular, this work will test the hypothesis that
transient trapping in misfolded conformations is responsible for reducing the
effective diffusion coefficient for intrachain dynamics and for the observed
non-Arrhenius temperature dependence of the closing times. Kinetics of hairpin
formation will be measured for varying stem sequences designed to significantly
enhance the probability of mis-matched stems; the kinetics will also be measured
for varying solvent viscosity. A recent statistical mechanical study of the
folding/unfolding of a 21-nucleotide RNA hairpin, which included misfolded
states in the statistical ensemble, predicted biphasic kinetics with a rapid
phase occurring on sub-microseconds. This prediction will be tested. Finally,
direct measurements of the first contact time between the two ends of a single-
stranded chain will be measured using triplet-triplet energy transfer between a
donor and an acceptor attached to the two ends of the chain. To verify the
predicted contact times expected for an ideal chain, the measurements will be
done under conditions where the self-interactions of the chain are minimized.
The contact times relevant for hairpin formation will be measured under solvent
conditions that enhance self-interactions and induce local secondary
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this study is to develop a
quantitative understanding of how a single-stranded polynucleotide organizes
itself into simple stable structures and to extend the insights gained from
these simple structures to a deeper understanding of the intrachain dynamics and
interactions that lead to successively more complex RNA structures. Close
comparison between kinetics measurements and statistical mechanical studies of
the folding of RNA will provide an ideal ground to test, not only the details of
the statistical mechanical models, but also the thermodynamic parameters used
for predicting secondary structures in single-stranded DNA and RNA. The primary
educational goals are to implement an undergraduate program in Biophysics. A new
course for undergraduates "Introduction to Biophysics" will be developed as a
way of attracting students into the Biophysics major. A higher level course
"Molecule and Cell Biophysics" intended for advanced undergraduates and
beginning graduate students was developed two years ago and is now offered each
year.&lt;br/&gt;