* 0211673
* Reciprocal Signaling in Animal-Bacteria Development
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Edward Ruby, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 09/30/2004
* USD 480,000.00

0211673&lt;br/&gt;McFall&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The light organ symbiosis between
the squid Euprymna scolopes and the luminous bacterium Vibrio fischeri
represents the most common type of animal-bacterial interaction; i.e., an
association of extracellular bacteria with polarized epithelial cells that
begins anew each generation. In this two-partner model both the host and
symbiont can be raised in the laboratory, and genetic approaches in V. fischeri
have been developed to study not only bacterial differentiation, but also how
the normal program of host gene expression is affected by genetically altered
symbionts. Many of the developmental effects of symbiosis on the host and
symbiont, as well as the reciprocal signals that trigger development of the
partners, have already been defined. We propose to characterize the individual
stages of the signaling process, and to begin to generate ways to model the
process of bacteria-induced host development as a whole.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal will address the following specific
objectives and questions: &lt;br/&gt; I. Describe the signals, signaling targets
and pathways that control the bacteria-induced &lt;br/&gt; development of two
tissues critical in the specific initiation of symbiosis&lt;br/&gt; - What is
the role of nitric oxide in the specificity and development of the light
organ?&lt;br/&gt;- Is the NF-kB/Rel family involved in symbiont-induced
signaling and, if so, how?&lt;br/&gt; II. Determine the role of stage-specific
bacterial structures and activities in development&lt;br/&gt; - Are activities
of the symbiont's flagellar apparatus essential for host signaling? &lt;br/&gt;
- What changes in symbiont gene expression are a response to interaction with
the host? &lt;br/&gt;III. Understand why bacterial bioluminescence is essential
to host tissue development &lt;br/&gt; - Is a host cryptochrome the
photoreceptor in luminescence-induced crypt-cell
swelling?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the dynamics of animal-bacterial
associations, experimental approaches must be interwoven and coordinated. The
two research groups collaborating in this proposal strive to achieve this
integration. Execution of most of the experiments outlined in the proposal will
rely on microscopic, molecular genetic, and biochemical techniques that have
been developed for the study of this system. The proposal builds on past results
within productive areas, such as studies of the role of nitric oxide in
symbiotic development. In addition, questions of a more exploratory nature will
be asked with the aim of opening new experimental paradigms, such as how host
NF-kB functions in both tissue development and response to bacterial
colonization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;