* 0211754
* RUI Proposal:  Learning the Rules that Govern the Folding and Stability of Coiled Coils
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Robert Fairman, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2005
* USD 346,086.00

The objective of this project is to explore the relationship between sequence
and structure for very long coiled coils, such as found in myosin, using both
protein folding and design approaches. Three-pronged approach will be used to
accomplish the goal. First, synthetic genes that encode copolymers of 14-amino
acid blocks will be constructed, whose sequences are based on de novo,
minimalist-design principles. These genes will be cloned into expression vectors
to make dimeric coiled coils that range from 70 residues to greater than 1,000
residues per helix. Specifically, this system will be used to test the role of
intermediates in the assembly of long coiled coils, such as monomeric helix
formation and nucleation of specific helix pairing interactions to dictate
proper phasing of helices. After expressing and purifying these designed
proteins, their structures will be characterized using circular dichroism,
analytical ultracentrifugation, and single molecule techniques such as atomic
force microscopy and laser tweezing. Second, to complement these design studies,
a myosin coiled-coil rod domain will be used as a model system for folding
studies involving segment swapping between designed and natural sequences. In
addition, the myosin coiled coil will be used to help develop biophysical
protocols for studying designed coiled coils, using the instruments described
above. Finally, these synthetic peptide blocks will be used to make long
copolymers for the study of other coiled coil topologies and higher order
assembly to form fibrils. Long copolymers are generated by forming staggered
helical structures that act as templates for their own head-to-tail self-
assembly. Peptides will be synthesized and purified in the laboratory and then
characterized using the same biophysical techniques described
above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to understand
the basic relationship between protein sequence and structure. It is still not
possible to predict protein structure and function from first principles, mainly
because it is still not understood how proteins balance the major chemical
forces in attaining their three dimensional shape. Two approaches have been
applied to study this problem, defining the fields of protein folding and
design. The two questions are the inverse of one another: scientists in the
field of protein folding ask, "Can we predict the structure of a protein given
its amino acid sequence?" and those who work on protein design ask, "Can we
predict what sequence of a protein will result in a target structure?" Both of
these strategies will be used in the study of coiled coils. These structural
motifs, predicted to be in 1/3 of all proteins, involve the interaction between
two or more alpha-helices. The modular design of the experiments will allow
students to make significant achievements over the course of a summer experience
and an academic year working towards a senior thesis project. This cohesive
program in design, along with a strong modular component, should provide a
rewarding experience for students interested generally in interdisciplinary
sciences, including elements of biochemistry and biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;