* 0212554
* Collaborative Research: Octopamine-Mediated Behavioral Development in Honey Bees - Social and Endocrine Regulation of Tyramine Beta-Hydroxylase
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Gene Robinson, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 07/31/2005
* USD 204,464.00

Biogenic amines are compounds that can act as modulators of nervous system
function and behavior in vertebrates and invertebrates. Octopamine is one of
these, and one of the most widely studied neuromodulators in arthropods. In
honeybees, octopamine plays a role in controlling behavioral plasticity. Levels
of octopamine are higher in the brains of forager bees that leave the hive to
get food compared to levels in nurse bees that work inside the hive, and
treatment with octopamine causes bees to forage precociously. A particular
enzyme, tyramine beta-hydoxylase (TbH) is critical for biosynthesis of
octopamine, so brain levels of octopamine depend at least in part on the
activity of TbH. This collaborative project uses molecular, biochemcial and
behavioral approaches to determine how TbH is regulated by both social and
endocrine factors. Enzyme activity, gene expression, and metabolic biochemistry
clarify how octopamine is synthesized and released in the antennal lobes of the
brain of honeybees during development of the behavioral change. Results will be
important to understanding how an important neuromodulator is regulated in the
context of behavioral plastiticty and in socially regulated gene expression.
This work will have impact beyond neuroendocrinology to animal behavior and to
agricultural applications. There is also an important component of student
training at the predominantly undergraduate institution involved in the
collaboration.

