* 0212567
* Responses to Artificial Selection for Voluntary Activity in Mice
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Theodore Garland, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 07/31/2006
* USD 375,001.00

Natural and sexual selection act on complex, highly integrated phenotypes, but
theories of how evolutionary response will occur across multiple levels of
biological organization are non-comprehensive, and existing empirical tests are
both fragmentary and inconclusive. Previous NSF support allowed development of a
novel model system to study multi-level evolutionary responses to selection for
high locomotor activity. Selective breeding for high voluntary wheel running was
implemented with outbred laboratory mice. By generation 16, mice in the 4
replicate selection (S) lines ran 170% more than in the 4 randombred control (C)
lines (for females, " 15 vs. 5.5 km/day). This difference continued for
generations 17-29, indicating a selection limit. Increased activity has occurred
primarily by higher running speed. S mice run more at weaning and for at least
18 months. Proposed research will test the nature of the physiological limit to
selection, elucidate the mechanisms of locomotor adaptation, and explore the
neurobiology of increased activity. Research will emphasize training of graduate
and undergraduate students, as well as a postdoctoral researcher. A lack of
evolutionary plasticity in maximal aerobic speed is hypothesized to limit
further increase in wheel running. Effects of both increased and decreased
oxygen on wheel running and on maximal oxygen consumption will be studied. The
energetic cost of locomotion will be measured during both wheel and treadmill
running. Lung diffusing capacity will be estimated morphometrically. Components
of the skeleton will be examined for differences in size, shape, symmetry, and
amount of secondary remodeling. Myosin heavy-chain isoform expression will be
quantified in hindlimb muscle, and the "mighty mini-muscles" that occur in two
of the selected lines will be characterized biochemically and by electron
microscopy. For many of the above-mentioned traits, both genetic and phenotypic
plasticity, and potential interactions, will be examined by measuring S and C
mice that have been housed chronically with or without wheel access.
Immunocytochemistry with cFos as an indicator of neuronal activity will be used
to compare key brain regions in S and C mice at rest and during peak wheel
running (motivation, reward, &amp; addiction; voluntary control of movement;
spatial memory &amp; learning). Results will lead to a comprehensive
understanding of how increased activity levels evolve in a model mammalian
system. Mice will be made available to other researchers and they will be an
important model for studying effects of exercise on physical fitness, health,
and aging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;