* 0212228
* Demise of the Shell Mound Archaic:  Ecological Circumstances Attending Regional Abandonment of the Middle Savannah at 3500 BP
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2004
* Kenneth Sassaman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2004
* USD 100,289.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Kenneth E. Sassaman and colleagues
will investigate the circumstances surrounding abandonment of the middle
Savannah River valley (Georgia and South Carolina) by the fourth millennium BC
Stallings Culture. As part of the Shell Mound Archaic, Stallings Culture
developed over several centuries to include stationary riverine settlements, an
intensive, aquatic-based subsistence economy, and numerous technological
innovations, including the first pottery in the North America. Around 3500 years
ago, major habitation sites were abandoned as groups dispersed into the adjacent
uplands to resume a mobile lifestyle. Archaeological research on foragers shows
how local resource abundance contributes to sociopolitical complexity, but we
know comparatively little about the sustainability of such institutions relative
to the ecological conditions that enabled them. The proposed work is designed to
ascertain the local environmental impacts attending increasingly intensive land-
use and the extent to which such impacts contributed to regional abandonment.
Over the past decade, excavations at four Stallings habitation sites in the
middle Savannah region have yielded a large inventory of paleoecological and
artifactual data spanning the rise, florescence, and demise of local Stallings
communities. Analyses of the animal and plant remains, wood charcoal, land
snails, and material culture from these sites are designed to test five
hypotheses: (1) subsistence economies over the course of Stallings prehistory
diversified; (2) diversification resulted from diminishing returns on high-
ranking resources; (3) diminishing returns on high-ranking resources resulted
from overexploitation by Stallings communities; (4) overexploitation resulted
from permanent use of local environments; (5) technological innovations
contributed to, rather than alleviated, economic stress. All analyses will be
conducted by graduate research assistants under the supervision of faculty
consultants in archaeobotany, zooarchaeology, malecology, and prehistoric
technology. The relevance of the proposed work is manifold. Stallings prehistory
represents one of the few cases worldwide of a truncated historical sequence of
increasing sociopolitical complexity. Whereas archaeologists have devoted much
attention to the transition from foraging to farming, and thence the rise of the
state, virtually no studies have been conducted to examine the failure of
increasingly intensified forager economies and societies to "evolve." A related
issue is changing perceptions of human ecology. Ethnographic foragers have long
been conscripted as evolutionary ideals whose patterns of mobility, food-
sharing, and simple technology were a keen adaptation to preagricultural
conditions. A growing body of evidence shows that some ancient forgers engaged
in land-use practices that irrevocably changed entire ecosystems and historical
trajectories. This, in turn, bears relevance on modern environmental restoration
policy. Just as there are arguably no "pristine" foragers in the ethnographic
present to model pre-Western society, there are arguably no "pristine"
ecosystems over the course of human history for which to model environmental
restoration efforts. Accurate portrayal of both ecosystem and cultural diversity
requires deep historical context, and the Stallings archaeological record offers
an unparalleled opportunity to assemble a detailed ecological history for
comparative uses in anthropology, conservation, and environmental policy.





