* 0212832
* Comparative Phylogeography of Eurasian Birds
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Robert Zink, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 274,464.00

Robert M. Zink and Sievert A. Rohwer of the University of Minnesota have been
awarded a grant to use DNA sequencing technology to analyze patterns of genetic
variation within 25 bird species that have been sampled across Russia. DNA
studies clarify whether each species is actually a single species, or whether
genetic discontinuities exist. For example, the PIs have already shown that what
was thought to be a common Eurasian species is in fact three species. Such
findings have important implications for documenting biodiversity. By comparing
a large number of species, it is possible to determine if genetic
discontinuities are congruent, which, if so, can be related to the climatic and
geological history of this region over the last million years. The PIs sampling
design allows assessment of whether geographical barriers such as the Ural
Mountains played a role in the evolution of diversity within these bird species.
Using estimates of rates of molecular evolution, dates of origin of genetic
discontinuities can be compared to those in North American
birds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Essentially nothing is known about the evolutionary
history of bird species across Eurasia, because, until recently, some important
study sites were not easily accessible. The available samples provide the first
opportunity for broad-scale analyses of genetic variation and species limits
across Eurasia. This provides a firmer base for interpreting the significance of
patterns of genetic variation in North America, the other large temperate land
mass. That is, the PIs will be able to compare units of biodiversity on a common
DNA scale on the two great north temperate landmasses, North America and
Eurasia. The effects of climatic change, including glaciation, on the origin of
species will also be revealed. The PIs collaboration with Russian scientists
through exchange of personnel and joint fieldwork further enriches this research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;