* 0212339
* 2002 Chemistry at Interfaces Gordon Conference (7-12 July, 2002, Connecticut College, New London, CT)
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Dennis Prieve, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

CTS-0212339&lt;br/&gt;Prieve, Dennis C.&lt;br/&gt;Gordon Research
Conference&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this grant is for partial support
of the Gordon Research Conference on&lt;br/&gt;Chemistry at Interfaces to be
held 7-12 July 2002 at Connecticut College in New London,&lt;br/&gt;Connecticut.
The funds requested will be used to encourage wider participation in
the&lt;br/&gt;conference by young chemical engineering faculty and promising
graduate students by&lt;br/&gt;providing partial support for travel expenses and
conference fees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program for the conference has four
sub-themes: 1) Biomolecules at Interfaces, 2)&lt;br/&gt;Self-Assembly at
Interfaces, 3) Consequences of Colloid Forces and 4) Charge Effects
in&lt;br/&gt;Nonaqueous Media. 22 speakers and 20 discussion leaders have been
invited and agreed to participate in the oral program. In addition to the
invited talks, posters are encouraged&lt;br/&gt;to be submitted from all
conference participants, especially from those not invited to&lt;br/&gt;speak. A
30-minute time slot is included in the morning program each day for
oral&lt;br/&gt;overviews. The Vice-Chair will select between 3 and 6 posters to
be summarized orally&lt;br/&gt;each day in this time slot. Full examination of
all posters will be conducted in each&lt;br/&gt;afternoon's poster session. A
final report will be prepared and submitted to the National Science Foundation.
&lt;br/&gt;