* 0212093
* Characterization of the CO2 Concentrating Mechanism of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2006
* James Moroney, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 01/31/2006
* USD 416,000.00

Aquatic photosynthetic organisms account for almost 50% of the Earth's CO2
fixation and O2 evolution. The fixation of CO2 by algae plays an important role
in the global carbon cycle, and most photosynthesis in the ocean is accomplished
by phytoplankton, single-celled photosynthetic organisms. Carbon dioxide
diffusion is almost 10,000 times faster in air than in water and almost all
phytoplankton and macroalgae have a mechanism that concentrates CO2 from the
environment for photosynthesis. The CO2 concentrating mechanism is essential for
photosynthesis at atmospheric levels of CO2 and for the survival of
phytoplankton. In this study, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii will be used to identify
components of the CO2 concentrating mechanism. C. reinhardtii will be used as
the experimental organism since it is a simple unicellular green alga with a
single chloroplast. C. reinhardtii also possesses a robust CO2 concentrating
system and can be grown photoautophically using CO2 as the carbon source or
heterotrophically using acetate as the carbon source. The CO2 concentrating
mechanism of C. reinahrdtii will be studied using an insertional mutagenesis
approach. Insertional mutagenesis allows for the direct isolation of genes
associated with a mutant phenotype, thus permitting a genetic and biochemical
analysis of function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous work from our
laboratory, a large number of mutants that cannot grow on low concentrations of
CO2 were generated by transforming C. reinhardtii cells with BleR, a gene
encoding resistance to the antibiotic Zeocin. In these mutants that cannot grow
on low CO2 concentrations, we hypothesize that the inserted BleR gene has
disrupted a gene essential to the CO2 concentrating mechanism. We now propose to
characterize these mutants physiologically and genetically and identify the
interrupted genes. Mutants exhibiting linkage of the BleR insert to poor growth
on low CO2 will be tested for CO2 fixation and inorganic carbon accumulation.
Once inserted into the C. reinhardtii genome, BleR offers unique sequences
allowing the use of inverse PCR or TAIL-PCR and these methods will be used to
identify the interrupted gene. It is expected that some of the insertions will
be in genes encoding transport proteins or carbonic anhydrases required for the
delivery of CO2 to the enzyme that fixes CO2, ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate
carboxylase/oxygenase. It is also expected that genes encoding proteins involved
in photorespiration and the low CO2 signal transduction pathway will be
disrupted. The characterization of the proteins of the CO2 concentrating
mechanism will add to our understanding of how algae have increased their
efficiency of CO2 fixation. An understanding of this process will also help
scientists predict how marine organisms might respond to increasing global CO2
concentrations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will also contribute to the
training of students at the undergraduate and graduate level. Graduate students
will learn molecular biology methods and apply these methods to the
ecophysiological question of how algae acquire CO2 for photosynthesis.
Undergraduates researchers will also contribute to this project, gaining
valuable research experience. Our research program has attracted a number of
undergraduates from underrepresented groups and we will continue to recruit from
these groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;