* 0212963
* SGER:  Exploration of a Novel Nuclear Domain Tightly Associated with PML Bodies
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Jeanne Lawrence, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2003
* USD 97,319.00

This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Lawrence will pursue recent preliminary evidence of a novel nuclear "domain" or
"body," which typically positions immediately adjacent to PML bodies and appears
to form a "doublet" structure with the PML body. In recent years, there has been
increasing appreciation for the complexity and importance of internal nuclear
structures and growing evidence of their fundamental roles in diverse nuclear
functions. At the forefront has been intense interest in PML bodies (also called
ND10, PODs, or PML domains), because these structures are enriched for a
collection of important gene regulatory proteins. Dr. Lawrence's laboratory has
been studying the characterization of distinct nuclear compartments and their
structural and functional relationship to gene expression. In the course of her
very recent work she fortuitously uncovered evidence that there exists an
essentially unknown and uncharacterized nuclear "body" that is structurally
linked to PML bodies. The evidence for this is at a very preliminary state, and
there are major questions to be sorted out in order to establish conclusively
the existence of this as a bona fide nuclear body containing multiple nuclear
factors and having defined structure. The potential significance of the work is
that it may demonstrate a previously unknown part of cell structure, the
equivalent of a nuclear "organelle" with an unexplored role in basic nuclear
function. In addition, these bodies are structurally coupled with a body that is
clearly implicated in cell cycle regulation. Dr. Lawrence and her colleagues
initially discovered a regularly spaced pattern of ~10-20 very bright nuclear
"dots" (immediately abutting but not overlapping PML bodies) using an antibody
to the FLAG-epitope in cells engineered to express flag-tagged c-myc oncoprotein
at physiological levels. However, recent evidence suggests that the antigen
detected is probably not the myc oncoprotein but rather an endogenous protein,
possibly induced as part of a cellular reaction to MuLV virus (murine leukemia
virus). The first aim is to investigate the hypothesis that PML-associated
bodies indeed exist and are found in a variety of cells, using both
ultrastructural analysis and immunofluorescence to several other specific
proteins that prior evidence suggests may co-localize to these bodies. Second,
she will investigate the relationship between MuLV vectors or MuLV expression
and the induction of the relevant protein and/or body. Depending on results, it
would also be feasible to identify an unknown cellular protein detected by the
anti-flag antibodies and localized to these structures. &lt;br/&gt;