* 0212571
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Psycholinguistic Approach to Second Language Reading
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Judith Kroll, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2003
* USD 11,622.00

Under the direction of Dr. Judith Kroll, Ms. Ana Schwartz will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. Her research will examine reading in a second
language. For many bilinguals, reading proficiency in a second language does not
reach the same level of fluency as in the first language. One reason for this
might be that word recognition processes are not as automatic in the second
language as they are in the first language. Further, when reading in a second
language, bilinguals are unable to "turn off" some information from their first
language. The competition between the two languages makes it difficult for the
second language reader to ignore first language influences. Ms. Schwartz will
investigate how bilingual readers use sentence context to negotiate the
competition between their two languages. One set of experiments uses response
time measures to ask what type of information is available during reading in the
second language. A second set of experiments uses eye movement measures to ask
when that information is available. These experiments will involve English-
Spanish and Spanish-English bilinguals, as well as a monolingual comparison
group. An additional set of measures will assess the degree to which the answers
to these research questions are affected by individual differences in the
ability to allocate cognitive resources during reading.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research contributes to the development of more
comprehensive models of the reading process. It also has important implications
for how reading is taught in multi-lingual classrooms. Given the increasing
number of students in American schools whose first language is not English, and
the central importance that reading holds for academic success, it is critical
to understand the cognitive characteristics of second language reading.
&lt;br/&gt;