* 0212042
* Fine Tuning Photochemical Reactions Through Confinement and Cation-Organic Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Vaidhyanathan Ramamurthy, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 05/31/2005
* USD 315,000.00

The PI seeks to continue his work in the use of zeolites to help effect
diastereoselective and enantioselective photochemical reactions. The PI proposes
that the cations which are present in the zeolite cage, along with the
photoreactive molecule and chiral auxiliary, are critical to the success or
failure of the asymmetric photoreactions. Cations present, hydronium ion
concentrations present, and chiral inductors or auxiliaries present will be
systematically varied. The main goal of the project period is to use this
information to develop a model to help one predict and plan enantioselective
photoreactions within zeolites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr.
V. Ramamurthy of the Department of Chemistry at Tulane University. Dr.
Ramamurthy will work on using zeolites to facilitate asymmetric photochemical
reactions. The photochemical reactions to be studied produce molecules which are
chiral (have two nonsuperimposable mirror images) and make only one of the two
possible forms (a single enantiomer). Development of this family of reactions is
one of the most important problems facing the pharmaceutical industry today.
When developed, Dr. Ramamurthy's work could be applied to the syntheses of a
number of biologically active molecules. Students trained during the course of
this work will gain skills needed by the pharmaceutical industry which now
produces a number of single enantiomer compounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;