* 0212150
* Interrelationships Between Success and Learning Strategies Applied by Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Leonhard Bernold, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 06/30/2004
* USD 155,987.00

Faculty and administrators in engineering programs across the country will
readily admit to being puzzled by a shared national phenomenon: while the number
of engineering jobs continues to increase, the retention rate of freshman
engineering students remains disturbingly low (43%). In a positive national
context for employment in engineering, there is an urgent need for research to
examine the institutional, pedagogical, and personal reasons for students to
give up their pursuit of a career in engineering. Our study proposes to
investigate this phenomenon in ways that can help to inform and reform
undergraduate education in engineering.

The central question guiding the proposed research project is what can be done
to help engineering students to be successful in college and in their profession
given the fact that the teaching culture can't be changed instantly?

Grounded in existing research on student achievement in engineering, the present
proposal seeks to investigate those skills and attributes that create successful
and personally motivated undergraduate engineering students. We propose a five-
year longitudinal, multi-phased study with following components: Phase 1)
Learning strategies, attitudes, and success of engineering freshmen; Phase 2)
Effectiveness of Coached/Integrated Cognitive Empowerment of Engineering
Freshmen; 3) Longitudinal Effect of Cognitive Empowerment Beyond Freshmen Year.

The goal of Phase 1 is to establish a thorough understanding of "what freshmen
do" when it comes to "college-study" and how or whether their behavior changes
during the first year. We propose to use a combination of previously validated
instruments and personal interviews to generate a bank of relevant data from
approximately 1000 engineering freshmen starting in August 2002, as well as from
engineering students at higher levels. This data will provide baseline
information for the design of a series of interventions targeted to students
rather than the teaching environment; that is, rather than proposing new
courses, teaching methods, or instructional delivery systems, we will focus on
the identifying and providing cognitive and learning strategies that foster
healthy habits and coach students to remove weaknesses in the context of the
existing culture in engineering education into which first-year students are
immersed, both at NC State and at many other engineering programs.

Based on the experience gained from Phase 2, the project will embark on
sustained monitoring of student successes as they matriculate in different
engineering disciplines (e.g., mechanical) and possibly continuing its
interventions/support geared towards the different learning environments faced
by the students. Based on the experience gained from Phase 2, the project will
embark on sustained monitoring of student successes as they matriculate in
different engineering disciplines (e.g., mechanical), and possibly continuing
appropriate interventions/support judged to be effective in increasing student
success within the different learning environments encountered in the
engineering curriculum.

The impact of this study is expected to be universal: engineering colleges
nationally and internationally have established a similar teaching culture and
face similar educational problems. We hope to demonstrate how empowering
engineering freshmen to become effective and skilled learners can increase their
level of success and with it their retention and lifelong interest in the
pursuit of the intellectual and work-related goals of engineering.