* 0212999
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effect of Attention on Memory for Negative and Neutral Words
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Suzanne Corkin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 08/31/2003
* USD 18,000.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effect of Attention on Memory for Negative and
Neutral Words.

Abstract

With National Science Foundation support, Elizabeth Kensinger and Dr. Suzanne
Corkin will conduct a one-year neuroimaging study as part of Ms. Kensinger's
doctoral dissertation. The study is aimed at uniting two areas of research: the
detrimental effects that divided attention has on a person's ability to learn
information, and the memory enhancing effects of emotion. When our attention is
divided as we attempt to learn information, memory suffers. Ample behavioral
data support this conclusion, yet the changes that occur in the brain have not
been fully explored. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) the
proposed studies will investigate what network of brain regions is recruited as
a person attempts to learn information while performing a difficult distractor
task. The studies will also examine the neural cirtuitry involved in later
retrieval the information that was learned under that attention demanding
condition. It is also not known how divided attention affects memory for
information that we typically remember very well, for example, emotional
information. Daily experiences are often infused with an emotional richness that
has typically been absent, and even actively avoided, in experimental studies of
learning and memory. Although behavioral studies have shown that individuals
remember emotional stimuli better than neutral, it is unclear how manipulating
the attentional resources available at the time of learning affects memory for
emotional stimuli. The proposed studies will examine the behavioral effect of
divided attention on memory for emotional as compared to neutral stimuli. The
proposed behavioral and fMRI studies together will advance knowledge about the
effects of attention on memory for neutral and emotional verbal stimuli.



