* 0212368
* Electron-Ion Recombination Chemistry:  Determination of Fragmentation and Product Distributions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Nigel Adams, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 400,497.00

&lt;br/&gt;In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Adams will develop an independent technique
to determine dissociative electron-ion recombination rates and product
distributions. The method is designed to circumvent difficulties that have
caused contradictory results from previous studies with flowing-afterglow and
storage ring experiments. After initial tests on well understood systems, the
technique will be applied to those for which controversial results have been
reported in the literature. New systems where dissociative recombination plays a
major role will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The molecules of
interstellar and cometary gases, and of the earth's upper as well as lower
atmosphere, continually undergo dissociative ionization followed by
recombination. The rates of recombination as well distributions of the
dissociation products are experimentally determined and provide the basis for
theoretical modeling. Conventional methods for determining these parameters have
often given disparate results. This project is designed to develop a new method
to generate reliable data for testing of existing theories and the development
of new ones. The work will be performed with the assistance of graduate and
undergraduate students and postdoctoral research
associates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, funded by the Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Adams will develop an
independent technique to determine dissociative electron-ion recombination rates
and product distributions. The method is designed to circumvent difficulties
that have caused contradictory results from previous studies with flowing-
afterglow and storage ring experiments. After initial tests on well understood
systems, the technique will be applied to those for which controversial results
have been reported in the literature. New systems where dissociative
recombination plays a major role will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
molecules of interstellar and cometary gases, of the earth's upper as well as
lower atmosphere, continually undergo dissociative ionization followed by
recombination. The rates of recombination as well distributions of the
dissociation products are experimentally determined and provide the basis for
theoretical modeling. Conventional methods for determining these parameters have
often given disparate results. This project is designed to develop a new method
to generate reliable data for testing of existing theories and the development
of new ones. The work will be performed with the assistance of graduate and
undergraduate students, and postdoctoral research associates.&lt;br/&gt;