* 0212163
* Miniature Combustor with Liquid-Fuel Film
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* William Sirignano, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 08/31/2006
* USD 354,742.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0212163&lt;br/&gt;W. Sirignano and D. Dunn-Rankin,
University of California-Irvine&lt;br/&gt;Title: Miniature Combustor with
Liquid-Fuel Film&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new concept is advanced for the
miniaturization of direct-injection liquid-fueled combustors wherein the fuel is
flowed in a wall film that reduces heat losses, optimizes vaporization rate, and
inhibits quenching. The new alternative for high surface/volume combustors is
the delivery of the liquid fuel as a film on the combustor surfaces. This
delivery simultaneously cools the combustor walls and exposes the fuel for
vaporization. A simple analysis indicates that if the combustor were part of a
miniature engine, power levels from ten watts to ten kilowatts would be
achievable with combustor volumes varying from a few hundred cubic millimeters
to a few cubic centimeters and fuel flow rates varying from about a milligram
per second to a gram per second. The liquid-film burning concept extends beyond
compact power devices and applies to any combustor where high surface-to-volume
ratio is imposed or desired. Studies analyze the&lt;br/&gt;combustor over a
range of laminar and turbulent conditions using both experimental and
computational methods. The goals are to maximize the combustor efficiency and
stability while minimizing size and emissions. Although proof-of-concept studies
are promising, a substantial amount of research is needed to bring the film-
combustion strategy forward. This includes fundamental issues regarding swirl
flows interacting with filming surfaces, heat transfer and vaporization under
these conditions, fuel/air mixing in the chamber, and minimizing reaction times.
A range of technical issues are also examined, including fuel filming approaches
(e.g., porous cylinders or wall sprays), moving to high pressure conditions,
flame stability, ignition strategies, and tolerance of different fuel types.
Small combustors are quite sensitive to operating conditions, so it is likely
that control of the system will be important. Control of the fuel and air flow
rates, heat flux control through wall cooling, and swirl control are examples of
potentially important system inputs needed to maintain optimal combustor
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growing market of ideas that require
personal power ranges from electronic and telecommunication equipment (e.g.,
cellular telephones and laptop computers) to small, mobile reconnaissance robots
that can safely explore potentially hazardous environments. Many of these
lightweight devices demand tens of watts of power for durations on the order of
tens of hours, thereby driving the power source considerations towards those
with highest energy density. Because internal combustion has the potential to
simultaneously provide high power density and high energy density, it is natural
to explore this method of power generation. The micro-gas turbine (combustor
volume 0.04cc), the mini (0.078 cc displacement) and micro (0.0017 cc
displacement) rotary engine , the microrocket (0.1 cc combustion chamber) , and
the micro Swiss roll&lt;br/&gt;burner are examples of such exploration. These
devices are not yet performing at efficiencies that make them competitive with
the best available batteries, but they have demonstrated the plausibility of
internal combustion as a personal power source.&lt;br/&gt;