* 0212910
* Phylogenetics of Life History and Development in Bombycoidea [Lepidoptera]
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Jerome Regier, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 08/31/2006
* USD 283,617.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Charles Mitter and Jerome Regier of the
University of Maryland, Dr. Richard Peigler of the University of the Incarnate
Word, and Dr. Ian Kitching of the Natural History Museum (London) to study the
evolution of moths in the superfamily Bombycoidea, the silkmoths, hornworms, and
relatives. A relatively new source of evidence, DNA sequences in the cell
nucleus that encode proteins, will be used to reconstruct the major branches of
the phylogeny (= evolutionary tree) of these moths. The phylogeny will then be
used in two kinds of evolutionary studies. The first will test hypotheses about
the evolution of food plant use, including the postulate that in species
evolving a short-lived, non-feeding adult moth, unlike the typical habit of
drinking nectar with a long proboscis, the caterpillars are likely to feed on
large, easy-to-find plant species, or on many different plant species, or both.
The second study will address the genetic and developmental basis of anatomical
"innovations" during evolution, using a novel surface structure on the eggshell
of some wild silkmoth species as a model. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work is
part of long-term effort to reconstruct the phylogeny of the mega-diverse insect
order Lepidoptera (~160,000 known species). Lepidoptera play a major role in
terrestrial ecosystems, as herbivores, pollinators, and food for birds and many
other animals. They include innumerable crop pest species, and provide model
systems for fundamental studies of ecology, genetics, and physiology. A reliable
phylogeny will be an essential tool for organizing and guiding research on
Lepidoptera, including the search for environmentally sound pest management
strategies. A phylogeny is also prerequisite for understanding the spectacular
diversification of lepidopteran species and their key ecological features such
as specialization on different food plants.&lt;br/&gt;