* 0212067
* RUI: Control of CIITA Function and Immune System Gene Expression by Phosphorylation
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Drew Cressman, Sarah Lawrence College
* Standard Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 09/30/2005
* USD 278,141.00

&lt;br/&gt;When a body is threatened by foreign pathogens, expression of a
variety of immune system genes allows cells to react to this threat and initiate
an immune response. Central to inducing this immune response is the activation
of the master regulator factor, the class II transactivator (CIITA). CIITA acts
in the nucleus of cells to induce the expression of genes necessary for the
presentation of foreign peptides on the cell surface. The CIITA protein is know
to be present in both the cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments of cells,
although the significance for this bimodal distribution and the factors that
regulate it are unclear. It has been well established that the addition or
subtraction of phosphate group moieties to a cellular protein can modify the
activity and localization of that particular protein. Preliminary data indicates
that CIITA is indeed subject to phosphorylation; however, the effect this
phosphorylation has on regulating the function of the CIITA protein is unknown.
One hypothesis is that phosphorylation of CIITA specifically present in the
nucleus shuts down CIITA-regulated gene expression and subsequently induces the
export of CIITA from the nucleus out to the cytoplasm. This may allow the
organism to rapidly and precisely control the timing and extent of CIITA
activity, and therefore mediate the magnitude of the immune response. This
project will examine this hypothesis by: 1) identifying the cellular mechanisms
and factors that mediate phosphorylation of CIITA; 2) determining the effect
phosphorylation has on CIITA activity; and 3) identifying the protein domains
that mediate the export of CIITA from the nucleus. Understanding the cellular
and molecular mechanisms that control CIITA activity will be crucial to devising
strategies to manipulate the immune system and alter immune
responses.&lt;br/&gt;This project will identify the cellular mechanisms by which
the immune system is regulated and signaled to respond to the presence of
foreign pathogens. Laboratory experiments will determine how the central control
protein, CIITA, is structurally modified and regulated and what effect these
modifications have on the function of the protein within cells. This research
will provide a basis for generating therapeutic strategies to modify and enhance
the therapeutic abilities of the immune system at the molecular and cellular
level. Additionally, during the three-year timeframe of this project,
undergraduate students will participate in the program as summer or academic
year interns, establishing the foundation for further curricular development and
strengthening undergraduate scientific training at Sarah Lawrence College.
&lt;br/&gt;