* 0212616
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Diagnosis of India's Weather Prediction Model's Forecast and Simulation Deficiencies
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Sumant Nigam, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2008
* USD 30,285.00

0212616&lt;br/&gt;Nigam &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports a
US-India cooperative research project entitled Diagnosis of India's Weather
Prediction Model's Forecast and Simulation Deficiencies.&lt;br/&gt;US PI Sumant
Nigam, University of Maryland will collaborate with Indian meteorologists, Shyam
Singh, Sarat Kar, and Gopal Iyengar of the National Centre for Medium Range
Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF), in New Delhi. They will test the physics of
India's numerical weather prediction model by producing multi-year simulations
of the past climate, using observed lower-boundary conditions. Analysis of the
ensemble-mean climate simulation, particularly comparison with the corresponding
period observations, will allow one to determine the deficiencies of the model's
physics. &lt;br/&gt;Improvement in the model's physics will have a beneficial
impact on climate simulation and on short-to-medium range weather forecasts
developed by the NCMRWF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The research goal is to
diagnose the reasons for deficient weather forecasts produced at the NCMRWF by
India's only operational numerical weather prediction model. Consequently,
successful completion of the research will lead to improved weather forecasts in
India and better understanding of the observed modes of recurrent seasonal-to-
interannual variability, particularly during the Indian summer monsoon. There is
immense research interest in this topic among monsoon meteorologists worldwide.
Beyond the immediate objective of facilitating NCMRWF's participation in the
international Atmospheric Model Intercomparison Project (AMIP), this research
will help benchmark the model's performance, foster additional analysis of the
NCMRWF model integration's, and accelerate model development by drawing on the
experience of the international meteorological community. This award is jointly
supported by the Division of International Programs and the Division of
Atmospheric Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;