* 0212846
* Structural Analysis of Virulence Determinants and Genomic DNA Packaging Constraints in a ssDNA Virus
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Mavis Agbandje-McKenna, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 06/30/2006
* USD 434,360.00

Capsid proteins play many functional roles during the life cycle of viruses,
including host cell recognition, specific encapsidation of genomic nucleic acid,
and the formation of the essential interactions required for progeny virus
capsid assembly and release. For the ssDNA Parvoviridae, the exact role of their
capsid proteins in these processes requires further elucidation. Genetics
studies have shown that interaction of the major parvoviral capsid protein, VP2,
with host cell factors play a crucial role in tissue tropism and entry into the
host cell. The methodologies of X-ray crystallography, biochemistry and virology
will be utilized to study two closely related strains of minute virus of mice,
MVMi (immunosuppressive strain) and MVMp (prototype strain) and their
interactions with sialic acid, a component of their infectious receptor, to gain
insights into mechanisms of specificity of capsid interactions in virulence
determination. In addition, the X-ray structure of MVMi, in which approximately
30% of the ssDNA genome is ordered provides a unique model for defining
molecular interactions between a viral capsid and its genome that ensure
selective recognition and packaging. The aim is to identify a possible genomic
signature that drives parvoviral DNA recognition and encapsidation. Research
developments and achievements will be integrated with educational training of
senior undergraduate and graduate students in the use of a multidisciplinary
approach to study macromolecular interactions.