* 0212503
* Single-Molecule Optical Probes of Protein Biophysics
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* William Moerner, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2005
* USD 330,000.00

The objective of this project is to study protein and enzyme dynamics and
function using optical single-molecule detection and spectroscopy with in vitro
and in vivo techniques. The central goals of this research are to utilize
diffraction-limited confocal, total internal reflection, and wide-field
epifluorescence optical microscopy and spectroscopy to attack three primary
thrust areas: (a) characterization and understanding of the photophysical
behavior of several red-emitting autofluorescent proteins at the single-molecule
level, proteins which are key elements in a wide array of in vivo cellular
labeling and gene expression studies, (b) development of reliable and
reproducible methods for specific surface attachment of functional proteins to
transparent surfaces, so that unwanted proteins do not stick to the surface in
single-molecule studies, and (c) extension of recent success in observing single
transmembrane proteins in living cells to establish new methods and protocols
for observing single molecules in vivo. In all of these studies, the fact that
individual copies of proteins will be studied, one at a time, provides an
additional critical source of information about the presence and extent of
heterogeneity in these complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these
ends, physical, chemical, and optical expertise will be combined with the
molecular biological and biochemical expertise of several collaborators. Owing
to its multidisciplinary organization, the fundamental research in this program
will not only generate new knowledge about the biophysical properties of
important protein systems, but, in addition the advances in instrumentation will
provide novel groundwork for technology transfer to other relevant disciplines.
Furthermore, the increased knowledge about both optically driven and spontaneous
changes in the emissive state of fluorescent proteins may lead to design of
mutants with improved properties for application in biology and other fields. At
the same time, the broadly-based multidisciplinary environment which has been
assembled to perform this research will provide excellent training and education
opportunities for the next generation of biophysical scientists. This project is
supported by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the
Divisions of Physics and Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;