* 0212421
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Interactions of Tribal Governments and Local Authorities: What are the Consequences of Federal Institutions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Nancy Burns, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/31/2004
* USD 10,450.00

This doctoral dissertation research project examines the ways in which racial
animosity, economic disparity, and institutions shape relations between Native
American tribal governments and neighboring local governments. More broadly,
this project speaks to the ways that social disadvantage shapes local
intergovernmental relations, and how institutional &lt;br/&gt;arrangements can
subsequently alter those relations. With tribal-local relations, historical
circumstances have produced institutions that can offset social disadvantage.
This project assesses the bargaining resources that tribal governments gain
through those institutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Political science has long
been concerned with the ways that social disadvantage translates into political
marginalization in local government-usually, strong voices are amplified, weak
voices are diminished in local politics. Scholars have been equally interested
in the ways that institutions and federal interventions structure local
politics, and have often documented how these arrangements can attenuate social
disadvantage in a region. This study addresses both literatures by examining how
institutions and federal interventions, in special circumstances, can counteract
social disadvantage in local politics. While there is much to be learned from
the scholarship that has documented how those with power become even more
powerful, it is also important to understand how politically weak groups marshal
and deploy those resources that they have at hand. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
the intensive study of six tribal governments and their neighboring authorities,
this project identifies how the differing circumstances of tribal governments
cause tribal-local relations to vary. Specifically, this analysis examines how
differences in federal interventions, tribal governing institutions, and tribal
resources affect tribal-local interactions. These findings illuminate how tribal
activists can parlay their institutional circumstances into a more powerful
Native American voice in local politics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;