* 0212907
* Structure/Function Studies of Antifreeze Proteins and Their Enhancers from the Beetle Dendroides canadensis
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* John Duman, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 09/30/2006
* USD 357,820.00

The most active antifreeze proteins (AFPs) are found in certain insects, such
as larvae of the beetle Dendroides canadensis where they function to prevent
inoculative freezing initiated by external ice across the cuticle and to promote
supercooling by inhibiting potential ice nucleators in hemolymph and gut fluid.
Overwintering D. canadensis produce 12 AFPs which consist of 12- and 13- mer
repeat sequences which differ somewhat in sequence and number of repeats.
Certain of these AFPs are produced in the fat body (analogous to the vertebrate
liver) and secreted into the hemolymph, while others are produced in the midgut
epithelium and secreted into the gut fluid. The single layer of epidermal cells,
which lie under the cuticle and help to prevent inoculative freezing, also
produces a unique combination of AFPs, as does the Malpighian tubule epithelium
which produces the urine. The latter AFPs are presumable secreted into the
tubule lumen to promote supercooling of the urine. The unique combinations of
the different DAFPs present in these different sites suggest that certain D.
canadensis AFPs (DAFPs) have evolved specifically to function in these tissues.
This study will continue earlier work attempting to better understand the
functions and mechanisms of the DAFPs in relation to those sites. In addition,
this work will clarify the reasons for seasonal and yearly variations in
antifreeze protein activity. Recent studies have shown that to achieve optimal
levels of DAFP activity (freezing point depression, inhibition of ice
nucleators, prevention of inoculative freezing) requires the presence of certain
enhancers, protein enhancers and/or low molecular mass enhancers such as
glycerol. While glycerol and certain protein enhancers have been identified in
hemolymph, other unidentified protein enhancers are also present there, and the
nature of the enhancers in other sites (midgut fluid, etc.) is unknown. This
study will identify these enhancers. Because of their high specific activities,
insect AFPs have tremendous potential for applications, such as agriculture and
the cryopreservation of biomedical materials. Transgenic Arabidopsis plants have
been produced which express DAFPs that lower the freezing temperatures of the
plants. Improved understanding of the factors which control AFP activity in D.
canadensis larvae has the potential to greatly improve the performance of the
insect AFPs in these applications.