* 0212613
* Causes and Consequences of Variation in Colony Structure in the Termite, Nasutitermes Corniger
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Eldridge Adams, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/2006
* USD 238,000.00

The control of reproduction is fundamental to the structure and evolution of
animal societies. This project will examine the causes and consequences of
variation in the breeding structure of colonies of the termite Nasutitermes
corniger, focusing on the number of reproductive males and females (kings and
queens) and their apportionment of reproduction. The wide range of colony
genetic structures present within natural populations provides opportunities to
test hypotheses arising from the rapidly growing body of theory on reproductive
partitioning in social groups. Nest dissections, behavioral assays, and analysis
of a highly informative set of genetic markers will determine (1) how
reproduction is partitioned among co-occurring queens and kings, (2) how colony
genetic structure affects interactions within and between groups, and (3) how
colony reproductive characteristics change through time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite their ecological and economic importance, termites
are understudied relative to other social insects. Nasutitermes corniger is
particularly well suited to the proposed research due to its abundance and to
the comparative ease with which the queens and kings can be collected from
mature colonies. Besides adding to knowledge of fundamental aspects of termite
biology, this research will contribute to the broader understanding of social
behavior, reproductive competition, and the genetic structure of
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;