* 0212205
* RUI: Effects of the Antimicrobial Agent Triclosan on the Emergence of Antibiotic Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Marcy Kelly, Ramapo College of New Jersey
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 12/31/2003
* USD 126,237.00

&lt;br/&gt;Triclosan is a broad spectrum antimicrobial agent that is currently
found in many consumer goods. Triclosan inhibits the bacterial enzyme enoyl acyl
carrier protein (ACP) reductase. This enzyme catalyzes the last step in fatty
acid biosynthesis in microorganisms. Several studies have indicated that
decreased susceptibility to triclosan correlates with quinolone antibiotic
resistance. The quinolones inhibit the bacterial DNA metabolic enzymes, DNA
gyrase and topoisomerase IV. Resistance to the quinolone antibiotics maps to the
genes encoding DNA gyrase, topoisomerase IV, or to genes encoding multi-drug
efflux pumps. Triclosan resistance also maps to genes encoding multi-drug efflux
pumps or to genes encoding regulatory proteins that control the expression of
these pumps. The primary focus of this project is to determine whether triclosan
resistance contributes to antibiotic resistance in Staphylococcus aureus. S.
aureus is a human pathogen for which therapeutic options for the treatment of
infections caused by this organism have become limited. Preliminary studies by
this laboratory have demonstrated the triclosan susceptibility profiles of 12 S.
aureus clinical and laboratory strains. Triclosan resistance was detected in 10
of these strains. Among the 10 triclosan resistant strains, 4 are also resistant
to the quinolone antibiotics. This project will use molecular biological and
biochemical experiments to further characterize the nature of these triclosan
resistant strains. The emergence of antibiotic resistance is a growing problem
among pathogenic bacteria. The results of this project will lead to a deeper
understanding of the impact of antimicrobial product usage by consumers on the
emergence of antibiotic resistant bacteria. &lt;br/&gt;