* 0212597
* Protein Phosphorylation as a Biophysical Switch: Structural, Dynamic and Thermodynamic Responses to Phosphorylation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Linda Nicholson, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2007
* USD 450,445.00

Nature has designed a broad array of protein-based molecular switches that
direct and control the flow of information, energy, and molecular cargo through
living cells. One of the most important questions regarding functional switching
of proteins is how the covalent attachment of a phosphate group so dramatically
alters activity. The overall goal of this research is to elucidate biophysical
mechanisms by which specific proteins are regulated by phosphorylation. Two
model systems will be investigated, moesin and the c-Src SH3 domain. Moesin is a
member of the ERM family of proteins that are involved in dynamic interactions
with the actin cytoskeleton and the plasma membrane. SH3 domains are small,
modular binding domains that mediate protein-protein interactions through
binding to proline-rich sequence motifs. The moesin model system employed in
this research consists of two interacting domains, N-FERM and C-ERMAD that
comprise the N/C complex. Formation of the N/C complex prevents interactions
between moesin and its cellular binding partners, and is regulated by
phopshorylation of residue T558 in C-ERMAD and by PIP2 binding to N-FERM. This
model system represents a "regulatory rheostat" where phosphorylation is coupled
with additional regulatory factors to elicit variable activation. In a second
model system, the ligand binding function of the c-Src SH3 domain is regulated
by phosphorylation of residue Y57. This represents a prototype molecular switch
where phosphorylation of a residue in or near the binding surface alters
specificity and affinity of a modular binding domain. For each of the two model
systems, multidimensional NMR spectroscopy will be used to observe
phosphorylation-induced changes in structure, stability and dynamics, and
isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) for quantifying phosphorylation-induced
changes in function. The biophysical mechanism by which each protein is
regulated will be determined through amide exchange measurements, backbone and
side chain dynamics studies, and determination of macroscopic and site-specific
pKas. These investigations will provide a structural, dynamic and thermodynamic
framework for understanding molecular switching mechanisms that have not yet
been elucidated.

Reversible protein phosphorylation is a ubiquitous mechanism utilized by all
cells to switch protein function on and off. In order to visualize how protein
phosphorylation regulates function, the structure, dynamics and thermodynamics
of proteins in both phosphorylated and unphosphorylated states must be examined.
Although a few detailed mechanisms are now characterized, our understanding of
the varied mechanisms by which regulation by phosphorylation is accomplished is
far from complete. This project aims to determine the biophysical mechanisms by
which two particular proteins are regulated by phosphorylation. Coupling of the
thermodynamic and site-specific perspectives obtained from ITC and NMR,
respectively, will yield valuable insights into potential origins of binding
energy, and the mechanisms used to alter this energy in biological molecular
switches. These studies will advance our understanding of how biological
processes are regulated by phosphorylation, and will impact important areas of
research such as signal transduction, intracellular trafficking, and regulation
of membrane structure. The research objectives will be accomplished primarily
through the participation of graduate and undergraduate students who will
receive education and training in molecular biology, protein chemistry, physical
chemistry, computer technology, and multidimensional NMR spectroscopy.