* 0212005
* CRB:Manipulation of Vertical and Horizontal Heterogeneity in a Large-Scale, Restoration Experiment
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* John Callaway, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2006
* USD 396,129.00

0212005 Zedler Ecosystem degradation often involves the loss of topographic
heterogeneity, a critical ecosystem property that declines as sediments fill in
depressions, flatten surfaces and raise elevations. In southern California,
coastal habitat that is highly valued for its support of endangered plants and
animals has suffered catastrophic sedimentation, followed by altered species
distributions and lowered biodiversity. When recovery is attempted, topographic
complexity is typically ignored as sediments are excavated and restoration sites
contoured by bulldozer. Insufficient vertical and horizontal heterogeneity might
be a key constraint on the restoration of wetlands toward structural and
functional equivalency with undisturbed sites. In this project, we will
investigate how adding topographic heterogeneity might accelerate the progress
of ecosystem restoration. The principal hypothesis is that adding vertical and
horizontal pattern at to will facilitate the restoration of wetland structure
and function. To test this hypothesis, an entire 8-ha tidal wetland restoration
site within the Tijuana River National Estuarine Research Reserve (San Diego
County, CA) was designed to support the large-scale, ecological experiment. The
$3.1-million excavation was completed in February 2000 with the connection of
the site to a main tidal channel, and we have monitored several attributes over
the 22 months since tidal flushing was reinstated. We propose to take full
advantage of the experimental treatments and examine the influence of (1) a
vertical pattern of topographic heterogeneity, in the form of complex tidal
creek networks, and (2) a horizontal pattern furnished by varying densities of
planted salt marsh halophytes, on the diversity, abundance and composition of
multiple response variables and trophic levels: geomorphology, algae, vascular
plants, invertebrates, and fish. In addition to testing methods for recovering
wetlands, the integrative work proposed herein will demonstrate the power of
restoration experiments and contribute fundamental new insights into the
relationship between topographic heterogeneity and the development of ecosystem
structure (species composition and abundance) and function (e.g., foraging by
fish).

Conservation and Restoration Biology (CRB).