* 0212302
* University of Minnesota-Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,04/30/2010
* Timothy Lodge, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Cooperative Agreement
* Z.  Ying
* 04/30/2010
* USD 14,884,500.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University
of Minnesota supports an interdisciplinary research program with over twenty
faculty participants from the departments of chemical engineering and materials
science, electrical and computer engineering, physics, and chemistry.
TheCenter's research is organized into three interdisciplinary research groups
(IRGs). IRG1, Microstructured Polymers, investigates the use of block copolymers
to direct the structure and function of microstructured molecular materials. IRG
2, Crystalline Organic Semiconductors, is a new effort whose goals are to
elucidate structure-property relationships and to apply that knowledge to the
synthesis of new organic semiconductors with enhanced performance in field-
effect transistors. IRG3, Magnetic Heterostructures, aims to understand
interfacial spin transport, magnetization dynamics, and exchange coupling in
magnetic heterostructures with well characterized
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center's research benefits from extensive
materials synthesis and characterization facilities that include microscopy,
X-ray scattering, polymer synthesis, rheology, molecular characterization and
tissue mechanics. The MRSEC operates a broad education and outreach program that
includes summer research fellowships for faculty-student teams from four-year
colleges, fellowships for individual Native American students, research
experiences for undergraduates and for teachers. The Center also has an
extensive industrial partnership program by which member companies participate
in collaborative research and education efforts with MRSEC faculty
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants in the Center currently include
23 senior investigators, 6 postdoctoral associates, 27 graduate students, and 2
technicians and other support personnel. Professor Michael D. Ward directs the
MRSEC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;