* 0212587
* IRCEB: The Life History-Physiology Nexus--Constraints on the Evolutionary Diversification of Avian Life Histories
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Robert Ricklefs, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 12/31/2008
* USD 2,618,000.00

This project brings together a team of ecologists and physiologists to
investigate how physiological mechanisms constrain the evolution of parental
investment and self-maintenance in tropical and temperate environments. Life-
history theory predicts that long-lived organisms should allocate more resources
to enhancing survival, thereby protecting future reproduction, at the expense of
current reproduction. Many of the predicted responses of physiology and behavior
are controlled by endocrine and immune system mechanisms that establish
incompatible physiological states and limit individual responses of organisms
and evolved responses of populations. This collaborative study will compare
related species of birds living in contrasting tropical and temperate
environments to determine population parameters (adult survival and reproductive
rate) and physiological and behavioral responses. Incorporating a strongly
developed student-training component in the project, measurements will include
activity, metabolism, health status, and endocrine profiles in the field, and
metabolism, hormonal stress response, and immune system response in the
laboratory. Analysis and interpretation of these data will relate variation in
life-history attributes to phylogenetic relationship, region, and ecological
measures of habitat, diet, and predator environment. This project is unique in
that it integrates studies in ecology, physiology, and demography to focus on
major patterns of diversification of life histories.