* 0212218
* Attracting and Retaining Undergraduates to Engineer the Built Environment through Instructional &amp; Technological Innovation
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Upmanu Lall, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sally Louise Wood
* 07/31/2004
* USD 393,750.00

&lt;br/&gt;The disciplines of Civil and Environmental Engineering (CEE) play a
critical role in the development and maintenance of physical infrastructure and
hence in any strategy for improving planetary habitability and sustainable use
of resources. The breadth of topics covered by these disciplines and the need to
understand their interactions in a physical, chemical, ecological, social and
economic context pose challenges for the design of an undergraduate curriculum.
The traditional, sequential, skill based undergraduate curriculum has
successfully trained a cadre of engineers who have designed and built reliable
physical infrastructure that society takes almost for granted. However,
"engineer bashing" is not uncommon in many segments of society as this
infrastructure ages, needs replacement, and unanticipated environmental and
social problems created as a byproduct come to the fore. Re-engineering the $20
trillion US physical infrastructure is now recognized as a major challenge. At
the same time, undergraduate CEE enrollments have been declining, and retention
of women and other minorities lag expectations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
prevailing response to this situation is that an undergraduate engineering
program cannot adequately provide the breadth and depth of coverage needed,
particularly given the humanities, liberal arts and basic science requirements.
Consequently, the MS is being proposed as the entry level professional degree
and various mechanisms for combined BS-MS degrees, coursework only MS degrees
and the like are being explored and implemented. While this conclusion and the
resulting direction may be inevitable in the traditional education model, it is
unclear that they constitute the best response for educating engineers as
analysts and as "master integrator", or leaders in providing solutions for
meeting the needs of managing a complex and changing
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interviews with students reveal: (1) a strong
interest in the CEE subject matter, but a lack of knowledge at the college
entrance level of the engineer's role; (2) little exposure to engineering in the
first two years; and (3) a sense of ill-preparedness for the work force on
graduation that is often ascribed to instructional methods that are abstract,
focused on general principles related to unit processes, with limited
integrative application. The second item contributes negatively to undergraduate
retention at schools where the student has a choice of major through the second
year. An institutional response is to emphasize design content, and introduce
capstone or synthesis classes in the curriculum. However, these measures are
typically adopted only in junior/senior classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a
partnership between Columbia University's Departments of Civil Engineering &amp;
Engineering Mechanics and Earth &amp; Environmental Engineering and the Columbia
Center for New Media Teaching and Learning the development of a new
instructional approach and curriculum to systematically address the issues
raised above is proposed here. The new curriculum is anchored by a sequence of
classes in the first three years that progressively expose the students to a
variety of CEE problems of regional and national interest in a case study mode.
These classes, designed to provide technological literacy to all majors, will
use a issystems approachli. The proposed curriculum will be progressively
specialized as one moves to the higher grades, offering a student the
opportunity to explore a subsystem given an understanding of the larger context
of the problem. The goal is to present a data driven, problem focused approach
to learning that integrates material from concurrent science and humanities
classes and emphasizes the interconnection between most classes in the
curriculum. Spatial interactions between subsystems over different time frames
will be made explicit and used to motivate the application of empirical as well
as theoretical approaches to design, analysis and management of the pieces and
the whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information and computer technology will be used
extensively to develop a virtual reality platform that will be used throughout
the curriculum. Beyond the redeveloped curriculum, the development of this open
simulation platform and working prototype scenarios for classroom introduction
represents the major deliverable of this proposal. Spatially explicit simulators
that bring together a variety of interacting infrastructure and environmental
components (as in the game SimCity) will be used as a vehicle to introduce the
broad problem context, and to bring case studies to life. Student teams will use
it to explore historical data, as well as the effects of both policy and
structural measures for a range of problems (e.g., natural and environmental
hazards) on the long term functioning of the infrastructure, the environment and
interacting social systems. In addition to exercising the system with different
problems and settings, students will develop and add functional modules to the
system using a high-level programming language. The inner workings of key
subsystem components or processes will be accessible for stand-alone
instruction. Interaction with existing numerical models, Geographical
Information Systems, and statistical analysis packages will be considered as
part of the design. Case studies introduced in the first year may continue to be
building blocks for more detailed analyses in subsequent
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Support is sought for the development
of CEE case studies and the educational simulation/gaming platform. Materials
for three classes offered in the first two years will be developed using the
proposed grant and matching funds. Industrial collaborators who have experience
developing SIMgames have been recruited as consultants to help design and
implement the open modeling platform. The materials developed under the grant
will be made available to the engineering education community, and formal
evaluations of changes in material, skills and knowledge imparted to and
retained by students will be performed.&lt;br/&gt;