* 0212686
* Genetic Analysis of Complex Adaptive Traits
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2005
* David Begun, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 01/31/2005
* USD 360,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Currently, there is not enough good data on what types of genetic
&lt;br/&gt;changes occur when organisms evolve an adaptation. This data can
&lt;br/&gt;only come from high-resolution genetic analyses of natural
&lt;br/&gt;adaptations. The fruitfly, Drosophila sechellia, is uniquely suited
for &lt;br/&gt;such an analysis as it can be manipulated genetically and has an
&lt;br/&gt;indisputable adaptation. A close relative of D. melanogaster, a
&lt;br/&gt;genetic model species, D. sechellia has adapted to consuming the
&lt;br/&gt;fruit of Morinda citrifolia, a fruit that is toxic to other
fruitflies. The first &lt;br/&gt;two experiments in this grant are in-depth
genetic analyses of D. &lt;br/&gt;sechellia's adaptation. The genes involved in
this adaptation will be &lt;br/&gt;precisely mapped and their effects estimated.
This data is a &lt;br/&gt;necessary first step towards the identification and
cloning of the &lt;br/&gt;adaptive alleles. The final experiment will determine
the relative &lt;br/&gt;importance of standing genetic variation versus new
mutations in the &lt;br/&gt;evolution of an adaptation by artificially evolving
resistance in related &lt;br/&gt;species of fruitflies.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will help us understand how organisms &lt;br/&gt;genetically change in
response to environmental change. &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this grant will
impact our understanding of how insects &lt;br/&gt;evolve resistance to plant
produced pesticides and will give insight &lt;br/&gt;into how insects choose the
plants upon which they feed. &lt;br/&gt;