* 0212189
* Small RNAs in Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Kenneth Kosik, Brigham & Women's Hospital Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 08/31/2005
* USD 378,453.00

Nerve cells, or neurons, extend complex branches that communicate with many
other neurons by sending and capturing signals at functional contacts called
synapses, specialized small sites where membranes of two nerve cells are very
close together. When the presynaptic cell is active, chemical neurotransmitters
are released to act on the post-synaptic cell membrane, to excite or inhibit
activity in the postsynaptic cell. A single neuron can have thousands of
synapses with hundreds or thousands of other neurons in the brain, and each
synapse is potentially capable of changing its efficacy in transmitting signals.
It is believed that a fundamental mechanism underlying neural functions such as
memory formation is a strengthening of synapses through repeated activity. That
strengthening requires synthesis of new proteins, which probably remodel the
synapse. Recently a subcellular neuronal organelle called an RNA granule has
been suggested to harbor messenger RNA (mRNA) molecules that provide templates
for such remodeling proteins, with translocation and release of this mRNA
locally at activated synapses in response to neural depolarization. This project
uses molecular biological techniques on cultured neurons to define the
functional roles of specific RNA granule proteins in a novel conceptual
framework. First, the new RNAi (RNA-interference) technique allows selective
inactivation or 'knock-down' of specific gene expression, and is used to
investigate the role of a particular granule protein called Staufen, to see how
it is involved in granule assembly. Second, micro-RNAs (miRNA) are a type of
short RNA that can regulate gene expression post-transcriptionally, so miRNAs in
the granule will be identified to see how they might modify the local protein
synthesis. &lt;br/&gt; This project has some technological risks, but
potentially very high impact, because results will be important for
understanding molecular mechanisms of modifying neural functions, and so of
networks involved in memory and learning. The impact is likely to extend beyond
neuroscience to cell biology and physiology in general. The project also
continues active involvement of this highly regarded PI with training a
postdoctoral researcher, with international collaborations, and with public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;