* 0212521
* RUI: Pollen Developmental Evolution in the Basalmost Angiosperms - Nymphaeales and Amborella
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Jeffrey Osborn, Truman State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Winner
* 12/31/2004
* USD 75,345.00

An understanding of the evolutionary relationships of flowering plants, or
angiosperms, has been greatly improved in recent years, and water lilies
(Nymphaeales) and Amborella have been identified as the earliest diverging
lineages. Water lilies have a cosmopolitan distribution, comprise two families
and eight genera, and have interested botanists for many years in part because
they have characteristics of both major classes of flowering plants (dicots and
monocots). Amborella includes a single species and is an understory shrub that
is limited in geographic distribution to montane tropical rain forests in
central New Caledonia. &lt;br/&gt; Comparative studies of pollen development in
angiosperms are relatively rare, but make significant contributions to
understanding the evolution of key characters, as well as evolutionary
relationships, or phylogeny, when conducted. Relatively few pollen studies of
water lilies and Amborella have been carried out, however. Historically, the
pollen wall of water lilies has been reported as granular, a character state
thought to be primitive among angiosperms, whereas that of Amborella has an
unusual structure that does not appear to occur in other extant flowering
plants. A recent study by the PI indicates that the mature pollen of all eight
genera of water lilies is columellar, and that the developmental pattern and
structure of these pollen wall elements makes them superficially resemble
granules. The developmental pattern of these elements and that of other pollen
characters in Nymphaeales and Amborella, however, are not well
understood.&lt;br/&gt; Given the evolutionary importance of these two primitive
groups, the overall focus of the PI's research is to study pollen developmental
evolution in Nymphaeales and Amborella. The principal objectives of the proposed
project are to (1) provide a comprehensive investigation of pollen development
in two key water lily genera (Cabomba and Nuphar) and (2) obtain preliminary
results on other genera. The proposed research will build on new data from the
PI's laboratory about mature pollen structure in all eight water lily genera, as
well as pollen development in three (Cabomba, Nuphar, and Euryale). The research
will use combined microscopical techniques, and it will yield data at a level of
resolution that has not been documented before. The new data will provide the
foundation to examine the patterns of pollen developmental evolution within a
phylogenetic context and determine functional correlations between pollen
developmental characters and pollination biology.&lt;br/&gt;