* 0212719
* Hypocrella and Aschersonia: Systematics and Evolution in the Clavicipitaceae (Ascomycota)
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2004
* Kathie Hodge, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 11/30/2004
* USD 96,533.00

0212719&lt;br/&gt;Hodge&lt;br/&gt; Few studies have been conducted to test
species limits in fungi used in insect biocontrol programs. One such group of
ascomycete fungi is the Hypocrella and Aschersonia group, the former with
sexual, ascospore producing phases and the latter with only or usually asexual
spore forming phases, but shown with recent DNA sequence data to be likely close
relatives of various sexual Hypocrella species. These fungi mostly infect
Homoptera insects, usually scale insects and whiteflies, and some were used
early in the 1900s to control pests of citrus groves in Florida. The taxonomic
boundaries between species and the linkages between sexual and asexual forms
remain poorly studied, which in turn has limited the development of improved
biocontrol agents. Dr. Kathie Hodge of Cornell University will work with
graduate students there to analyze species relationships in the critical
Aschersonia aleyrodis and A. goldiana complex, with a focus on integrating data
from morphology, mating trials, and multi-gene sequences to establish species
circumscriptions that reflect biological properties of the organisms while
providing practical tools for rapid identification from observable phenotypic
features. &lt;br/&gt; Taxonomic data will be gathered from existing herbarium
specimens and laboratory cultures, and from material newly collected during
field work in Florida and elsewhere, augmented with material provided by
colleagues around the world. New taxonomic identification resources and keys
will be generated. Evolutionary relationships will be assessed through
phylogenetic analyses of morphological characters and of DNA sequence data
obtained from several nuclear ribosomal and protein-coding genes. A graduate
student will be trained in collecting techniques and in modern phylogenetic
systematics. Publications and Internet-based resources will be generated to
transmit the results of the work to other biologists and to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;