* 0212164
* RUI: Measurement and Modeling of Photosynthetic Responses by Temperate Forest Herbs and Tree Seedling to Nearground Enriched Carbon Dioxide and Irradiance Regimes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Timothy Sipe, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2006
* USD 230,000.00

The proposed research has two goals: (1) to measure the interactive effects of
naturally-occurring near-ground enriched carbon dioxide (NEC) and fluctuating
light on photosynthesis by six herbaceous and woody plant species in a temperate
forest ecosystem; and (2) to model daily leaf-level photosynthesis across a wide
range of CO2/light combinations in order to determine the potential for
NEC/sunfleck interactions to affect survival, growth, and species composition
within and across forest stands. The widespread occurrence of naturally enriched
CO2 in the herbaceous zone (due to respiration by plant roots and soil
microorganisms) and its likely impacts on photosynthesis have been noted for
many decades, but no comprehensive effort has been made to measure or model NEC
variation or quantify its effects on photosynthesis, especially under the
fluctuating light levels (especially sunflecks) typical of the forest
environment. Previous research by the principal investigator and his colleagues
has shown that the impacts of enriched CO2 on leaf-level photosynthesis are
substantial during both background shade and sunflecks. However, it is necessary
to measure NEC/light regimes and photosynthesis more extensively in order to
accurately predict NEC variation and its effects on plants over longer time
periods (days to weeks). The results of this project will increase our
understanding of temperate forest ecology in several important ways. First, the
data on spatial and temporal NEC/light variation will help fill a major gap in
our knowledge of forest resource environments. Second, empirical models of NEC
regulation generated during the project should apply in broad outline to other
forested systems. Third, the accuracy with which a recently developed dynamic
photosynthesis model can predict daily net carbon gain under a range of CO2
levels in the field will be determined. Finally, the data will have implications
for estimating the effects of human-caused global CO2 rise on plant species in
the herbaceous stratum, including forest regeneration
processes.&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students will play critical roles in all
phases of the proposed project, including research planning, field measurements,
data processing, data analysis, presentation of results at professional
meetings, and publication. A total of nine students will each spend twenty
months on the project, including an academic year of preparation for twelve
weeks of intensive summer research at the Harvard Forest research site
(Petersham, MA), followed by one to two semesters of formal independent study
focused on data analysis, presentation at professional meetings, honors thesis
preparation, and co-authorship on publications. &lt;br/&gt;