* 0212466
* Genetic Analysis of Methylotrophic Methanogenesis in Methanosarcina Species
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* William Metcalf, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 360,000.00



The long-term goal of the research is to expand our knowledge regarding the
physiology, metabolism and evolutionary adaptation of the methane-producing
Methanosarcina species. Although the primary emphasis of these studies will be
the identification and characterization of genes that directly and indirectly
effect the utilization of methanol as a growth substrate (methylotrophic
methanogenesis), the results are expected to have broad implications with
respect to Methanosarcina and other methanogenic organisms. In particular, it is
expected that these studies will reveal not only novel aspects of the
methylotrophic pathway, but also how methanogenesis is integrated into the
overall metabolism of the organism. Further, it is expected that a clearer
understanding of archaeal transcriptional control will result from examination
of the highly regulated methylotrophic genes. The experiments will be primarily
based on recently developed methods for genetic analysis of Methanosarcina
species; however, physiological, biochemical and molecular approaches will also
be utilized to complement the genetic studies. This approach is expected to
generate data that are both novel and complementary to the results of preceding
studies. To achieve these aims Methanosarcina strains with mutations in a number
of genes believed to be involved in methylotrophic methanogenesis will be
constructed. These mutant strains will then be characterized with respect to a
variety of physiological and biochemical traits. Random mutagenesis and
proteomics approaches will be used to identify new genes that are specifically
required for growth on methylotrophic substrates. Separate studies will examine
the regulation of genes known to be involved and attempt to identify the genes
that mediate this regulation. Finally, during the course of this work additional
methods will be developed for genetic analysis of Methanosarcina species.