* 0212903
* RUI: Mating System Evolution at the Interface of Populations and Species in Linanthus (Polemoniaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Carol Goodwillie, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/2006
* USD 164,947.00

The proposed research continues an ongoing exploration of self-incompatibility
and the evolution of self-fertilization in Linanthus (Polemoniaceae). Self-
incompatibility (SI), a genetic mechanism that allows plants to recognize and
reject self-pollen, is a common feature of higher plants. The breakdown of SI,
resulting in self-fertilization, is known to have occurred frequently throughout
the evolutionary history of flowering plants. The proposed series of experiments
will explore a newly discovered transient form of SI that may represent a
"snapshot" in the breakdown of SI and evolution toward self-fertilization. In L.
jepsonii, self-fertilization is prevented for a few hours or days, after which
flowers become fully capable of self-fertilization. The proposed experiments
will characterize this phenomenon, its genetic basis, and its effect on the rate
of self-fertilization. Molecular methods will be used to explore evolutionary
relationships among populations that differ in the extent of transient SI.

The proposed research will contribute basic knowledge about SI, a phenomenon
that has important implications for crop plant breeding. The genetic and
physiological bases of this mechanism have received considerable study, yet we
know little about the process by which SI breaks down. The project has been
designed to foster training of undergraduate students. The modular nature of the
research, comprising a series of discrete experiments, will allow undergraduates
gain experience in a range of methodologies, including field studies,
fluorescence microscopy, pollination experiments, and molecular techniques