* 0212099
* Signal Transduction in Root Gravitropism
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Simon Gilroy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2006
* USD 349,999.00

MCB0212099 PI: Gilroy, Simon&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Gravity is a
fundamental signal that regulates plant growth and form. Despite its importance
to plant success, the cellular and molecular events whereby higher plants sense
and respond to this most pervasive and constant of environmental signals are
essentially unknown. In the root, gravity is perceived in the columella cells of
the root cap and this signal is converted to oriented growth in the elongation
zone through a mechanism likely involving asymmetrical auxin redistribution. The
goal of this research project is to define the cell and molecular nature of the
initial gravity-related signaling events generated in the columella cells, using
the roots of Arabidopsis thaliana as a model system. Previous research has
identified changes in cytoplasmic and cell wall pH as important initial events
in gravity signaling in the root cap columella cells. In addition, recent
evidence suggests highly localized changes in Ca2+, likely close to membrane
surfaces, also accompany some of the earliest events of gravity perception in
these cells. Research will therefore concentrate on characterizing how these
gravity-related H+ and Ca2+ fluxes are generated and how they are modulated by
putative components of the gravity signal transduction system such as the
actomyosin cytoskeleton. In addition, transgenic Ca2+ sensors based on the
Cameleon green fluorescent protein Ca2+ sensor will be constructed and targeted
to the vacuolar, endoplasmic reticulum and plasma membranes. These novel sensors
will be used to assess whether membrane-associated Ca2+ microdomains are indeed
associated with gravity signaling. The final goal of the research program is to
develop single cell mRNA profiling for the columella cells in order to catalog
gene expression patterns within the different regions of the root cap. Initial
analysis will be targeted at profiling the actin and myosin gene families as
these represent strong candidates for encoding parts of the force transmissive
network that generates the biochemical signaling events of gravity perception.
&lt;br/&gt; Plant growth and form are inextricably linked to the developmental
impacts of gravity. Yet, despite its fundamental role in regulating development,
the precise mechanism whereby plants sense and respond to gravity remains
unknown. Results from this research program will therefore seek to define the
molecular machinery of the root that allows it to sense gravitational forces.
The project will focus on developing microscope-based imaging approaches to
visualize the dynamic changes in the levels of ions that are thought to signal
the gravity stimulus to the sensitive cells of the root. An understanding of
these signaling events should not only help provide a more complete
understanding of how plants sense and respond to their environment, but also
holds the potential to uncover strategies to regulate plant development through
manipulating the responsiveness of defined components of this plant gravity
sensing system.&lt;br/&gt;