* 0212724
* Molecular Genetic Analysis of Cell Polarity in the Maize Leaf Epidermis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Laurie Smith, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Banks
* 07/31/2006
* USD 390,000.00

0212724&lt;br/&gt;Smith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As in all other eukaryotes and
prokaryotes, diversification of form and function during plant development
depends on cell polarity. Relatively little is known in molecular terms about
how cells translate polarizing cues into localized cytoskeletal assemblies that
direct the polarization of other cell components or of the cell growth
machinery. With the support of a prior NSF award, a genetic approach was taken
to analyze mechanisms by which maize leaf epidermal cells become polarized,
focusing on three Brick (Brk) genes required for the polarized growth and
division of epidermal cells. Building on this work, studies are proposed here to
further advance our understanding of plant cell polarity, with the following
specific objectives: &lt;br/&gt;1. Complementary approaches will be taken to
localize BRK1 protein in polarizing subsidiary mother cells and expanding
epidermal pavement cells. 2. Complementary approaches will be taken to identify
candidate BRK1-interacting proteins and investigate their in vivo interactions
with BRK1. 3. As shown for the Brk genes, two Pangloss (Pan) genes promote the
polarization of subsidiary mother cells, but are not required for polarized cell
expansion. The functions of Pan genes and how they relate to those of Brk genes
will be further elucidated through phenotypic analysis of single and double
mutants. 4. To help build a bigger picture of how maize leaf epidermal cells
become polarized, one additional epidermal cell polarity gene (Pan1, Brk2, or
Brk3) will be cloned and molecularly characterized by means of transposon
tagging. The intellectual merit of the work proposed is augmented by the central
importance of cell polarity in the development of all eukaryotes and
prokaryotes, and the fact that BRK1 (and probably the entire pathway in which
all 3 Brk genes were shown to function) is conserved among eukaryotes.
Therefore, our findings will most likely have an impact outside the boundaries
of plant cell biology. The broader impact of the work proposed will mainly be
the education and training of young scientists participating in the research,
including one postdoc, one Ph.D. student, and a series of undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt;