* 0212336
* Genetic and Molecular Characterization of Dual HLH Domain Proteins in C. elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Casonya Johnson, Morgan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 08/31/2005
* USD 458,403.00

Eukaryotic development depends on three carefully orchestrated processes:
differentiation, morphogenesis, and growth. The coordination of these processes
is most clearly demonstrated during embryological development of newly
fertilized eggs, when a single cell gives rise to thousands of differentiated
and morphologically distinct cell types. During this process, and throughout its
life cycle, the developing organism is responsible for regulating the spatial
and temporal expression of genes. The helix-loop-helix (HLH) family of
transcriptional regulators regulate a wide array of developmental processes.
Members of this transcription factor family have been identified in most
eukaryotic systems and are required for a variety of critical developmental
processes, including normal pancreatic functioning, brain and eye morphogenesis,
macrophage differentiation, and skeletal muscle development. Because HLH
proteins are involved in so many diverse processes, they have been the focus of
intense study by molecular geneticists and biochemists. General rules for DNA
binding and protein dimerization activities by HLH proteins have been
determined, and the HLH proteins are classified according to these properties.
During a previously funded pilot study, a new class of HLH proteins was
identified in the soil nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans. The five proteins
identified each contained two intact HLH domains. Because HLH proteins have been
extensively characterized, finding two domains was surprising. The
identification of HLH proteins containing more than one HLH domain implies that
these proteins may regulate transcription in more ways than previously
described. The long-term goal of this project is to perform an in vivo and in
vitro characterization of HLH regulators containing multiple HLH domains. To
meet this goal, the following specific aims have been formulated: (1) determine
expression patterns of five C. elegans proteins, each containing two HLH
domains; (2) characterize phenotypes associated with aberrant expression of dual
HLH domain proteins; and (3) determine the DNA binding properties of two dual
HLH domain proteins. The intellectual merit of the work described here is the
beginning of a long-term project that focuses on the transcriptional regulation
of eukaryotic development by HLH proteins. Once completed, this project will
help determine if proteins containing more than one HLH domain are widely
expressed in C. elegans, and if these proteins exhibit the same DNA binding
properties as those with single HLH domains. Future experiments can then focus
on in vitro studies of transcriptional regulation by these proteins. On the
broader scale, the work described here will be performed at Morgan State
University, an HBCU that is also an urban, predominantly undergraduate
university. With the goal of exposing more students to research careers,
undergraduate students are involved in all aspects of the research described.
These students will present their research activities at local undergraduate and
at National Research Symposia. As designed, this project will also allow the
Department of Biology to integrate an active research project into a required
upper-level undergraduate course. The integration of the research into this
course will ensure that every Biology Major at Morgan State University will have
at least one semester of exposure to basic research in molecular genetics. This
project is supported by the Biochemistry of Gene Expression Program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Multi-User Equipment
Program in the Division of Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences, and by the Historically Black College and University
Undergraduate Initiative Program in the Division of Human Resource Development
in the Education and Human Resources Directorate.