* 0212232
* Energy Functions for Spectroscopy and Dynamics Studies of Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Samuel Krimm, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2005
* USD 345,000.00

Accurate potential energy functions for polypeptide chains have two important
uses. For spectroscopy, they provide the means to calculate reliable normal mode
frequencies of peptides and proteins for fundamental analyses of structure and
interactions from infrared and Raman spectra. For molecular mechanics (MM) and
dynamics (MD) studies, they provide the physical accuracy needed for reliable
predictions of structures, energies, and dynamics of proteins. Current standard
functions do not meet such standards since they give spectroscopically poor
reproduction of vibrational frequencies. Using a method developed in his
laboratory, called a spectroscopically determined force field (SDFF), such
deficiencies have been overcome. The goal of this project is to determine and
incorporate into an SDFF for the polypeptide chain those components of an MM
energy function that will give it the needed accuracy for reliable simulations
of proteins. Polarizability will be fully included in the SDFF, based on a
recently developed electrostatic model for this property of polar groups.
Structural features of the peptide group that depend on pyramidalization at the
nitrogen atom will be further elucidated and parameterized. These include the
explicit incorporation of charge fluxes, i.e., the dependence of charge on
conformation, which are also essential to computing reliable infrared band
intensities. Previous studies of typical N-H...O hydrogen bonds will be extended
to include C-H...O hydrogen bonds, which have recently been found to be
important in protein structures. SDFF descriptions of O-H...O hydrogen bonding
in water and alcohols will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this research will have broad scientific and educational impacts. The ability to
more reliably calculate structural and energetic, as well as spectroscopic,
characteristics of proteins will lead to more accurate predictions of their
properties. This will lead to deeper insights into functions of these
biologically important molecules. The developments from this research will be
disseminated to the scientific community, will result in the advanced training
of graduate students and postdocs, and will be reflected in curricular themes in
undergraduate courses, thus contributing to the integration of research and
education. This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences and the Division of Physics in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate. &lt;br/&gt;