* 0212992
* A Genetic and Molecular Approach to Investigating the Relationship Between Root and Nodule Development in the Model Legume, Medicago Truncatula
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Jeanne Harris, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Banks
* 07/31/2006
* USD 365,951.00

0212992&lt;br/&gt;Harris&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project
is to understand how nitrogen-fixing nodules develop on the roots of legumes.
Since nodule formation is a plant developmental program, and is a normal part of
the development of most legumes, this process should be studied within the
context of normal root development. Why is it that only legumes form nitrogen-
fixing nodules with rhizobia? Perhaps a difference in development lies at the
root of their ability to interact with rhizobia. In particular, lateral roots
have been proposed as a potential evolutionary precursor of nitrogen-fixing
nodules, based on their developmental similarities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
immediate goal of this project is to examine the relationship between root
development and nodulation. The specific aims of this project are:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Determine the role of root development genes in the process of
nodulation.&lt;br/&gt;This problem will be addressed using a combined genetic
and molecular approach. The mutant screen for genes required both for nodule and
root development will be continued. In parallel, the expression of known root
development genes will be examined in the developing nodule. Finally, the
phenotype of the lat1-1 mutant, identified in above screen, will be
characterized in more detail. &lt;br/&gt;2. Map LAT1, a gene required for both
nodule and root development and identify genomic BAC clones that span this
genetic interval.&lt;br/&gt;LAT1 is one of the few genes currently identified
that links lateral root development and nodule formation. Thus this gene
provides a tool to examine the intersection between the genetic programs for
nodulation and root development. During the period of this project, the LAT1
gene will be finely mapped and genomic BAC clones spanning this interval
identified, laying the groundwork for the future cloning of the LAT1 gene.
&lt;br/&gt;3. Characterize lateral root development in a legume using
morphological and molecular markers: Are there any unique features?
&lt;br/&gt;To address this question, molecular markers will be generated that
label lateral roots at a very early stage and allow the observation of the
marked cells through lateral root development. In this way, stages of lateral
root development in M. truncatula will be identified, and can be used as a
framework to examine lateral root development in mutants identified in response
Specific Aim 1.&lt;br/&gt;