* 0212222
* Identification of Targets of Apetala3 and Pistillata Floral Homeotic Gene Action
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Vivian Irish, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan J. Lolle
* 09/30/2005
* USD 404,999.00

0212222&lt;br/&gt;Irish, V.F.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Floral organs arise as
lateral outgrowths from the florally determined meristem, and differentiate with
distinct identities. The specification of these organs as sepals, petals,
stamens or carpels depends on the action of several floral homeotic genes which
act as master regulators of these developmental pathways. Two such genes,
APETALA3 (AP3) and PISTILLATA (PI), encode MADS domain-containing transcription
factors that regulate the specification of petal and stamen identity in
Arabidopsis. The proposed work will focus on identifying other genes involved in
petal and stamen development, with a particular emphasis on identifying several
candidate target genes regulated by AP3 and PI. The analysis of such genes can
serve as a model for dissecting the genetic hierarchies by which particular
organs and tissue types are specified during plant development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to identify a set of target genes regulated in
vivo by these transcription factors, Dr. Irish proposes three complementary
approaches. Microarray analyses comparing the expression of a set of Arabidopsis
ESTs in various mutant backgrounds will be carried out in order to define those
genes that are up- or down-regulated in response to AP3 and PI action. This
should define a set of reasonably highly expressed petal and/or stamen specific
genes that are directly or indirectly regulated by these floral homeotic gene
products. Second, chromatin immunoprecipitation will be employed to identify DNA
sequences that are bound in vivo by AP3/PI proteins. Sequences identified by
this approach are good candidates for being direct targets of AP3/PI regulation.
Third, a gain-of-function genetic approach will be employed, using activation
tagging, to mutationally identify genes that are involved in the floral
developmental pathway. This approach has the advantage that it can result in the
recovery of downstream target genes that act in a redundant fashion, which would
preclude their recovery by traditional forward genetic screens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potentially hundreds of candidate target genes may be
recovered by these three approaches. These approaches are not meant to be
exhaustive, as it is likely that only abundantly expressed genes are likely to
be recovered. Dr. Irish plans to initially focus further analyses on a limited
number of candidates, focussingon those recovered by more than one method. Such
genes will be examined to determine whether their transcription is directly
dependent on AP3/PI function. This will define a set of direct targets that will
in turn be valuable in beginning to assess the spectrum of developmental
processes controlled by AP3/PI. In turn these analyses will shed light on the
question of whether the floral homeotic gene products act at the top of a long
regulatory cascade, or whether these gene products act directly to regulate a
wide array of downstream targets responsible for various aspects of
morphogenesis. Characterizing how such master regulatory genes effect their
functions will be crucial for a detailed understanding of how organogenesis and
morphogenesis ensue, and should serve as a model for these processes in other
plant systems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;