* 0212065
* Independent Evolutionary Origins of Tetrodotoxin Resistance as a Test of the Geographic Mosaic of Coevolution
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Edmund Brodie, Jr, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/2004
* USD 31,999.00

Evidence for arms-race coevolution between predator and prey will
be&lt;br/&gt;evaluated in a unique natural interaction between toxic newts and
their&lt;br/&gt;resistant snake predators. Newts possess the neurotoxin
tetrodotoxin&lt;br/&gt;(TTX), which blocks sodium channels in nerves and
muscles. No known&lt;br/&gt;predator can ingest TTX and survive except for
garter snakes of the&lt;br/&gt;genus Thamnophis. Previous work demonstrated that
predator and prey have&lt;br/&gt;matched levels of defensive and exploitative
abilities, but the source&lt;br/&gt;of newt toxicity is still unknown. High
Performance Liquid&lt;br/&gt;Chromatography (HPLC) will be used to assay levels
of toxin in&lt;br/&gt;laboratory bred and reared newts to determine whether the
requisite&lt;br/&gt;individual, genetic and population variation exists for
newts to evolve&lt;br/&gt;in response to predators, allowing an evaluation of
whether observed&lt;br/&gt;patterns of matching are consistent with an arms race
view of&lt;br/&gt;coevolution.&lt;br/&gt; Understanding the interactions between
species that drive&lt;br/&gt;coevolution is a major goal of evolutionary
biology. Coevolution, in&lt;br/&gt;which one species evolves in response to
another species, is thought to&lt;br/&gt;be one of the major engines of
biodiversity. Although coevolution is&lt;br/&gt;thought to be a common outcome
of many ecological interaction, there are&lt;br/&gt;strong theoretical and
empirical reasons to suspect that predator-prey&lt;br/&gt;interactions might be
different. This research will shed important light&lt;br/&gt;on natural
variation in an important neurotoxin, TTX, which is used&lt;br/&gt;widely in
studies of nerve function and development, by identifying the&lt;br/&gt;sources
of TTX in amphibians.&lt;br/&gt;