* 0212496
* Genomic Studies of Blue-Light Signaling Pathways Controlling Seedling Growth
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Edgar Spalding, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William E. Winner
* 08/31/2005
* USD 399,561.00

A detailed description of the mechanisms plants use to sense and respond to
their light environment is necessary for a complete understanding of plant
development, which is important to those concerned with the practical uses of
plants in agriculture and biotechnology as well as to academic researchers. The
processes that control the growth of seedlings exposed to blue light do not
function properly in Arabidopsis thaliana mutants that lack the cryptochrome
photoreceptors. Understanding the molecular-level differences responsible for
the differences in growth rates between the wild-type and cryptochrome mutant
seedlings will lead to a better understanding of what controls the fundamental
process of plant growth. The funding provided by this award will enable
measurements of the expression levels of thousands of genes at once using DNA
microarray technology at a point during the seedling's response to light that
previous work has shown to be critical. Those genes found to differ in
expression will be manipulated to test the hypothesis that they function in
growth control. Finding genes that affect the rate of seedling growth in
specific light conditions could provide plant breeders and biotechnologists with
promising targets for their studies. In addition to such a genomic approach,
specific hypotheses about the role of the hormone gibberellic acid in the
phenomenon of blue-light controlled growth will be tested. Also, the role of
calcium in the earliest phase of the response, which is mediated by the
phototropin 1 photoreceptor, will be investigated using cell biological
techniques. A central theme in the experimental design is that a detailed
understanding of the biology under study should guide the genomics experiments,
the results of which should be brought back to the biological system for
validation. The cycle can then be repeated. In this iterative fashion, a very
detailed, molecular-level description of how light controls growth can be
obtained during the next funding cycle. In the process, undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral students will receive training in modern biological research,
which adds to the country's scientific infrastructure.

