* 0212663
* Functional Analysis of Vacuolar Potassium Channels
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Jeanmarie Verchot, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Rogers
* 08/31/2007
* USD 379,528.00

Ion transport across the surrounding membrane of the central vacuole of a plant
cell plays an essential role in turgor-driven movements, in intracellular signal
transduction, and in plant growth and nutrition. The PI has recently identified
the first vacuolar ion channel, the two-pore-domain K+ channel KCO1 of
Arabidopsis thaliana. An Arabidopsis insertion mutant (kco1) lacking KCO1 was
used for patch clamp analysis. Currents mediated by slow-vacuolar (SV) channels
of mesophyll cell vacuoles were significantly smaller in kco1 plants compared
tot the wild-type, indicating that KCO1 might be involved in the formation of SV
channels. By quantitative RT-PCR it was shown that transcripts of KCO1 and KCO6
dominate in Arabidopsis mesophyll and guard cells. By a combination of reverse
genetic, biophysical, and physiological approaches, the function of KCO1 and
KCO6 in mesophyll and guard cells of Arabidopsis will be explored. The specific
objectives are (1) to establish whether KCO6--Like KCO1--is targeted to the
vacuolar membrane, (2) to identify which vacuolar ion channel is formed by KCB1
and KCO6 -- determine whether it is the SV channel or another vacuolar ion
channel, and (3) to relate physiological function(s) to KCO channels. To pursue
these aims, plants lacking or overexpressing KCO1 and/or KCO6 will be
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies will give insight into the molecular
nature and physiological function of vacuolar potassium channels. This will have
a major impact on plant physiology in general and on the understanding of plant
growth in particular. For a systematic improvement of plant growth and
nutritional composition (e.g. 'fortified foods') insight onto the molecular
mechanisms of vacuolar ion transport is of vital importance. Undergraduate
students, graduate students, and post-doctoral associates will be trained, and
the new insights into vacuolar potassium ion transport resulting from this
project will be integrated into the plant mineral nutrition and plant physiology
classes given by the PI.