* 0212013
* Plant Vacuole Biogenesis and Function
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,06/30/2005
* John Rogers, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/2005
* USD 448,182.00

Plant cells store a diverse variety of molecules in vacuoles. Storage is the
central reason why plants are so important to humankind. The wars against
cocaine and heroin result from the harvest of products in storage vacuoles, the
morning coffee is brewed to release products stored in vacuoles, the flowers in
our garden are there because of pigments stored in vacuoles, and the nutrition
of domestic animals and humans ultimately depends upon proteins stored in plant
vacuoles. Many molecules that are targets in plant biotechnology are stored in
vacuoles. Only by understanding the different compartments, their internal
contents and environment, and how proteins and membrane are directed to each,
will we be able to program a cell to make and accumulate a desired product. The
need to separate a digestive compartment similar to the yeast vacuole or
mammalian lysosome from the storage compartments has resulted in a complex plant
vacuolar system. Of the storage compartments, protein storage vacuoles have been
best studied because proteins are relatively easy to track in a cell. In many
plant cells, separate protein storage and lytic vacuoles coexist. Proteins are
delivered to each from the Golgi complex by separate vesicular trafficking
pathways, clathrin coated vesicles for the lytic pathway, and dense vesicles (or
their equivalents)for the protein storage vacuole pathway. However,in developing
seeds and certain other cells, the two pathways converge on the same vacuole. In
this instance, for example in protein storage vacuoles in seeds, the resultant
organelle is a multivesicular body, where the storage products are partitioned
in the "soup " and lytic functions are partitioned into the internal vesicles.
Thus the seed protein storage vacuole is a compound organelle,where two
functionally distinct compartments exist within the limiting membrane. How
proteins are delivered by the two separate vesicular pathways to the two
compartments within the organelle is an important unsolved question in cell
biology. This project focuses on mechanisms by which proteins are sorted into
the protein storage vacuole pathway in the Golgi complex. Results from recent
ligand binding experiments indicate that the lumenal domain of a plant RMR
protein specifically interacts with the targeting determinants that sort
proteins into the protein storage vacuole pathway. RMR proteins are integral
membrane proteins that traffic from Golgi to the protein storage vacuole where
they are incorporated into a membrane-containing crystalloid within the storage
compartment.Thus it is likely they serve as a unique type of sorting
receptor.RMR proteins are also expressed in avian and mammalian cells. The
association and dissociation constants, and stoichiometry, for binding of RMR
protein lumenal domains for a model ligand will be determined. The function of
RMR proteins in plants will be assessed by generating antisense knockouts in
tobacco and by identifying transposon/T DNA insertions in individual RMR protein
genes in Arabidopsis. Motifs in the RMR proteins' cytoplasmic tails responsible
for traffic from Golgi to the storage compartment will be identified. A separate
experimental strategy will address mechanisms by which the storage compartment
crystalloid is formed. Dr. Rogers' laboratory has purified protein storage
vacuole crystalloids away from other membranes in the vacuole. Using a
proteomics approach, the integral membrane proteins specifically incorporated
into PSV crystalloids, and then tonoplast and globoids in B. napus seeds will be
identified. The mechanisms by which a tomato storage protein related to 11S
globulins that appears to have transmembrane helices is incorporated into
crystalloid membranes will be defined. Although protein storage compartments
were thought initially to be unique to plant cells, evidence now emerging
indicates that animal cells also have a dense vesicle pathway, and that
multivesicular body endosomes in animal cells may partition two separate
functions within the same organelle. Thus,an understanding of fundamental
processes of compartmentation in plant cells may have broader impact in cell
biology. The ability to visualize the two compartments easily in protein storage
vacuoles and to track proteins in each of the vesicular pathways provides great
advantages for use of a plant system in these studies.