* 0212054
* LTREB: On the Consequences of Removing Ground-dwelling Mammals for Tropical Forest Diversity: Towards a New Conceptual Framework
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2009
* Walter Carson, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2009
* USD 273,764.00

0212054&lt;br/&gt;Carson&lt;br/&gt;LTREB&lt;br/&gt;We have underway a long-term,
large-scale experiment that is addressing one of the
primary&lt;br/&gt;hypotheses proposed to explain the maintenance of tree species
diversity in tropical forests, namely,&lt;br/&gt;that mammals acting as
herbivores, seed predators, and dispersers, are critical determinants of
tropical&lt;br/&gt;tree diversity and abundance. This experiment is essentially
a community-level test of the Janzen-Connell&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis that predicts
that the removal of ground-dwelling mammals will ultimately cause
a&lt;br/&gt;decline in tropical tree diversity. Under this scenario, mammals
preferentially prey on the juveniles of&lt;br/&gt;tree species that are abundant
and ultimately keep these tree species in check.&lt;br/&gt;The study system is
mature-phase tropical moist forest in central Panama on Barro
Colorado&lt;br/&gt;Island (BCI) and the adjacent mainland (Gigante Peninsula).
Since1994, we have monitored the&lt;br/&gt;consequences of excluding ground-
dwelling mammals in 8 large (1355m&lt;br/&gt;2&lt;br/&gt;) fenced exclosures
and&lt;br/&gt;adjacent unfenced control plots. Four pairs of treatment and
control plots were established on BCI and&lt;br/&gt;4 pairs were located on
Gigante in similar mature forest. Prior to initiating any treatments,
we&lt;br/&gt;censused, measured, identified, and tagged all woody plants &gt; 50
cm in height in all plots. In&lt;br/&gt;addition, we quantified newly recruited
seedlings in 28 smaller subplots in each large plot. In total,&lt;br/&gt;we have
now followed the fate of more than 60,000 individual seedlings and saplings.
Overall, the&lt;br/&gt;exclusion of mammals led to a substantial and sustained
increase in seedling density.&lt;br/&gt;The results of this experiment to date
suggest that excluding mammals may significantly&lt;br/&gt;increase woody
species diversity of the seedling layer at least in the short-term (~10 yrs).
Thus, our&lt;br/&gt;results contrast sharply with the community-level
predictions of the Janzen-Connell hypothesis. We&lt;br/&gt;propose a new
conceptual model that suggests that the consequences of the short term removal
of&lt;br/&gt;mammals (2-25 yrs) from tropical forests, whether by experimental
exclusion or more broadly via&lt;br/&gt;over hunting, will cause first an
increase in woody species diversity and thereafter potentially
a&lt;br/&gt;decrease (see Fig. 1). This result will first appear in the seedling
layer (1-50 cm in height) and then&lt;br/&gt;move as a wave through larger size
classes. The data to date, however, even after 7-years,
remain&lt;br/&gt;equivocal. The short term increase in diversity clearly
documented inside exclosure plots may be a&lt;br/&gt;transient effect of the
1998 El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) event. Specifically, the ENSO
event&lt;br/&gt;caused a severe and extended dry season that increased seedling
mortality. Because there was a higher&lt;br/&gt;seedling density inside the
exclosures, these sites may have been buffered from the drought.
We&lt;br/&gt;believe that it is imperative that we continue this experiment and
monitor the next phase as the seedling&lt;br/&gt;layer moves into the small
sapling size class. The conservation implications of this work are clear;
the&lt;br/&gt;overexploitation of the mammalian fauna in many tropical forest
reserves, parks, and fragments may&lt;br/&gt;have long-term negative
consequences for forest diversity that may not become apparent for
decades.&lt;br/&gt;It is only through long-term experiments that we can
unequivocally separate out short-term dynamics&lt;br/&gt;from long-term forest
trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;