* 0212746
* Relationships of Protein Dynamics to Structure and Stability
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Martin Stone, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2008
* USD 545,000.00

The objective of this project is to understand the relationship of dynamics to
structural features and fold stability in a small model protein, the B1 domain
of Streptococcal protein G. This will be accomplished by using NMR relaxation
data to compare the backbone NH and side chain methyl group dynamics in various
mutants of the B1 domain. First, for a series of 10 single-site mutants, the
dynamics at the mutation site and remote sites will be correlated with the
properties (volume, branching, and polarity) of the amino acid at the mutation
site. Second, the backbone and side chain conformational entropy of each of the
10 mutants will be estimated from the dynamics data and correlated with the fold
stabilities of the mutants. This section will incorporate dynamics studies of
the folded as well as unfolded forms of the mutants. Third, the extent of
correlated motions in the B1 domain will be investigated by analysis of the
covariation of internal dynamics parameters. Correlation data will be obtained
both for the family of 10 mutants and for the dynamics of the B1 domain measured
at several temperatures. Fourth, the mechanism by which dynamic information is
propagated from a mutation site to a remote site in the B1 domain will be
investigated using double-mutant experiments. Finally, the influence of
secondary structural environment on amino acid dynamics will be investigated
using two B1 domain variants, in which the same 11-amino acid sequence exists in
alpha-helical or beta-hairpin structures, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
chemical properties of proteins such as structural stability, binding to other
molecules, and ability to catalyze reactions can often not be adequately
understood from the static protein structure because these properties are
influenced by the dynamics of the protein. The broad goal of this study is to
understand the relationship of dynamics to structural features and fold
stability in proteins. The study will provide insights that will aid in our
understanding of protein stability and function and may be useful in the design
of proteins with novel properties. The major educational goal of this project is
the training of a graduate student and a postdoctoral research associate.
Activities in the project range from site-directed mutagenesis and protein
expression and purification to NMR spectroscopy, other physical biochemistry
experiments and extensive computational data analysis. The project will involve
development of skills and knowledge in all of these practical areas as well as
in theoretical aspects of protein stability and in experimental
design.&lt;br/&gt;