* 0212742
* Evolution of Dioecy from Distyly and the Impact of Recent Landscape Changes on the Reproductive Systems of Cordia spp in the Guanacaste Region of Costa Rica
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Kamaljit Bawa, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2006
* USD 362,000.00

0212742 Bawa

Breeding systems, a keystone feature of the life history of plants, are known to
be diverse and mutable. Two breeding systems of particular note are distyly and
dioecy. Distyly, with self-incompatible hermaphroditic individuals of two types,
has evolved multiple times in flowering plants. Mating of the two types of
individuals, (those with long styles and short stamens (pin) and those with
short styles and long stamens (thrum)), is generally restricted to crosses
between types. Dioecious species, on the other hand, have separate male and
female (unisexual) individuals. There are many examples of closely related
species (Cordia spp. is one) that possess these alternative breeding strategies
and it has been repeatedly suggested that dioecy has evolved from distyly. Yet
no genetic tests nor ecological studies have been made to confirm or refute the
likelihood of this evolutionary pathway. The first objective of this research is
to use molecular phylogenetic techniques to reconstruct the phylogeny of Cordia
spp. and to map changes in breeding system onto it. The second objective is to
use DNA markers to identify regions linked to sex-determining genes in dioecious
species and to flower morphology (pin and thrum) in distylous species. These
markers will be utilized to characterize the genetic basis of each breeding
system, the likelihood of a common origin, and the specific steps that lead to
changes.

These studies will provide information about the direction of evolutionary
change in breeding systems in a tropical tree. This work will lay the foundation
for future studies on how breeding system evolution occurs within the context of
rapidly changing environments (e.g., changes in the pollinator community brought
on by landscape-level disturbance), a topic of considerable importance for
conservation biology. The research will also impact human resource development
because of PIs' strong commitment to provide research opportunities for female
students and for students from groups under-represented in science (e.g.,
through our summer Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) programs, McNair
fellowships and Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology (UMEB)). In
addition the project will train graduate students and post doctoral associates.

