* 0212917
* Climatic and Ecological Controls on the Holocene Range Expansion of Western Hemlock and Western Redcedar in the Interior Pacific Northwest
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Feng Sheng Hu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2005
* USD 329,693.00

0212917&lt;br/&gt;Hu&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of the proposed research are
to determine Holocene migration lags of western&lt;br/&gt;hemlock and western
redcedar in the interior Pacific Northwest and to examine the relative
importance of climatic change,dispersal limitation,and stand-level invasibility
as controls of migration. These two species currently co-dominate late-
successional forests in a coastal distributional range and an interior
distributional range separated by a &gt;160-km wide dispersal barrier of semi-
arid grassland and pine forest. Preliminary data suggests that invasion of these
species into the interior range lagged behind the establishment of suitable
climatic conditions by &gt;3000 years, longer than any migration lag
hypothesized by previous studies. This possibility stands in sharp contrast to
the inference from several decades of paleoecological studies in the coastal
range that migration lags were generally unimportant in the heterogeneous
landscapes of the Pacific Northwest where most species arrived shortly after
deglaciation. Because of the dearth of paleoecologic and paleoclimatic data from
the interior range, however, it remains uncertain to what extent the range
expansion of hemlock and cedar into the interior lagged behind climatic change
to suitable conditions and how climatic constraints, dispersal limitation, and
stand-level invasibility affected their expansion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address the research objectives, this study will employ a suite of paleoecologic
tools and state-of-the-art paleoclimatic methods to reconstruct vegetation, fire
disturbance, and climate at three pairs of sites across a latitudinal gradient
in the interior range. Specifically, sediment cores from these sites will be
analyzed for pollen,lignified stomata,wood fibers,and plant macrofossils to
detect range expansion of hemlock and cedar at three spatial scales (between the
coastal and interior ranges, within the interior range, and arrival adjacent to
lakes).Macroscopic-charcoal analysis of these sediment cores will be used to
identify fire events and assess the effect of fire on stand
invasibility.Reconstructions of effective moisture and growing-season
temperature will be made from oxygen-isotope and trace-element analyses as well
as diatom and midget ransfer-functions.Chronological controls will be based on
AMS 14 C dates of plant macrofossils,ages of tephra layers,and 210 Pb dates of
bulk sediments.These results will be&lt;br/&gt;integrated to quantify migration
lags of hemlock and cedar and assess various scale-dependent migration
controls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To our knowledge,this is the first comprehensive
paleoecological study using independent measures of vegetation,disturbance,and
climate to address the relative roles of dispersal limitation,stand-scale
invasibility,and climatic constraints during range expansion.This project will
result in a large multi-proxy data set relevant for understanding future range
shifts on the fragmented landscapes of the northern temperate regions.Evidence
of a large migration lag at the inter-range scale would suggest that long-
distance dispersal events occur infrequently,and thus range shifts at similar
scales during anticipated climatic change may be constrained by limited long-
distance dispersal.In contrast,evidence of climatic limitation (i.e.,no
migration lag)would imply that the relatively small-magnitude changes toward
cooler and wetter climatic conditions in the last 4000-2000 years were necessary
for the invasion of hemlock and cedar into the interior range,and thus these
forests will be vulnerable to future warming. Contrasting migration lags across
the coastal and interior ranges and within the interior range should offer
insights into the patterns of plant migration in highly fragmented landscapes
versus in the absence of a dispersal barrier.At the local scale,evidence for
fire-mediated invasion would show that stand-scale invasibility is an additional
important mechanism controlling the range expansion of these species.This
multiple-proxy/multiple-scale approach represents a significant advance in
interpreting Holocene records of plant migration.