* 0212393
* RUI: Developmental and Cognitive Constraints on Birdsong Learning
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Richard Braaten, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 07/31/2006
* USD 261,251.00

RUI: Developmental and Cognitive Constraints on Birdsong
Learning&lt;br/&gt;Richard F. Braaten, Colgate University,
PI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animals are constrained in the kinds of things that they
are most likely to learn. For example, humans and other primates easily learn to
fear snakes and other predators of their evolutionary ancestors, but do not so
easily learn to fear some other objects, even when they are clearly associated
with danger. As another example, rodents and other mammals are more likely to
learn about the association between the taste of food and subsequent illness
than about other characteristics of the feeding experience. Birdsong learning is
a particularly interesting example of constrained learning because it is
constrained in two ways. First, songbirds are more likely to learn the song of
their species than the songs of other species, even under experimental
conditions in which the amount of song exposure is equated. Second, like human
language learning, in which languages are learned more effectively early in
life, birdsong learning is also temporally constrained. Songbirds are much more
likely to learn songs presented during a specialized early period of
development, the sensitive period. This project attempts to better understand
the role that cognitive processes such as attention, perception, and memory may
play in constraints on song learning in birds, and also how the role of these
cognitive processes may change with development. For example, do birds learn the
songs of their own species because those songs are particularly memorable? Are
they especially memorable during the sensitive period of song learning? To
answer these questions, zebra finches will learn to make responses to particular
songs to receive food reward. Birds will later be tested for their memory of
both their own and other species' songs. In order to study possible
developmental changes in memory, zebra finches will be tested during and after
the sensitive period for song learning, at 30 and 90 days. Effects of early
experience will also be evaluated by testing 30-day-old birds raised in acoustic
isolation from zebra finch song. Similar experiments will be done that will
assess developmental changes in attention, perception, and categorization of the
songs of zebra finches and other species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this research are two-fold. An understanding of the cognitive
processes involved in constraints on song learning may help to better understand
constraints on learning in general. Song learning in birds has many parallels
with human speech development, including the existence of sensitive periods, and
the presumed involvement of attentional, perceptual, and memory processes in
human speech learning. The second broader impact of this work derives from it
being carried out in an undergraduate institution. Concepts and experiments from
this proposal will be integrated into all levels of the undergraduate
curriculum. Undergraduates will be involved in the research both during the
academic year, and as part of a special summer research program at Colgate
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;