* 0212935
* Understanding Maternal Effects in a Natural Population of a Long-Lived Organism
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Rachel Bowden, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 07/31/2006
* USD 314,999.00

In several major groups of vertebrate animals, offspring sex is determined
permanently by environmental temperatures experienced during embryonic
development. Little is understood about the importance of many aspects of this
phenomenon (known as TSD). The roles of genetic and nongenetic maternal effects,
like reproductive physiology and behavior under natural conditions, are
particularly in need of critical evaluation. The proposed research will
investigate several significant maternal aspects of the biology of TSD in a
natural population of long-lived vertebrates that has been studied in detail
since 1988: (1) the impact of maternally-derived yolk hormones and how such
hormones might vary with maternal age, (2) the genetically inherited component
of nesting behavior of females with TSD, and (3) the genetically inherited
component of offspring sex determination under TSD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
questions will be addressed with a series of multi-year field and laboratory
projects. A team of postdoctoral and student researchers will gather crucial new
physiological, behavioral, and genetic data. The research team will study
animals from a natural population during nesting events. Vegetation cover over
nests, which accurately predicts offspring sex ratio, and nesting date will be
recorded. Data will then be obtained for offspring sex ratio for each nest, and
incubation temperature, yolk hormone levels in eggs, and offspring paternity for
a focal subset of nests. The findings of this research will have important
implications for the impacts of climate change and human habitat use on the
biology and conservation of species with TSD. This research program will also
provide extensive educational opportunities for numerous students (including
underrepresented minorities, persons with disabilities, and women) and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;