* 0212869
* Solving a Bottleneck in Functional Genomics:  Rules for Efficient Computational Identification of Cis-Regulatory Elements by Interspecific Sequence Comparison
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Eric Davidson, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/28/2006
* USD 949,123.00

0212869&lt;br/&gt;Cameron&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
details of how individual cis-regulatory elements function and how the gene
regulatory networks they form control developmental process is crucial to
understanding how the genome works, how development works, and how evolution
works. An effective method of locating individual cis-regulatory elements is
comparative sequence analysis conducted at appropriate divergence times to
reveal conserved elements. Current results show that this approach may yield a
more than 10-fold increase in rate of experimental cis-regulatory element
discovery, compared to the most efficient "blind" search methods. However,
general rules for carrying out such analyses are not yet known, and initial work
has shown very different degrees of similarity between genomic regions
surrounding different genes in a single pair of sea urchin species. These
investigators propose to determine the rules for efficient cis-regulatory
sequence prediction by interspecific sequence analysis. To this end they will
analyze and then test by gene transfer putative cis-regulatory elements
identified in the vicinity of about 20 different genes, using several different
echinoderm species that display a range of phylogenetic relatedness. The sea
urchin embryo is a model system of choice in which this method can be quickly
and effectively explored: species separated by various known evolutionary
distances are available; they have already established methods for comparative
prediction of conserved cis-regulatory sequence for one sea urchin species pair
and shown that the methods work; and there is a practical high throughput gene
transfer technology available. These investigators will construct BAC libraries
for 6-8 species including sea urchins, and for more distant comparisons, a sea
star and a hemichordate. Sequence of BACs containing the set of genes to be
studied will be obtained, and they will then identify putative cis-regulatory
regions for the candidate genes selected, as indicated by interspecific sequence
comparison at diverse distances. These DNA fragments will be tested for cis-
regulatory capability by gene transfer. Not only will this approach reveal rules
for computational cis-regulatory analysis, but it will also support the
extension of the current repertoire of BAC libraries, improve computational
tools, and generate more efficient laboratory methods for this essential
research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;