* 0212138
* A Systematic Investigation of Golden Algae - Ochromonadales (Chrysophyceae).
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Robert Andersen, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 299,999.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Robert Andersen at Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean
Sciences to investigate the systematic biology of golden algae. The
Chrysophyceae (golden algae) contain many common freshwater and marine algal
species. Most species are microscopic and were described about 100 years ago
using only a light microscope. Recent studies revealed that older studies were
too simplistic and inaccurate. This study will examine the largest taxonomic
order of the Chrysophyceae, the order Ochromonadales, with emphasis on the
largest genus, Ochromonas. These are biflagellate microorganisms that are able
to conduct photosynthesis. Preliminary results showed that the small subunit
ribosomal RNA and the ribulose bis-phosphate carboxylase/oxygenase genes are
appropriate for the DNA portion of the study. Additionally, the electron
microscope will be used to study flagella and special vesicles of keystone
species, i.e., those especially important for understanding evolution of these
algae. We anticipate the discovery and description of several new species, as
well as new genera, that have heretofore been unknown to science. The completed
project will provide a modern taxonomic revision for this large and important
group of algae. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Chrysophyte algae help form the base of
the food chain in aquatic ecosystems, and freshwater and marine animals depend
directly, or indirectly, on these algae. Those in drinking water treatment
plants or environmental science companies, who work in aquatic ecosystems,
depend upon systematic biologists, like myself, for accurate and thorough
descriptions of species. Also, biochemists, molecular biologists, and
biotechnologists depend upon systematic biologists for accurate identifications
of cultures and precise descriptions for species. Our previous research
discovered a new group of algae that produce large amounts of polyunsaturated
fatty acids (PUFAs), especially EPA, which is very beneficial for human health
(reduces heart disease). These new PUFA algae are related to the Chrysophyceae,
and perhaps additional organisms, which are beneficial to human health, will be
discovered and described in this study.&lt;br/&gt;