* 0212123
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Responses of Productivity and Nutrient Dynamics to Elevated CO2 in an Intact Mojave Desert Ecosystem.
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* James Reynolds, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 07/31/2006
* USD 211,088.00

The Nevada Desert FACE Facility (NDFF) is a long-term research project examining
the responses of an intact Mojave Desert ecosystem to elevated CO2. In the first
four years of NDFF operation, we found that primary production increased
substantially at elevated CO2, but only in wet years, and that an exotic annual
grass responded more strongly than did native shrubs and annuals. Therefore, our
initial results suggest that an ecosystem type (drylands) that represents 30% of
the earth's terrestrial surface area may not respond to elevated CO2 in a simple
manner, as predicted by existing models of global
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the context of these results and the long-term
nature of our desert FACE experiment, we propose to address three overarching
questions in this study:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Will elevated CO2 alter
community composition and structure in the Mojave Desert by continuing to
stimulate a disproportionate increase in an exotic annual species?&lt;br/&gt;2.
Will the increases in production and changes in nutrient dynamics that we have
observed in response to a step-change increase in CO2 be sustained over
time?&lt;br/&gt;3. Can we adapt proven models of desert ecosystem function to
predict how this Mojave Desert ecosystem will respond to elevated CO2 in the
future?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in our
conceptual approach in which we are focusing on the functional interactions
between species composition and ecosystem function, tied together by an explicit
modeling component. The model will be an adaptation of an established, validated
desert model (PALS, the Patch Arid Lands Simulator) that will be used to develop
a synthetic understanding of biotic and abiotic controls on carbon, nitrogen,
and water fluxes to elevated CO2 in this arid ecosystem. The broader impact of
this proposed study will be an examination of the potential invasion of an
exotic species in response to elevated CO2, and how this process may impact
ecosystem function, and therefore ecosystem services, in a desert environment.
Through this research program, we are also forging a cohesive network between
five research campuses. To date, our research group has an excellent record of
training undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral scholars at the NDFF,
including members of underrepresented groups. This study will similarly train a
wide spectrum of students and postdocs, both at the NDFF and in our support
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;