* 0212052
* Coordinating Developmental Gene Expression in Myxococcus Xanthus
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,11/30/2004
* Anthony Garza, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 11/30/2004
* USD 399,999.00

Multicellular development depends on cell-cell signaling and the consequences of
this dialogue between cells, which are often large-scale changes in gene
expression. Hence, a fundamental goal of developmental biologists is to
determine how cell-cell signals orchestrate global changes in gene
transcription. The multicellular nature of the Myxococcus xanthus developmental
cycle makes it an excellent model system for studying this basic problem in
developmental biology. During M. xanthus development, large groups of cells
migrate to focal points and begin constructing a multicellular structure called
a fruiting body. Once the fruiting body is molded into its final form, cells
inside this structure differentiate into dormant, stress-resistant spores. Many
M. xanthus genes are developmentally regulated, and cell-cell signaling is
required for the temporal expression of these genes. However, what happens
between production of these cell-cell signals and transcription of developmental
genes has remained relatively uncharted territory. This project focuses on a
family of proteins that play a prominent role in regulating these coordinated
changes in gene expression, the NtrC family of transcriptional activators. It
has been proposed that M. xanthus uses a series of NtrC-like proteins to
activate expression of specific sets of genes at specific times in development;
seven different NtrC-like activators that are required for development have been
uncovered. Using genetic and biochemical approaches, this research project will
examine the role that NtrC-like activators play in orchestrating developmental
gene expression in M. xanthus.