* 0212101
* Introducing Engineering Through Mathematics
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Muddappa Gowda, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2008
* USD 374,930.00

The University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) will address the need to
increase both the awareness of and interest in career opportunities in
engineering by developing algebra curricula that use engineering applications to
build students mathematical skills and understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UMBC,
in collaboration with Baltimore County Public Schools, Anne Arundel County
Public&lt;br/&gt;Schools, the Maryland State Department of Education, Northrop
Grumman, The Whiting-Turner&lt;br/&gt;Contracting Company, Meade Middle and High
Schools, Sollers Point/Southeastern High School, the Baltimore Museum of
Industry, The American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and UMBC's Center for
Women and Information Technology, will work to achieve the following
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop curriculum kits, each one targeting
a different aspect of engineering (chemical, electrical, civil, and mechanical)
that can be used in both middle and high school algebra classes.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Provide a five-day summer workshop annually for 30 in-service mathematics
teachers and 10 undergraduate engineering Teaching Fellows. This workshop will
give an introduction to engineering career opportunities, and an overview of the
curricula on the kits prior to classroom use.&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop an
undergraduate engineering Teaching Fellows program targeting women and
&lt;br/&gt;other underrepresented minorities to provide hands-on instructional
classroom support for middle and high school algebra teachers to help them
integrate the curricula into their courses. The Fellows program will also
support the long-term retention of current engineering students, particularly
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;4. Maintain student interest in engineering
at eight schools through the development and&lt;br/&gt;institutionalization of
an after-school engineering program that culminates in a series
of&lt;br/&gt;collaborative and competitive activities.&lt;br/&gt;5. Increase the
involvement of females and other underrepresented groups in engineering by
providing female and minority engineering role models in the classroom and
developing curricula that encourage interest and participation by all
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "Introducing Engineering Through Mathematics"
project will benefit UMBC, the State of&lt;br/&gt;Maryland, and a nation in
great need of a larger and more diverse technology workforce. The engineering
program at UMBC will improve its retention rate through the project's Fellows
program. Also, students and teachers throughout Maryland will become familiar
with engineering through the standard algebra curriculum. Further, increased
numbers of diverse students will understand and be able to apply higher
mathematics concepts and be more likely to pursue further training in science
and mathematics. Finally, greater numbers of diverse students will develop an
interest in and select engineering as a career.&lt;br/&gt;