* 0212582
* Inbreeding Depression in Metapopulations: Epistasis and Purging
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Michael Wade, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 09/30/2005
* USD 339,000.00

This research investigates the contribution of gene interactions to inbreeding
depression, the decline in viability and reproduction that affects the offspring
of close genetic relatives. Over many generations, inbreeding depression can be
mitigated or "purged" as natural selection removes deleterious genes and gene
combinations from inbreeding populations. Using a combination of theory and
experiment, with flour beetles as the model system, this research investigates
the rate of inbreeding depression and the rate of purging for single genes and
gene combinations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conservation strategies for managing
the genetics of endangered species use elaborate pedigrees designed to minimize
inbreeding depression. Because they mitigate inbreeding, they necessarily
mitigate purging. These management strategies are based upon single-gene theory.
When inbreeding depression is caused by gene interactions, it can accumulate
faster or slower than expected from single-gene theory. Thus, current
conservation practice might be either overly elaborate or hopelessly inadequate
for its goal of minimizing inbreeding depression. In addition, a balance between
inbreeding and purging might represent the best strategy in the long run. With
gene interactions, purging by selection removes groups of deleterious
interacting genes and be much faster than the rate predicted by single-gene
theory, where genes are removed independently, one at a time. &lt;br/&gt;