* 0212896
* International Symbiosis Society Congress Support, August 17-23, 2003, Saint Mary's University, Halifax, Nova Scotia
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Douglas Zook, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2004
* USD 15,000.00

The International Symbiosis Society based at Boston University requests support
for the planning and convening of its next scientific research Congress set for
August 17 - 23, 2003 at Saint Mary's University, Halifax, Nova Scotia. Five
hundred participants are expected, most working in specific symbiotic systems
such as mycorrhizae-plant interactions, endophytic fungi and grasses, nitrogen
fixing bacteria/cyanobacteria and their hosts, hermatypic corals and
dinoflagellates, lichens, insect and rumen gut microfauna, Azolla/Oryza sativa
growth enhancement, and orchid ecology.

Keynote speakers/leaders for the symposia include David Read, U. of Sussex, UK;
Birgitta Bergman, Stockholm U.; Margaret McFall-Ngai, U. of Hawaii; Angela
Douglas,York U., UK; Jan Sapp, U. of Montreal; Lynn Margulis, U. of
Massachusetts; and Ove Hoegh-Guldberg, Queensland U., Australia, among others.
Congress organizers are Society President Douglas Zook biologist and science
educator at Boston University and who is the P.I., and David Richardson, Dean of
Science and lichenologist at Saint Mary's University, Halifax.

The Society is particularly unique in that it by its very nature it builds
bridges among biologists/ecologists who would otherwise remain separated.
Therefore, the main objective of the Congress is to provide a special world
forum where symbiologists can optimally exchange knowledge and ideas. Also, its
dialogue and outcomes will contribute to a greater understanding of global
ecology, regional ecosystem function, and cell biology; encourage involvement in
ecology in general and symbiosis in particular by students; and, actively
promote content and curriculum enhancement in symbiosis for both pre-college and
university teachers.

A focus theme of the Congress will be global threats to keystone symbionts, such
as bleaching of zooxanthellae, lichen susceptibility to sulfur dioxide and
related emissions, and the demise of larger symbiont-containing foraminifera.
This theme further emphasizes the deep but often ignored role symbiosis plays in
earth systems and human society. Agriculture, forestry, biome establishment,
restoration ecology, coral reef existence, and fundamental understandings of the
eukarya cell are all substantiually dependent on symbiosis.

More then fifty per cent of the funds for the Congress will be covered by
registrant fees and some projected private corporate support. The ISS seeks
additional support from the NSF to help defray travel costs for graduate
students; to provide travel and related support for featured speakers; to assist
teacher attendance and support a symbiosis teacher workshop at the Congress; and
to cover costs of key publications, such as special editions of the ISS
newsletter, Symbiosis International, which will highlight Congress
announcements, conference schedule booklet, and the Congress abstract book.
Ongoing post-Congress contact will be mainained through a web exchange network
on the ISS web sites (Congress web site is http://people.bu.edu/dzook/), and
selected papers from the Congress will be published during 2004 in a special
issue of the ISS affiliated journal, Symbiosis, published out of Tel Aviv.