* 0212659
* Characterization of Aux/IAA Protein Degradation in Higher Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Judy Callis, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2006
* USD 350,000.00

The regulation of proteolysis is an emerging paradigm in cellular and organismal
regulation. Multiple pathways have been demonstrated to be regulated through the
specific and controlled degradation of both regulatory and downstream proteins.
In higher plants, multiple aspects of plant growth and development require
auxin, of which indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) is the most abundant naturally
occurring biologically active member. Auxin regulates cell division, cell
elongation, cell differentiation, and it plays an important role in multiple
organismal processes such as lateral root initiation, apical dominance, and
tropic responses.&lt;br/&gt; Molecular and biochemical studies have identified
the family of Aux/IAA proteins as essential players in the auxin signal
&lt;br/&gt;transduction pathway that alters gene expression in plants. In
addition to the activity of the Aux/IAA proteins (which remains poorly
characterized), their rapid degradation has emerged as an integral part of their
biological function. The mechanism and role of this rapid proteolysis is the
focus of this study. &lt;br/&gt; Based on work in other systems demonstrating
that the cis-acting requirement for proteolysis is represented by a small region
that can target other proteins for degradation, the rapid degradation of a
fusion of Aux/IAA amino acids to the marker enzyme firefly luciferase was
demonstrated directly in transgenic Arabidopsis plants. The nature of absolutely
required Aux/IAA amino acids were defined, however, flanking sequences appear to
affect proteolysis in a way that was not completely understood. Experiments
proposed here will define the role of these sequences. Point mutations and
deletions of Aux/IAA sequences will be made, fused to LUC and the fusion protein
half-life determined in transgenic plants. To determine whether all Aux/IAA
proteins have the same half-life, the ability of additional Aux/IAA proteins to
target LUC for degradation will be determined. An Aux/IAA protein lacking the
required conserved amino acids will tested for in vivo degradation as a LUC
fusion. If not rapidly degraded, this protein will serve as the starting point
to determine the sufficiency of the Aux/IAA degradation signal. &lt;br/&gt;
Application of exogenous auxin alters the rate of Aux/IAA proteolysis, providing
for the first time experimental evidence for a proposed mechanism for auxin-
regulated gene expression. Increased loss of Aux/IAA proteins by faster
proteolysis correlated with induction of transcription of genes containing
auxin-response elements in their regulatory regions. Experiments will be
performed to test whether alterations in endogenous auxin alter Aux/IAA
proteolysis through the construction of transgenic plants with inducible
expression of enzymes that alter IAA steady state levels. The above studies will
be complemented by a genetic approach to isolate mutants defective in
Aux/IAA::LUC degradation. Additional screens, including an activation tagging
screen, will be initiated. The effect on Aux/IAA::LUC proteolysis of previously
described mutants altered in auxin responses will also be determined to identify
genes important for Aux/IAA proteolysis. &lt;br/&gt; The results from the
proposed work will be highly significant given the importance of the regulation
of Aux/IAA proteolysis in auxin signaling and the importance of auxin in
regulating plant growth and development. Aux/IAA proteolysis will serve as a
model by which other cellular pathways may be regulated, providing methodogy,
reagents, and experimental approaches useful in other systems. Sequences defined
in these studies may be used in other contexts to control the intracellular
level of a protein.&lt;br/&gt;