* 0212362
* Computational Analysis of Peptide/lipid Interactions and Organization at Membrane Surfaces
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Diana Murray, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2005
* USD 388,314.00

The focus of this project is the development of numerical procedures for
calculating the physical basis of the association of peptides with the membrane
interface, the electrostatic forces involved in lateral redistribution of
lipids, and detailed electrostatic properties of membrane systems based on more
realistic models than have been used in the past. This project is based on two
main hypotheses: 1) Physical forces-electrostatics and hydrophobicity-mediate
the membrane association of amphipathic peptides: the electrostatic interactions
occur between basic residues and acidic phospholipids, and the hydrophobic
interactions are mediated via aromatic residues which partition into the polar
headgroup region of the membrane. 2) Nonspecific electrostatic interactions
provide the driving force for the observed lateral sequestration of multivalent
acidic phospholipids by clusters of basic residues on membrane-adsorbed peptides
corresponding to these basic domains. The finite difference Poisson-Boltzmann
(FDPB) method, which is based on a continuum description of the aqueous solvent
and a more detailed, atomic-level description of the macromolecules, has been
remarkably successful in its ability to reproduce experimental measurements of
the binding free energies of simple basic peptides that do not penetrate the
membrane interface. Here, the continuum approach will be extended to peptides
containing basic and aromatic residues that do penetrate the membrane interface.
In addition, more realistic structural and theoretical models of
peptide/membrane systems will be developed by incorporating snapshots from
molecular dynamics simulations of membranes into FDPB calculations. Comparison
with experiments at all levels will allow refinement of the theoretical
methodology and provide valuable input to the experimental studies.

The research described here is based on computational approaches and aims
ultimately to provide a detailed theoretical description of the interactions
between peripheral proteins and membranes. This research is important both
because of the significance of the general area of peptide/membrane interactions
and because many of the questions posed can only be approached with
computational methods. This project involves the combined development and
application of biophysical tools to describe problems that have not previously
been studied with computational techniques and close collaborative interactions
between computational and experimental work. The principal investigator is
involved in a number of graduate programs such as the Program for Chemical
Biology, the Biochemistry and Structural Biology Graduate Program, and the Keck
Program in Cellular and Molecular Biophysics of Signal Transduction. The
computational and research infrastructure being developed through projects such
as this one is contributing to the enrichment of the graduate training
environment.