* 0212772
* New Hydrogen Bonding Modules for Supramolecular Polymer Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Steven Zimmerman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 07/31/2006
* USD 445,000.00

The objectives of this work are to develop DNA base-pair analogs which can self
assemble (using hydrogen bonding) into oligomers and polymers that adopt defined
three dimensional structures. They will start this investigation by preparing
new base-pair analogs and study the structural factors that determine base-pair
stability. They will also work to develop a model to predict analog base-pair
stability. Oligomers and polymers of these base pair analogs will then be
synthesized with the goal being the preparation of self assembled polymers which
can equilibrate between folded and sheet-like structures. Molecules which can
use light to accomplish this equilibration are particularly desirable and will
be studied in detail. These self assembling polymeric materials may have
properties, such as self healing, which are not currently available with
traditional covalently bonded polymers. The incorporation of these small
molecules with defined hydrogen bonding capabilities into bulk commerical
polymers may one day lead to higher performance
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Steven C. Zimmerman of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Illinois. Dr. Zimmerman and his
students will work on the development of DNA base-pair analogs which can self
assemble into oligomers and polymers that adopt defined three dimensional
structures. Polymers of these base-pair analogs will then be prepared with the
goal being the preparation of self assembled polymers which can equilibrate
between folded and sheet-like structures. Molecules which can use light to
accomplish this equilibration are particularly desirable and will be studied in
detail. These self assembling polymeric materials may have properties, such as
self healing, which are not currently available with traditional covalently
bonded polymers. The incorporation of these small molecules with defined
hydrogen bonding capabilities into bulk commerical polymers may one day lead to
higher performance materials. Students trained during the course of this
interdisciplinary work will gain skills needed by the pharmaceutical, polymer
and speciality chemicals industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;