* 0212411
* CRB: Effects of Harvesting and White-Tailed Deer Browsing on Demography and Population Viability of American Ginseng
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* James McGraw, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2007
* USD 277,000.00

0212411&lt;br/&gt;McGraw&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;American ginseng an uncommon
perennial plant native to the eastern deciduous forest. Harvest of natural
populations occurs in response to demand for roots of this slow-growing,
medicinally active plant from the Asian market. Its harvest by rural, often
poor, Appalachian people serves several economic, social and cultural functions.
Multiple lines of evidence suggest ginseng as a natural resource of our forests
has declined in both abundance and stature over the past two centuries. Ginseng
is potentially a victim of a dual problem - one caused by competition among
harvesters for the root, and a second caused by collateral effects of too many
white-tailed deer. The federal government, in cooperation with states, is
required to certify the sustainability of harvest since ginseng is listed on
Appendix II of CITES (the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species). However, no standardized monitoring procedure, demographic statistics,
or population viability estimates are available for ginseng in the U.S. The
primary goal of this research is to fill this gap by assessing population growth
rates, diagnosing causes of low population growth rates where they occur
(focusing on harvest and browsing as possible factors), and evaluating possible
prescriptions for reversing population decline. This study will also provide a
prognosis for ginseng in terms of extinction probabilities as they may vary with
management schemes. Natural ginseng populations from a four-state area (Indiana,
Kentucky, Virginia, and West Virginia) will be studied over a four-year period
(2002 - 2005), continuing a data collection process begun in 2000. Using the
analysis and modeling tools of population biology, the research goals described
above will be addressed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be the most
extensive, in-depth effort to evaluate the status and potential conservation
strategies for ginseng to date. The research has the potential to impact tens of
thousands of ginseng harvesters as well as numerous local, state, and federal
land managers and regulatory agencies. In the science of conservation biology
and population biology, the example of ginseng could become a model for how
knowledge of population biology can be applied to preserve both a native plant
species and the cultural traditions that have developed around that species.
Undergraduate and graduate student involvement with research on this charismatic
native plant will develop further expertise and interest in conservation
biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;