* 0212210
* New Early Transition Metal Metallocene Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Richard Jordan, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 07/31/2006
* USD 423,000.00

This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Professor Richard F. Jordan of the University of Chicago to
develop efficient methods for the stereoselective synthesis of chiral ansa-
metallocenes and to expand the fundamental understanding of the properties of d0
metal olefin complexes that are models for transient intermediates in olefin
polymerization reactions. Metallocene complexes of early transition metals, such
as Ti, Zr and Hf, are important in organic synthesis and closely related
cationic complexes are the active species in olefin polymerizations. Chiral
ansa-metallocenes, in which the two cyclopentadienyl rings are linked, are
important stereoselective olefin polymerization catalysts and have been employed
as enantioselective catalysts or reagents for other olefin reactions.
Metallocene compounds with ligands that can control the face-selectivity of
cyclopentadienyl ligands will be prepared involving 6-membered chelate rings in
bis-amide complexes that adopt twist conformations, which complement 2-fold
symmetric rac-metallocenes and strongly disfavor meso-metallocene structures.
This first part of this research will: 1) develop streamlined ansa-metallocene
syntheses based on chelate-controlled salt-elimination and amine-elimination
reactions, 2) establish the generality of this approach for group 4 and group
3/lanthanide ansa-metallocenes with diverse structures, 3) understand the
stereocontrol mechanisms in chelate-controlled ansa-metallocenes with synthesis
through studies of the conformational and dynamic properties of group 4 metal
bis-amide complexes, and 4) design chiral group-4 metal bis-amide precursors for
the enantioselective synthesis of ansa-metallocenes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
second part of this research is to use alkoxy metallocene olefin complexes as
models for the similar alkyl metallocene olefin cation complexes that are
involved in olefin polymerization. The alkoxide model systems exhibit enhanced
thermal stability and do not undergo olefin insertion, which enables studies of
the metal-olefin bonding. Models are designed to provide a detailed picture of
how d0 metal species bind and activate olefins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide rigorous and broad training for graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows in challenging organometallic synthesis, modern
spectroscopic methods and mechanistic studies, and facilitate the application of
the targeted compounds in economically important catalytic
syntheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic routes to enantioselective catalytic
reagents will be devised and models of complexes that catalyze the
polymerization of olefins will be used to gain insight as to how these catalysts
operate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;