* 0212110
* Urochordate Origins of Neural Crest and Muscle
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2006
* William Jeffery, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 11/30/2006
* USD 420,000.00

0212110&lt;br/&gt;Jeffery&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about the origins
of vertebrate features in the Phylum Chordata. Here, the focus is on aspects of
urochordate development that are expected to shed new light on this important
problem in evolution and development. The overall goal is to assess the origins
of two key vertebrate features in the ascidian urochordates: (1) migratory
neural crest cells and (2) larval musculature specified by inductive processes.
The ascidian species used in contemporary developmental biology (e. g., Ciona,
Molgula, Styela, and Halocynthia) exhibit rapidly developing, highly streamlined
tadpole larvae. These derived larva appear to lack migratory neural crest cells
and contain only about 40 tail muscle cells, which are primarily specified by
localized cytoplasmic determinants. The streamlined tadpoles, which have evolved
for rapid dispersal, are not representative of most ascidian larvae. Most
ascidian species have larger, slowly developing tadpoles with more complex heads
and robust tails, which are likely to represent the true ancestral state.
Accordingly, Dr. Jeffery will introduce here the ascidian Ecteinascidia
turbinata as an experimental system to study the origin of key vertebrate
features in the urochordates. Ecteinascidia, a close relative of Ciona, has a
giant tadpole larva exhibiting a head with preformed siphon rudiments, enlarged
sensory organs, and pharyngeal gill slits, and a robust tail with 1134 muscle
cells. The development of ascidians with highly differentiated tadpoles has been
virtually ignored and is ripe for analysis using modern technologies. The
Ecteinascidia system will permit him to combine a variety of experimental
embryological and molecular approaches, including use of ongoing Ciona genomic
and EST databases, to study the evolution of development. This proposal
specifically addresses neural crest and muscle development in Ecteinascidia
embryos. First, he will determine whether Ecteinascidia embryos have migratory
cells homologous to vertebrate neural crest cells using a combination of vital
dye and gene marking studies. He already has strong evidence from DiI marking
experiments that migratory neural crest-like cells are present. He will
determine the embryonic sources, regional migration patterns, and developmental
fates of the neural crest-like cells, and compare their properties to vertebrate
neural crest cells. Second, he will determine whether the development of tail
muscle cells in Ecteinascidia is controlled by cytoplasmic determinants, the
predominant means of tail muscle specification in ascidians with streamlined
larvae, or by inductive processes, the method of muscle specification
characteristic of vertebrates. These studies will be carried out by a
combination of cell lineage tracing, in situ mRNA and protein localization, and
blastomere isolation and recombination. The intellectual merit of these studies
is that they will provide new information on the evolutionary history of neural
crest cells and the mechanisms of tail muscle development in the urochordates.
The broader impacts of the proposed activity is that it will address the origin
of key vertebrate features in the Phylum Chordata and focus our future attention
on particular chordate or non-chordate groups in order to chart the evolutionary
beginnings of the complex vertebrate body plan. Finally, the research is planned
to foster general education in research by incorporating undergraduate students
into the investigative process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;