* 0212417
* In Vivo Pathways of Molecular Evolution:  Acquisition of Thermostability by Mesophilic Adenylate Kinase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Yousif Shamoo, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 385,000.00

Using in vivo molecular evolution the P.I. is studying how an organism mutates
an essential gene as a response to changes in its environment. The model
organism is a genetically modified strain of B. stearothermophilus (a
thermophile) that has had the wild type copy of the essential adenylate kinase
gene (adk) replaced by the mesophilic B. subtilis gene. The grant focuses on two
key attributes of molecular evolution; firstly, what are the characteristics of
bacterial populations as they adapt to environmental extremes, and secondly,
what are the physicochemical properties of the proteins generated from these
selections. The experiments follow populations of mutant bacteria as they
compete for survival and will use x-ray crystallography to examine the
stereochemical basis for increases in thermostability.

Sequence and structure based comparisons of mesophilic and thermophilic homologs
have suggested that numerous changes in amino acid sequence can increase
thermostability, whereas in vitro directed evolution has shown that a smaller
number of changes can frequently bring about the required changes in
activity/thermostability. One conclusion frequently drawn from these
observations is that many of the differences seen in sequence are the result of
evolutionary drift, rather than evolutionary necessity. To determine the
principles that guide evolution of a protein, the mutational path(s) taken by a
population of bacteria as they evolve an essential protein to higher
thermostability is being determined. Together with atomic analysis of the
protein intermediates along this path, the complex sequence surface that
constitutes the mutational path to thermostability for the model protein will be
explored. Altering conditions of the evolution experiment can also change the
"mutational path" used by the bacterial populations and allow further insights
into evolution. Thus the primary goal of the work is to elucidate the pathway(s)
used in vivo and to apply biophysical methods to understand the physical basis
for the elaborated mutational pathway(s).