* 0212699
* RUI:  Regioselective Syntheses of Heterocycles and their Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Charles Beam, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2006
* USD 182,000.00

The research in this project will focus on the preparation and study of azoles,
primarily pyrazoles and isoxazoles, and pyranones. For the syntheses, some
emphasis is placed on multiple anion-type syntheses coupled with standard
preparative methodology as exemplified by Claisen-type reactions, aldol-type
reactions and alkylations. Starting materials will consist of readily available
ketones, hydrazones and carboxylic acid hydrazides. Each of the projects will be
organized into smaller component investigations thereby allowing each
undergraduate participant to be involved in at least two investigations.

With this Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research efforts of Dr.
Charles F. Beam and Dr. Jason S. Overby of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at the College/University of Charleston. The principal
investigators will focus their work on the preparation of heterocycles that have
interesting biological activity, that have interesting ligand properties and
compounds that are viable ligands for the construction of new metallocene
derivatives. The students working in the project will have the opportunity to
gain from the experience of both an organic and an inorganic chemist.