* 0212224
* Transfer Facilitation for Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Mary Kocak, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 385,000.00

The objective of the proposed project is to develop and deliver several
internet-based freshman and sophomore level engineering courses through a
partnership between The University of Tennessee (UT), The University of Oklahoma
(OU) and area community colleges. The proposed project will provide new
opportunities for engineering students who wish to transfer to a four-year
institution after completing a pre-engineering program in a Community College,
Junior College or Liberal Arts College that offers most, but not all, of the
freshman and sophomore requirements for an engineering degree. The development
and delivery of asynchronous, open entry/open exit, self-paced courses via the
Internet will enable these students to transfer into a university engineering
program as a junior with all prerequisite requirements satisfied. The major
impacts will be increasing student opportunities for timely completion of
engineering degrees and serving the country's engineering workforce needs.

Approximately fifteen classes have been identified as typical prerequisites for
junior level study in an engineering field that are not offered in pre-
engineering programs. The reason that these courses are not offered is that they
are commonly fairly specialized classes that do not draw substantial enrollments
that make the offerings cost effective. We propose to develop web-based versions
of the seven classes that provide the greatest impact to the engineering field.
Of these seven classes, two (Static's and Dynamics) have been previously
developed at OU for asynchronous web delivery and will be implemented with
improvements for this project.

The model identified for course development merges several technologies to meet
the course delivery objectives. It integrates a phased development methodology
to produce highly interactive animated modules designed to engage the student in
an active learning process. The University of Tennessee's Innovative Technology
Center, Outreach and Continuing Education Division, Center for Advanced
Educational Technology, and College of Engineering faculty have significant
experience in developing interactive web-based courses. At the University of
Oklahoma, the College of Engineering Media Laboratory is headed by the CO-PI of
this grant proposal, who has been involved in web-based, asynchronous course
delivery and training for close to ten years. The synergistic combination of
these two institutions produces a team of educational professionals with the
resources, experience, and desire to successfully attain the goals and
objectives outlined in the proposal.

The long-term goal of this project is to facilitate the articulation of
engineering students by developing and offering the entire set of prerequisite
classes to engineering students enrolled in pre-engineering and engineering
programs throughout the United States. The funding of this grant will result in
the national availability of web-delivered courses to meet a majority the
prerequisite needs and provide a significant step toward meeting the long-term
goal. To provide project guidance and assist with information dissemination, a
national advisory board composed of leaders in the field of education has been
assembled.