* 0212310
* Term Limits in the State Legislatures: Analysis of a 50-State Survey and Collateral Data
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Gary Moncrief, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/2004
* USD 105,941.00

Term limits are the most significant innovation in state legislatures since the
legislative modernization movement of the 1960s and 1970s. Currently, term
limits have taken effect in 11 states; they will go into effect in seven more
between 2002 and 2008. By now, hundreds of legislators have been prevented from
running for re-election. New legislators, in turn, will be forced from office
after as few as six years. Legislative organization has also been affected, as
term limited legislatures can no longer rely heavily on seniority to pick their
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because term limits are new, there is little
evidence about their effects. There has been one comprehensive, 50-state study,
but it was carried out in 1995, before any legislators were actually turned out
of office. Other studies have now begun to appear, but they have typically been
based on one or two legislatures. Now that term limits are in effect in 11
states, with others shortly joining the list, the effects can be gauged more
fully.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project draws on a new, 50-state survey of
legislators along with election data and demographic data about the legislators.
It examines electoral effects (e.g., competition), influence patterns (e.g.,
executive-legislative relations), and procedural effects (e.g., constituent
service). The methodology includes over-time comparisons (using the earlier
survey as a base) as well as comparisons between term limited and non-term
limited states. Multivariate statistical methods allow the investigators to
control for possible confounding factors, including characteristics of the
legislators themselves, of states and chambers, and of legislative
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is part of a cooperative venture
between academic political scientists and the National Conference of State
Legislatures, the Council of State Governments, and the State Legislative
Leaders Foundation. Through this cooperation, it is anticipated that there will
be considerable feedback to the legislatures. In particular, team members will
identify and evaluate ways in which various states have adapted to term limits
and disseminate this information to all term limited states. Non-term limited
states will also benefit from learning about and possibly adopting newly
implemented training, professional development, and procedural
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;