* 0213381
* Study of the ALDOL Reaction
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Paul Williard, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2005
* USD 366,000.00

Alkali metal (Li, Na, K and Cs) and a very few additional cationic (B, Zn, and
Ti) stabilized reagents are among the most widely utilized organometallic
reagents in organic synthesis. However, many questions remain unanswered
concerning their solution and solid-state structures and their reactions. A
better understanding of the aggregation state, the coordination number, the
geometry of the attached ligands, and the intimate structural features have
begun to provide a more thorough model for use in predicting the
stereoselectivity in reactions utilizing these reagents. Professor Williard
proposes a research program designed to obtain structural information by
diffraction analyses for many commonly utilized carbanionic reagents. Specific
to this proposal is a focus on the Aldol reaction. The long-range goal is to fit
the structural information that is obtained into a more coherent pattern of
models utilized to control and to predict mechanism and stereoselectivity.
Controlling stereoselectivity in organic synthesis is especially important to
the design of new reagents. An emphasis will be placed on the solid-state
structural studies of highly reactive and synthetically important carbanionic
intermediates. This project will target specific reactive intermediates, which
are the basis of almost all of our synthetic mechanistic models. A well-known
example is the often-cited Zimmerman-Traxler transition state model for
enolate/aldol reactions. Although this particular structural model is applied
with reasonable success to the correlation of stereoselectivity of many enolate
reactions, very little experimental evidence exists to establish the validity of
this model. Hence, a major goal of this project is to provide structural
information and specific mechanistic details that can be directly related to
established models such as the popular Zimmerman-Traxler model.

With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the
research of Professor Paul G. Williard of Brown University. Professor Williard
is a leading x-ray crystallographer and an organic chemist who is interested in
correlating the structure of enolate salts with their reactivity using aldol
chemistry, which is the key to carbon-carbon bond formation in organic
synthesis. His work will involve undergraduate students as researchers and the
results will be of significant practical importance to the chemical
manufacturing industry.