* 0213652
* SGER: Ethnic Diversity, Social Capital, and Public Goods in East Africa
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Edward Miguel, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2005
* USD 75,624.00

This exploratory research attempts to make at least three contributions to the
literature on the political economy of development, using original data
collection, microeconometric analysis, and formal theory. First, the research
estimates the impact of ethnic diversity on local public goods provision in two
countries, Kenya and Tanzania. Data is being collected on local public goods,
including school funding, maintenance of wells, and community participation in
village meetings. The resulting dataset provides information on the impact of
ethnic divisions on public good provision across a variety of settings and
outcomes. Preliminary empirical results indicate that higher local ethnic
diversity is associated with sharply lower local funding and worse facilities
across ninety rural Kenyan primary schools. The drop in funding associated with
the change from complete ethnic homogeneity to median school ethnic diversity is
approximately 25 percent of average local school funding, and this relationship
is robust to the inclusion of geographic, socioeconomic, demographic and teacher
quality controls. Ethnically diverse areas also have lower community
participation in school committee meetings, as well as substantially worse water
well maintenance in rural western Kenya. Second, the research examines how
central government policies toward ethnicity affect inter-ethnic relations and
public goods provision, by comparing outcomes across two nearby rural districts:
one in western Kenya and one in western Tanzania. Despite their shared
geography, history, and colonial legacy, central governments in Kenya and
Tanzania have followed radically different ethnic policies since independence.
Finally, the research explores the impact of a recent local government
decentralization reform in Tanzania - which was gradually phased-in across
villages - on local public good outcomes. The unique dataset collected in this
project allows the author to test the hypothesis that decentralization reforms
improve public good outcomes, and to explore whether such reforms are less
effective in ethnically diverse areas due to local collective action failures.
Understanding the impacts of decentralization in diverse communities has
important policy implications given the current movement toward decentralization
in many African and other less developed countries. The field data collection in
Tanzania is being conducted in collaboration with a capable local non-
governmental organization that has a well-trained research field staff and data
entry group. The author has been involved in field data collection projects in
East Africa since 1995.