* 0213549
* Collaborative Research:Modeling Issues with Time-Series--Cross-Section Data
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Jonathan Katz, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2004
* USD 111,835.00

Time-Series-cross-section (TSCS) models have become popular in political
science, since they allow students of comparative politics (broadly defined) to
use powerful statistical methods that have been the province of students of
American politics (typically studying voting behavior via large surveys). While
there are many applications, the prototypical application is the study of
political economy, and in particular the impact of political arrangements on
economic performance in advanced industrial societies. TSCS data has also become
of interest in International Relations (IR). Many quantitative IR researchers
use a "dyad-year" design, where pairs of nations are observed annually for long
periods of time (ranging from 40 to over 100 years). The dependent variable of
interest in these studies is often the binary indicator of whether a dyad was in
conflict in a given year. Binary dependent variables cause special
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most studies either ignored TSCS issues or
treated those issues as a nuisance, using a Feasible Generalized Least Squares
(FGLS) estimation method to treat those nuisances. These FGLS procedures either
have poor statistical properties (in finite samples) or seem dangerous on other
grounds. One reason that TSCS data is of interest is that the richness of the
data allows researchers to do many things; but many of those things should not
be done.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; By now most political science scholarly
publications appear to use the methodology developed by the researchers in
earlier research where they recommended the use of Ordinary Least Squares
estimates coupled with panel correct standard errors, with dynamics modeled via
a lagged dependent variable. However, this still treats TSCS issues as problems
of estimation and not specification. The researchers will develop the next
generation TSCS methodology that focuses on specification. They are interested
in studying the best way to model unit heterogeneity directly as well as to
account for spatial correlation that is typically seen in these data. In
addition, for binary TSCS data they explore how best to model temporal
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research entails developing appropriate
estimators and testing them on both actual and simulated data. In addition, the
investigators develop practical advice and software for the applied researcher
using TSCS data that implements this methodology. In addition to developing the
next generation TSCS methodology they gather and catalog a set of reference
datasets for use in evaluating TSCS models. By developing a reference set of
datasets that will be made freely available, the researchers will make it easier
to evaluate future proposed estimators for TSCS data in political science and
therefore improve the field of political methodology.&lt;br/&gt;