* 0213187
* Patterns of Community Assembly in Serpentine Grasslands: The Roles of Initial Plant Composition and Functional Complementarity
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,09/30/2008
* David Hooper, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/2008
* USD 282,504.00

0213187 Hooper The search for patterns of community assembly has occupied the
last 25 years in community ecology and remains controversial today. A commonly
sought assembly rule is that species coexistence in communities will be enhanced
by differences in traits related to competition for limiting resources (i.e.,
that niche overlap is minimized). Put another way, do species from complementary
guilds or functional groups have a better chance of persisting than those with
strong overlap in resource use characteristics? Evidence for the role of
complementarity among plant groups in structuring communities is sporadic. The
balance between rates of external stochastic processes (such as disturbance or
priority effects of colonization) compared to internal community dynamics (such
as competition or facilitation) may be critical in determining the degree to
which internal assembly dynamics are manifested. Gaining further insight into
this question is critical for understanding how communities might be structured,
and for the implications of that structure for ecosystem dynamics. We propose a
five-year experiment to assess the roles of initial plant composition and
functional complementarity in structuring communities of serpentine annual
grasslands. We seek to test several hypotheses centered on the following
questions, generally grouped into two themes: 1) Does the initial composition of
a community shape its subsequent development? If so, for how long? Are there
different stable endpoints? 2) To what extent does complementary resource use
(i.e., niche differentiation) versus dominance among plant species govern
patterns of community development? Are other factors, such as seed input or
climatic conditions more important in determining community composition? Our
goal is not to prove or disprove the predominance of assembly rules, but rather
to better understand the conditions under which they might strongly influence
community composition versus be overwhelmed by other factors. We will use as our
experimental system a series of California serpentine grassland communities that
vary in functional group composition and richness. Functional composition has
been maintained since the plots were established in 1992. In fall 1999 and 2000,
seeds of six additional species (3 species each from two groups) were added to
test the effects of functional characteristics and diversity on invasibility of
ecosystems. Thus we now have a system with treatments that differ in initial
functional composition, that have had common seed sources for a number of
additional species, and that will be subject to continuing seed rain from
surrounding grasslands. Our plan is to track changes in community composition
over the next five years as the communities develop from their initially
different starting points. Monitoring of vegetation changes in these
experimental communities through the next several years provides a unique
opportunity to gain insight into interactions among a variety of processes that
help shape ecological communities.