* 0213994
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Incremental Development of Primate Enamel
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Lawrence Martin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 06/30/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Dental remains are the most common, well-preserved type of fossil evidence for
extinct species of primates. Many researchers have studied aspects of tooth
shape, wear, and developmental timing in an attempt to understand the evolution
of humans and their closest relatives. Teeth are made up of several hard
tissues: enamel, dentine, and cementum. One recent area of research is based on
enamel microstructure, which is the internal microscopic structure of a tooth
crown. Enamel forms in an incremental manner similar to the growth pattern of
tree rings, regular lines that record the number of years a tree has been
growing. During tooth growth, a series of near-weekly and daily lines are formed
that record the position of the developing front and the daily growth of the
enamel-forming cells. Counts and measurements of these features provide
information on the rate, pattern, and total time required to form the tooth
crown. The first aim of this study is to refine our current understanding of
enamel development by establishing the periodicity, or frequency, of incremental
features in a large sample of newborn and juvenile pigtailed macaques. This will
be accomplished by relating these incremental features to known interval
fluorescent labels, which were injected during a previous study of bone growth.
The growth lines will be counted between specific labels, which will allow us to
determine how much time it takes to form each type of feature. The second aim of
this study is to document the degree of variation of these features in orangutan
and chimpanzee dentitions. Comparisons of incremental features will be made
among individuals, between subspecies of orangutans, and between chimpanzees and
orangutans. This project will provide additional support for studies of tooth
growth by allowing standard methods to be tested, and will allow better
assessment of results based on small sample sizes. Information collected on
tooth growth in chimpanzees and orangutans will also serve as the largest
comparative sample for the interpretation of fossil material. Ultimately, these
results may allow researchers to better understand the relationships between
humans and our closest relatives, including living and fossil apes.