* 0213529
* Novel Carbon Media for Separation Science
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2002,01/31/2007
* Susan Olesik, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 01/31/2007
* USD 407,000.00

The project of Professor Susan Olesik of Ohio State University, supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry program, is to develop chromatographic media
capable of separating compounds that differ minimally in their structure. Recent
studies on the mechanisms of retention on glassy carbon (GC) have shown that
glassy carbon is capable of interacting strongly with both polar and nonpolar
analytes through different retention mechanisms. Accordingly the chromatographic
applications of glassy carbon have expanded substantially. Also, solid
adsorbents are typically very good candidates for the separation of compounds
that differ minimally in structure. Due to the polymer precursor and the method
of production, there is presently only one commercially-available glassy carbon
material for the separation of compounds and it is limited to the configuration
of porous particles. New precursor polymers, diacetylenic polymers, allow the
production of glassy carbon at low temperatures with minimal weight loss. These
precursor polymers are also readily soluble in organic solvents allowing the
production of continuous low temperature glassy carbon films. In addition, the
microcrystallite size and the extent of graphitization can be varied with film
processing temperatures. Furthermore, low temperature glassy carbon (LTGC)
surfaces can be made that include noncarbon atoms covalently bound in its
structure.

Fabricated chromatographic media such as these have potential applications to
the separation and purification of a large number of chemicals, including
pharmaceuticals. This work will study the surface chemistry of the low
temperature glassy carbons (LTGC) produced using select diacetylenic polymers
and will develop new selective chromatographic media based on the surface
chemistry. LTGCs are expected to be distinctive and should provide unique
chromatographic selectivity and extensive applications. Pure carbon LTGC,
perfluorinated LTGC, and nitrogen-containing LTGC films will be characterized
for use in liquid chromatography. New configurations of GC, specifically
nonporous LTGC particles, will be compared to the thin film media.