* 0213745
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,04/30/2009
* Sidney Nagel, University of Chicago
* Cooperative Agreement
* Z.  Ying
* 04/30/2009
* USD 14,578,977.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University
of &lt;br/&gt;Chicago focuses on two overarching, intertwined issues: the
manipulation of structural properties connected through hierarchies of length
scales, and the feedback between structural properties and dynamical response.
The understanding and control of these issues provides a foundation for the
design of the next generation of functional materials, from cooperative spin
systems, self-assembled nanostructures, or microfluidic systems, to bio-
inorganic hybrid materials. The Center's research is organized into four
interdisciplinary groups (IRGs). IRG1 investigates the Dynamical Formation of
Structures in Liquids and Elastic Solids that emerge as one follows coarse,
macroscopic features to finer and finer length scales, including phenomena such
as droplet break-up, crumpling and mesoscale flows. IRG2 aims to design and
implement Hierarchically Assembled Molecular Materials composed of molecular
assemblies on surfaces that express novel function. IRG3, Jamming and Slow
Relaxation in Materials Far from Equilibrium, develops a unifying framework to
understand the complex behavior of large classes of materials, from spin systems
to supercooled liquids to granular matter, that become stuck in states far from
equilibrium and defy description by conventional statistical mechanics. IRG4,
Bio-Interfacial Science, develops new routes for designing and controlling the
interface between biological entities and man-made materials, including
development of biochips for quantitative characterization of biological
activities and the assembly of protein units for novel nanostructured
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center's research benefits from
extensive shared experimental facilities that provide research support and
training of students. The MRSEC operates a comprehensive program that integrates
research with education that includes a seminar and workshop series, a shared
student and postdoctoral associates program, a long-term visitors program, as
well as outreach programs such as summer research experiences for undergraduates
and links with the K-12 level that emphasize attracting and keeping women and
minorities in science. The Center also has an industrial partnership program
that includes research collaborations, joint workshops, and joint student
training activities, as well as a close collaboration with researchers at
Argonne National Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants in the Center
currently include 27 senior investigators, 9 postdoctoral associates, 29
graduate students, and 9 technicians and other support personnel. Professor
Heinrich Jaeger directs the MRSEC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;