* 0213659
* Columnar Cacti; A Critical Resource For Avian Consumers? Quantifying Avian Community Responses and Nutrient Fluxes in Natural and Experimental Settings
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Blair Wolf, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2006
* USD 330,000.00

Large columnar cacti, such as the saguaro (Carnegiea gigantea), are prominent
features of many ecosystems. Because of their extensive distribution and
abundant production of large succulent fruit they play an important role in
structuring food webs and ecosystems. Up until now, however, researchers
studying the ecological and evolutionary aspects of plant-frugivore mutualisms
have largely ignored this important group of plants. These succulent fruit may
be particularly important in hot deserts where high air temperatures and water
scarcity may constrain animal behavior as well as the timing and investment in
reproduction. The saguaro's fruit are available during the driest and hottest
period (June-July) of the summer in the Sonoran Desert, before the onset of
monsoon rains. In this research, I use a two-faceted approach to assessing the
importance of a unique resource, the saguaro, to a community of avian consumers.
The proposed research has several features that set it apart from earlier
studies examining plant -animal interactions: 1) it combines observational data
of resource use by individual consumers with direct measurements nutrient
transfer between the plant resource and a community of consumers using stable
isotopes as tracers; 2) it quantifies both temporal changes in fruit
availability and changes in avian abundance, diversity, and productivity and 3)
it directly manipulates resource availability, through fruit removal, while
quantifying changes in consumer abundance, diversity, and productivity. Taken in
concert, these studies provide a unique approach to assessing the importance of
presumed irkeystonely or irfoundationlr resources by: 1) directly quantifying
the flux of nutrients between a primary producer and individual consumers and 2)
through a fruit removal experiment, examining the effects of the fruit resource
on consumer abundance, biodiversity, and productivity. I expect this research to
produce an extensive array of new insights into: 1) the water and energy balance
of desert birds; 2) the role of cacti as consumer resources in arid and semi-
arid ecosystems; 3) frugivory and nutrient transfer rates between plant-consumer
interactions and 4) community dynamics as it relates to changes in resource
levels. This work will also quantify how different consumer groups (seed
predators versus seed dispersers) interact with the plant to affect the plant's
reproductive potential. It will provide the first comparative analysis of
traditional methods of studying resource use to the newer techniques using
stable isotopes. At the same time, it will be among the first studies to
quantify the effects of removal of a presumed irKeystone Plant Resourcele on the
abundance, diversity and reproductive output of an entire animal community. This
research will also be the first to quantify the importance of a single resource
to the nutrient and water balance of multiple species of different body sizes,
foraging modes and dietary guilds in any ecosystem. This work should also
provide important new empirical evidence on how home range size and foraging
mode affect individual exploitation of a resource system. Finally, this research
will bring all facets of the scientific process to a large number of graduate
and undergraduate students. Twenty undergraduate students and 1 graduate student
will obtain extensive research experience working on this project and it is
likely that many more will be trained through the REU program. This research is
bound to have a major inpact with the public as well, because of my association
with the Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum. Research results from this project will
be the basis of a centerpiece display at the museum that explores the scientific
process and the interactions of saguaros with the other inhabitants of the
Sonoran Desert.