* 0213522
* New Technologies Based on Organocopper Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Bruce Lipshutz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2005
* USD 463,000.00

The main theme of this work is the use of copper (I) complexes to catalyze a
variety of asymmetric organic reactions. Most of the proposed chemistry involves
the catalytic use of asymmetrically ligated copper hydride or alkyl complexes.
The copper hydrides will be used for asymmetric hydrosilylation of ketones and a
1,4-reducation-transmetallation protocol for converting alpha, beta unsaturated
ketones into Z-boron enolates. The copper alkyl complexes will be used primarily
for asymmetric 1,2 additions to aldehydes and to effect alkylative kinetic
resolution of racemic epoxides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr.
Bruce H. Lipshutz of the Department of Chemistry at the University of California
at Santa Barbara. Dr. Lipshutz will work on the development of copper complexes
capable of catalyzing a number of chemical reactions. Most of these copper
catalyzed carbon-hydrogen and carbon-carbon bond forming reactions produce
molecules which are chiral (have two nonsuperimposable mirror images) and make
only one of the two possible forms (a single enantiomer). Development of this
family of reactions is one of the most important problems facing the
pharmaceutical industry today. These transformations which are catalytic in
copper may be amenable to large scale production of fine chemicals and
pharmaceuticals. Students trained during the course of this work will gain
skills needed by the pharmaceutical and speciality chemicals industries which
now produce a number of single enantiomer compounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;