* 0213373
* Stress Effects on Kinetic Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,10/31/2005
* Michael Aziz, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 10/31/2005
* USD 364,898.00

This project involves a combined experimental and theoretical study of the
effects of nonhy-drostatic stress on the kinetic processes of epitaxial crystal
growth and diffusion. The impact of stress-dependent activation barrier heights
for crystal growth and surface diffusion on growth morphology evolution will be
studied. The effect of simple, uniform stress states on atomic dif-fusion in
thin films, both parallel and perpendicular to the surface, will be measured.
The theory of diffusion under nonhydrostatic stress states will be further
developed. This research is ex-pected to establish methods by which the
measurement of the stress-dependence of a kinetic pro-cess under a few simple,
uniform stress states permits the prediction of the effect of an arbitrary,
nonuniform stress state-deemed important for the design of future semiconductor
devices. It also permits the determination of processes going on in the interior
of solids, where they cannot be observed directly, from the results of atomistic
theoretical calculations and experimental ob-servations of the response to
imposed external stresses. It is anticipated that success in this en-deavor will
facilitate the creation of new, interesting, and potentially useful materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research issues in areas
of electronic materials science having strong technological relevance. An
important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the
integration of research and education. The research program provides excel-lent
opportunities for hands-on experience in the use of sophisticated scientific
equipment. The resources available provide special opportunities for education
and training of students involved in interdisciplinary forefront materials
science research. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;