* 0213087
* QEIB: Gas Exchange Across Insect Eggshells
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,01/31/2004
* Harry Woods, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 01/31/2004
* USD 67,106.00

Despite a large literature on insect eggshell morphology, little is known about
the relationship between eggshell morphology and gas transport. This award will
support the development of a mathematical model that explicitly connects gas
flux to eggshell morphology. The equations will incorporate 6 - 8 of what appear
a priori to be important eggshell morphological parameters. The model will then
be solved numerically and used in two primary ways. (i) Sensitivity analyses
will identify which morphological parameters have the strongest influence on gas
flux. Subsequent morphological work on a common North American moth, Manduca
sexta, will concentrate on getting the best measures of the most important
parameters. (ii) Once the morphological parameters have been obtained, they will
be used in conjunction with the model to predict total eggshell permeability to
each of the three gases. These predictions will then be compared with direct
measures of the permeability from other experimental work currently in progress.
A good match will indicate that all significant factors affecting eggshell
permeability have been accounted for and understood. A poor match will lead to
additional mathematical and experimental work to identify the source of error
(and in the process an important component of eggshell function). Thus, by
design the mathematical and experimental progress will be iterative and co-
dependent. The outcome will be a robust model that captures the essential
elements of eggshell function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such a model will be useful
in a number of ways. (i) Many species, including Manduca sexta, have geographic
ranges that span a variety of temperature and humidity conditions. The model
will provide a tool for predicting how eggshell structure may vary intra-
specifically across abiotic environmental gradients. (ii) Insects as a group
exhibit spectacular diversity in eggshell form. The model will provide a way to
predict how this morphological diversity affects permeability characteristics.
(iii) An important methodology for controlling some crop pests, especially pests
of stored-grains, is atmosphere manipulation. In conjunction with morphological
data on eggs of pests species, the model will provide a way of evaluating
atmosphere-based control strategies. (iv) Student training in mathematics and
modeling is increasingly important in biology. The project provides an ideal
vehicle for training students to think about the relationship between models and
experimental work. The award will support a graduate student to participate in
model development and parameterization, and it is highly likely that additional
undergraduates will also participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;