* 0213696
* High-Resolution Younger Dryas Environmental Variability: A Comprehensive Assessment from Mid-North America Tree Rings
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Steven Leavitt, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2006
* USD 244,174.00

The goal of this award is to develop a high-resolution portrait of the Late
Glacial-Early Holocene transition in middle North America using data from tree-
rings. In this study, the environmental changes in middle North America will be
investigated over several millennia (ca. 10,000 to 14,000 years ago) during the
Late Glacial-Early Holocene transition, including the Younger Dryas (YD)
interval. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The warming from the Late Glacial to the Early
Holocene was interrupted by an abrupt, millennial-length, cold climate excursion
known as the YD event. The environmental effects of this climatic event seem to
be widespread, but knowledge of the character of the YD in Europe far exceeds
that of North America. North America has potential links with the physical
mechanisms likely to have triggered the event in the middle North Atlantic Ocean
such as shifting glacial meltwater outlets from the land to the ocean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The environmental changes during the YD (i.e., those
related to temperature, water-use efficiency, and hydrologic cycle-related
parameters of precipitation, relative humidity, and soil saturation) will be
measured against those of the time periods immediately before and after, and
with modern conditions. The results will improve our understanding of the
environmental and faunal changes and responses in middle North America. This
will help place such changes in the context of global environmental change
during deglaciation.