* 0213384
* "Pyrroles, Indoles, and beta-Lactams: Novel Approaches to Their Formation Using Classic Organometallic Reagents"
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Herman Holt, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 09/30/2005
* USD 18,000.00

The objectives of this work are two fold. Professor Holt first proposes to
investigate the transition metal catalyzed rearrangement of 2H-azirines into
pyrroles and indoles. This initial work will produce vinyl pyrroles which will
be used in the synthesis of beta- lactams containing pyrrole ring substituents.
Vinyl and aryl-2H-azirines will be prepared initially and a nickel mediated
rearrangement of these substrates into vinyl pyrroles and indoles will be
effected. The vinyl pyrrole products of this first work will be aziridinated and
the aziridine products will be carbonylated to produce the beta-
lactams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this Minority Research Planning Grant award,
the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of
Dr. Herman L. Holt, Jr. of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
North Carolina at Asheville. Dr. Holt will work on the preparation of a class of
chemical compounds known as vinyl pyrroles and indoles and then work on the
conversion of these compounds into beta lactams. New methods for the production
of beta lactams could have future practical applications since this functional
group is found in some antibiotics and antitumor agents. Students trained during
the course of this work will gain skills needed by the speciality chemicals and
pharmaceutical industries.