* 0213848
* ITR:   High Performance Implementation of Approximate Algorithms for Large-Scale Routing and Network Design
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Daniel Bienstock, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen M. O'Hara
* 08/31/2005
* USD 233,759.00

This project will address theoretical and computational methodology for
massively large, approximate optimization problems in network design and
routing, encompassing both static and online problems. A central component of
the work will be the implementation of the PI's algorithms on architectures such
as IBM's forthcoming BG/L.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will be directed at
problem instances arising in networking and telecommunications, that are far
larger than those currently studied by the mathematical programming community.
While metropolitan area networks, at an appropriate level of aggregation,
involve a few hundred nodes, computer networks can be far larger. Looking toward
next-generation networking, especially wireless and adhoc networking, the need
for optimization tools that can handle much larger networks becomes
pressing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's previous work built upon methodologies
on potential function methods for linear programming, developed during the last
decade primarily by the theoretical computer science community. His work further
developed the methodology and produced an effective implementation. This
implementation is fast (more efficient than competing special-purpose algorithms
and much faster than commercial software), it is quite accurate for engineering
purposes, and it is general: it handles network design problems, static
throughput routing problems, multicommodity flow problems, and in fact, a much
more general class of linear programming problems, all with a common interface
and no user-selected parameters. It successfully handles problems involving
networks with hundreds and up to a few thousand nodes. The resulting linear
programs, with tens of millions of variables and constraints, are at the limit
of what can be considered approachable with state-of-the-art linear programming
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When considering larger networks, however, the
dimensions of the optimization problems increase by several orders of magnitude,
placing them well beyond the capabilities of current methods and implementations
- these problems are large enough that the idea of optimization becomes rather
daunting. At the same time, the complexity, economics, and fast-changing nature
of networking applications provides a stringent need for cost-effective,
survivable designs and high throughput routing schemes. This work will seek to
build on new, concrete methodological ideas so as to develop algorithms with
provably stronger convergence properties; further, it will also develop high-
performance implementations that can tackle massively large
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A parallel effort will concern online routing
problems. Many online routing methods (for example, dynamic routing schemes that
seek to minimize congestion, or to achieve fair routings) can be viewed as
single iterations of potential function methods for corresponding static
problems. This project will use this idea, together with the PI's work on static
problems, with the aim of developing effective routing algorithms; again, a
significant part of this work will be computational.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
both cases, this project will use previously established industrial research
partnerships to validate methodologies and to obtain realistic data.&lt;br/&gt;