* 0213627
* Collaborative Research: Speaking the Truth in Maritime Risk Assessment
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* David Primeaux, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2004
* USD 136,479.00

Over the past 6 years the principal investigators have developed a
&lt;br/&gt;methodology for assessing the risk associated with
maritime&lt;br/&gt;transportation. The methodology utilizes dynamic simulation
of the&lt;br/&gt;maritime transportation system, expert judgment elicitation
models and&lt;br/&gt;probabilistic risk assessment (PRA) techniques. The
approach has proven&lt;br/&gt;useful in three major maritime ports in the United
States i.e. Port of&lt;br/&gt;New Orleans (Mississippi River in Louisiana), Port
Valdez (Prince&lt;br/&gt;William Sound in Alaska) and Port Seattle (Puget Sound
in Washington&lt;br/&gt;State). Two of these studies focused on passenger
safety, while the&lt;br/&gt;other focused on oil transportation risk. The
National Research Council in&lt;br/&gt;1998 assessed the methodology and
concluded that representation of uncertainty &lt;br/&gt;in the maritime risk
assessment method is lacking. "The Prince William Sound &lt;br/&gt;Risk
Assessment is an important step forward in using probabilistic risk
&lt;br/&gt;assessment methods to assess the safety of transporting oil in large
tankers&lt;br/&gt;in PWS. Because the data were very limited, the analysis
results and the resulting&lt;br/&gt;conclusions are not robust and are
necessarily uncertain [National Research&lt;br/&gt;Council,
1998]."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF project will allow the maritime risk
assessment method to live&lt;br/&gt;up to its promise by developing a coherent
theoretical framework to&lt;br/&gt;address uncertainty. The truth is that we are
uncertain. Therefore,&lt;br/&gt;speaking the truth implies that we express our
analysis results in terms&lt;br/&gt;of probability curves rather than fixed
points estimates. [See, e.g.,&lt;br/&gt;Kaplan, 1997]. The intellectual merit of
the research stems from the&lt;br/&gt;development of an overarching Bayesian
framework for addressing&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty when simulation of systems states
is combined with available&lt;br/&gt;data and expert judgment to assess risk and
risk intervention&lt;br/&gt;effectiveness. The broader impact of the proposed
work is primarily&lt;br/&gt;drawn from its applicability to areas other than
maritime accident risk&lt;br/&gt;such as e.g. maritime security risk
(intentional events as opposed to&lt;br/&gt;accidents). The framework and
methodologies to be developed will be&lt;br/&gt;applicable to other
transportation modes, such as aviation or road&lt;br/&gt;safety. Aside from
aviation security and accident risk, the technique&lt;br/&gt;will be directly
transferable to the ever-increasing problem of runway&lt;br/&gt;incursions as a
result of increased traffic congestion at our
national&lt;br/&gt;airports.&lt;br/&gt;