* 0213658
* Cooperative Behavior and the Frequency of Social Interaction
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Jack Ochs, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye Husbands Fealing
* 07/31/2005
* USD 65,187.00

Cooperation may be in everyone's long-term interest, but in any single social
interaction each individual may have an incentive to defect from cooperative
behavior. This is the essence of social dilemmas. When individuals are paired in
an indefinitely long-term relationship, the threat of triggering non-cooperative
responses by others to a non-cooperative act may be sufficient to sustain
cooperative behavior. However, individuals may live in a community for a long
time, frequently interact with various members of that community, but have only
short-term, intermittent, relationships with any particular member of that
community. In such circumstances, it is not be possible for the victim of an
opportunistic act to directly punish the defector. Nevertheless, Kandori has
shown that, under certain conditions, a social norm of cooperative behavior can
be sustained by the same kind of history-dependent strategies that can sustain
cooperative behavior in long-term relationships between fixed pairs of
individuals. Kandori's theorem is an extension of the Folk Theorem for
infinitely repeated games. Like the Folk Theorem, it only proves that
cooperation can be sustained by history-dependent trigger strategies. Whether,
and under what conditions a group will develop a social norm of cooperative
behavior are the questions this study addresses. Specifically, a behavioral
experiment has been designed to investigate the degree to which cooperative
behavior in an indefinitely repeated prisoners' dilemma stage game is influenced
by both the nature of the matching technology and the character of the
information transmitted about the play of one stage game to the players of the
next stage game. The study will compare the extent of cooperative behavior
observed when fixed pairs play an indefinitely repeated Prisoners' Dilemma stage
game with that observed in a fixed group that is anonymously and randomly
matched after each stage game. In the random matching condition, the amount of
information that players have concerning their opponent's past behavior will
also be varied so as to determine whether more information leads to increases in
the frequency of cooperative behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The question of what
kinds of social interaction promote or inhibit cooperative (competitive)
behavior in environments where agents have both incentives to cooperate over
time and incentives to opportunistically compete at any particular moment of
time is of obvious importance in many settings where cooperative arrangements
must be self-enforcing. These include such diverse settings as the design of
test-ban treaties, the design of relative performance pay systems, and the
administration of anti-trust laws to deal with implicit collusion. Beyond these
matters of practical importance, the results of this experiment are also of
methodological importance for experimental economists who often use random
matching protocols to study learning behavior in strategic situations that are
meant to represent one time encounters. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;