* 0213407
* Development and Application of Improved Methods for Coupling NMR and Capillary Isotachophoresis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Cynthia Larive, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 09/30/2005
* USD 322,482.00

Professor Cynthia Larive of the University of Kansas is supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry program for development of capillary
isotachophoresis (cITP) in combination with microcoil NMR spectroscopy. The
development of solenoidal microcoils with nanoliter to microliter detection
volumes has greatly enhanced the mass limits of detection of nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR). Recently, this technology has been advanced further through the
coupling of capillary isotachophoresis (cITP) for sample concentration and
analyte separation with nanoliter microcoil NMR probes for on-line detection.
This new methodology shows considerable promise as a versatile tool for the
analysis of mass limited samples. The proposed research will advance the
instrumentation for online cITP-NMR and explore the application of this
methodology to chemical analysis. A capacitively coupled conductivity detector
for use in conjunction with NMR detection will be developed and evaluated. The
implementation of dual conductivity and NMR detection for cITP will advance this
technology by facilitating the use of signal averaging to detect dilute analytes
with NMR and monitor NMR transparent cITP bands. This technology will be
critically evaluated as a tool for the analysis and structure elucidation of
mass limited samples through the examination of several antibiotic compounds
both as simple mixtures and in the presence of more complex sample matrices.
Finally, this approach will be used to characterize the structure, chemical and
physical properties of humic substances through cITP fractionation as a function
of pH and borate complexation as well as with one and two-dimensional NMR
experiments. These experiments will examine functional group composition of the
fractionated materials allowing interpretation of both common and unique
structural elements of the bands separated by cITP. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of new measurement techniques has facilitated understanding of many
complex chemical phenomena. This has been particularly true in the field of
environmental chemistry, where scientists face the problem of analyzing very
complex samples containing species at low concentrations. The proposed
experiments will develop new analytical methods that will allow NMR
characterization of molecules at low concentrations in complex samples. NMR is
one of the most informative methods of chemical analysis, capable of revealing
minute details of molecular structure. Initial experiments will focus on
relatively simple samples of antibiotics, compounds of environmental interest
due to their wide spread use in large scale agriculture and problems related to
the development of antibiotic resistance. In addition, cITP-NMR technology will
be used to study a class of environmentally important compounds, humic
substances (humic and fulvic acids). Humic substances are environmentally
important because they affect the bioavailability and transport of organic
pollutants and toxic metal ions. These naturally occurring organic acids are
formed in the environment by the breakdown of animal and plant material to form
very complex mixtures, which makes the determination of molecular level
structure information very difficult. These experiments will advance the
knowledge of the chemistry of humic substances and in turn increase the
understanding of their behavior in the environment. &lt;br/&gt;