* 0213154
* Molecular Genetic Analysis of Ethylene Insensitive Loci in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Joseph Ecker, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 08/31/2005
* USD 600,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How plants perceive and transduce hormone signals is a
fundamental question in biology that also has important practical applications.
The response to ethylene gas serves as a paradigm for understanding of plant
hormone signal transduction. Ethylene plays critical roles in development (such
as in the ripening of fruits) and in responses to a variety of physical and
biological stresses (such as pathogen attack). Understanding of these various
roles of ethylene are being addressed using genetic, molecular and biochemical
approaches in Arabidopsis. In particular, the goal of this project is to
characterize the functions of the EIN3/EIL family of plant specific DNA-binding
proteins in ethylene-mediated transcriptional regulation. EIN3 encodes a DNA-
binding transcriptional activator protein and is a member of a small gene family
of EIN3-LIKE (EIL1, EIL2, EIL3, EIL4, EIL5) proteins. Along with another
transcription activator called ERF1, the EIN3/EIL proteins participate in a
little understood transcriptional regulatory cascade. This project will
investigate how the activities of the EIN3/EIL proteins are modulated by
ethylene and also explore the roles of these proteins in mediating ethylene
signaling to the various downstream responses. In particular, the possibility of
posttranslational modification(s), changes in protein stability or alterations
in the subcellular localization of EIN3/EIL proteins in response to ethylene
will be examined. In addition, biochemical and genetic approaches will be
employed to identify EIN3/EIL interacting proteins. Analysis of individual
EIL1,EIL2, EIL3, EIL4, and EIL5 loss-of-function mutants, various multiple
mutant combinations and ectopic expression of these genes will provide
significant new insight into the possible functions of these genes in downstream
responses to ethylene. In addition, genome-wide studies of EIN3/EIL gene
expression and in vivo target identification will be conducted using custom gene
expression and whole genome tiling arrays, respectively. Identification and
characterization of the EIN3/EIL ethylene signaling pathway genes and analysis
of their interactions with other signaling pathway components will provide new
insights into tremendous diversity of biological affects of the simple
hydrocarbon, ethylene. Moreover, understanding of the functions of these
proteins will allow the ability to modify the beneficial and/or detrimental
effects of ethylene in any plant, in particular, crops with important economic
or social value.&lt;br/&gt;