* 0213790
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Why do people support Islamist Parties?
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Ronald Inglehart, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 07/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Doctoral Dissertation addresses the following
question: What factors explain the popularity of political parties that promise
an Islamic solution to social ills? Since the 1970s, the importance of Islam in
social and political life visibly increased not only in authoritarian Middle
Eastern states but also in the secular state of Turkey and in immigrant Muslim
communities in the Western World. At a time when liberal-democracy has achieved
victory over socialism, Islam stands as an alternative to liberal-democratic
values. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project relies on three different data sets.
First, it uses the information obtained from World Values Surveys conducted in
eight predominantly Muslim countries. These countries are Bangladesh, Egypt,
Indonesia, Iran, Jordan, Morocco, Pakistan, and Turkey. These surveys contain
valuable information about the value-systems, political behavior, and attitudes
towards public issues of the respondents. The Principal Investigator will also
conduct a comparative analysis of two districts of Istanbul to see how they
differ in their popular bases for political Islam. Although, these regions have
very similar socioeconomic and demographic conditions, Islamist parties managed
to establish a popular base in only one of the districts. These natural settings
provide an excellent opportunity to discern the factors that explain the
popularity and the limits of political Islam. Finally, it uses data generated
from open-ended interviews from Islamist politicians in Turkey. This third data
set serves two goals. On the one hand, it helps the Principal Investigator to
identify what political Islam offers to the people. On the other hand, it
illuminates how the elites of the Islamist movements think about politics along
with spotting their perceptions of liberal-democracy and West.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, this project aims to contribute to the
scholarly knowledge in the following realms: the relationship between
secularization and liberal-democracy; the prospects of democracy in the Muslim
world; the implications of Islamic revival for liberalism; and the reasons for
the rise of Islam as a major political force. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;