* 0213339
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Impact of Authoritarian Rule on Chilean Political Culture
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Mitchell Seligson, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00

Does political structure affect political culture? To be more specific, does a
long period of authoritarian rule transform the attitudes, orientations and
feelings citizens have about their political system, in particular their support
of its constituent units? What are the factors that can explain variations in
mass system support, and is their relative predictive power the same in both the
periods? What can comparisons between the political cultures of newly
democratizing nations tell us about the impact of authoritarianism and about the
consolidation of democracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Doctoral Dissertation
Research Support project examines the evolution of mass political attitudes, in
particular system support, in Chile for the periods leading up to, and
following, 16 years of authoritarian rule (1973-1989). The Chilean political
system presents an ideal case for studying the link between political regime and
political culture because of its generalizability and because the data are
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Longitudinal and cross-sectional comparisons are
possible because of the presence of an extraordinary collection of survey data,
particularly those from Chile, archived at the Roper Center for Public Opinion
Research. The data also include cross-national surveys carried out in the post-
authoritarian period: the Latinobarometro surveys 1996, 1997; the World Values
Survey 1990, 1995; and the 1998 Hewlett Survey. These measure citizens' opinions
on a broad spectrum of social, economic and political subjects. This projects
uses the available data to test, across regimes, a wide-range of hypotheses that
focus on factors such as ideology, party identification, trust, participation,
live satisfaction, economic conditions, class and religion to explain variations
in mass support for democracy.&lt;br/&gt;