* 0213771
* Discriminating Methods:  Nonnested Tests for Strategic Choice Models
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Curtis Signorino, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2005
* USD 175,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consider a researcher who must choose between
two rival models, based on how well those models explain the behavior in a given
set of data. Suppose one is a strategic choice model and the other is a
nonstrategic model -that is, the models have different functional forms. How
would the researcher discriminate between these models? In other words, how
would she determine which of the models is "better?" In this project, Principal
Investigators answer this question by merging two promising areas of
methodological research, and then use those methods to analyze international
conflict. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first line of research, by Signorino and
various coauthors, has demonstrated that traditional specifications of
statistical models are generally inconsistent with strategic theories of
political behavior. The main message of this research has been that the
functional form of one's statistical model must be consistent with the
relationships implied by the behavior under analysis, or the statistical
inferences will be invalid. However, aside from comparisons of likelihood values
and percent correctly predicted, Signorino has not provided a more rigorous
framework for comparing (nonnested) strategic models against one another, or
against nonstrategic models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clarke, on the other hand,
has engaged in a second line of research, addressing comparative model testing
for nonnested models. The main message of his research has been that nonnested
model testing requires special techniques that are unknown to most political
scientists. New and existing nonnested testing methods have been developed and
adapted in prior research to deal with competing limited dependent variable
models. The competing models in this literature, however, have only been
nonnested in terms of their covanates. Testing strategic choice models against
each other or against nonstrategic models requires discriminating between models
that are nonnested in terms of their functional forms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research conducted by Signorino and by Clarke is clearly complimentary. By
developing nonnested tests for strategic choice models, Signorino and Clarke
will provide the necessary tools for assessing whether strategic models
outperform their nonstrategic rivals, or whether certain strategic
specifications outperform other strategic specifications. By addressing
strategic choice models, Signorino and Clarke will expand the set of functional
forms beyond that currently available in the nonnested testing literature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As in previous work on nonnested model testing, the
proposed research will make use of classical, Bayesian, and nonparametric
statistical techniques. The project goals include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*
Adapting absolute discrimination tests (such as the Cox test) for strategic
models &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Adapting and developing relative discrimination
tests (such as the Vuong test, Clarke's non- parametric test, and Bayes factors)
for strategic models. &lt;br/&gt;* Refining current Bayesian techniques for use
with strategic models, and conducting Bayesian estimation of strategic models
(to conduct tests based on Bayes factors). &lt;br/&gt;* Applying these methods
to models of deterrence, alliance politics, and the effect of domestic politics
on militarized interstate disputes. &lt;br/&gt; Incorporating these techniques
into currently available software (e.g. STRAT and WinBUGS). &lt;br/&gt;By
combining these lines of research, future scholars will be able not only to
develop statistical models that are truly consistent with their theories, but
also to test those theories against each other. The attainment of these goals
will allow the scientific study of international relations to move significantly
beyond its current state. &lt;br/&gt;