* 0213217
* Molecular Biology and Biosynthesis of Lolines by Grass Endophytes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Lowell Bush, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 411,143.00

Neotyphodium and Epichloe species, known as fungal endophytes of grasses, are
systemic, maternally transmitted symbionts that protect their host plants from
herbivory, and can enhance drought tolerance, disease resistance, nutrient
acquisition, biomass production, and competitiveness. The endophytes produce
bioprotective alkaloids of four distinct chemical classes. This project concerns
one such class, the saturated 1-aminopyrrolizidine alkaloids (loline and related
compounds), which are highly insecticidal, complex heterocyclic molecules, and
can reach levels of 2% total biomass in plant-endophyte symbioses. It is
conceivable that these abundant alkaloids are also involved in drought tolerance
or any of several other host fitness enhancements, but genetic and molecular
genetic investigations are needed to address their true ecological and
physiological roles. Thus, the goals of this project are to elucidate the
genetics and biosynthetic pathways of the loline alkaloids, and to develop
background information and tools to study the roles of these alkaloids in plant
fitness. Two gene clusters (lol) have been identified that are associated with
loline alkaloid production by the endophyte species, Neotyphodium uncinatum. In
addition metabolic precursors of loline alkaloids have been determined. The
first objective in this project is to complete DNA sequence determinations for
the two lol gene clusters. The next objective is to utilize molecular genetic
techniques to seek confirmation that the lol cluster genes are involved in
loline alkaloid biosynthesis. The third objective is to test possible
biosynthetic pathways for lolines by synthesizing putative intermediates labeled
with stable isotopes, feeding these to loline alkaloid-producing cultures, and
employing mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance to detect and
identify the labeled atoms incorporated in the lolines. The information and
mutants developed in this project will be a resource for future studies
detailing the natural roles of lolines in grass-endophyte
symbioses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symbioses of grasses with fungal endophytes are
protective mutualisms,&lt;br/&gt;whereby the endophytes ward off a variety plant
pests and parasites. Among the fungal products involved in protecting host
plants are the loline alkaloids, which are highly insecticidal, abundant in the
symbiotic plant, and chemically complex. The pathway of loline production is
unknown, and elucidating this pathway will provide new insights into enzyme
mechanisms and evolution of symbiotic microorganisms. This project will employ a
combination of modern techniques in molecular biology and chemistry to identify
the steps in the loline production. Fungal mutants that are produced in the
study will be a resource for future research to determine the specific roles and
activities of lolines in endophyte-grass symbioses. The research topic is
relevant to the ecological interactions of plants, fungi and herbivores, and
also to the potential use of natural products for environmentally friendly
biological protection of plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;