* 0213375
* Photochemistry of Sulfoxides and Analogs:  The Hunt for Oxene, Nitrenes, and Carbenes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* William Jenks, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2006
* USD 380,000.00

This proposal describes experimental work involving photochemically initiated
deoxygenation, alpha-cleavage and stereomutation of sulfoxides as well as the
potential photogeneration of nitrenes and carbenes from sulfilimines and
sulfonium ylides. A collaboration with Miguel Garcia-Garibay at UCLA will be
used to investigate the possible involvement of heavy atom tunneling in the
photoinduced oxygen atom transfer experiments. Irradiation of sulfoxides
generates extremely reactive oxidizing agents and the Jenks group will be
determining whether these oxidations occur by oxygen atom transfer or generation
of oxygen atoms followed by their reaction with the molecules which are
oxidized. Similar irradiations of sufilimines and sulfonium ylides should also
provide organic chemists with access to other reactive intermediates such as
nitrenes and carbenes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. William S.
Jenks of the Department of Chemistry at Iowa State University. Dr. Jenks and his
collaborator will work on understanding the mechanisms of photochemically
initiated oxidation reactions and other photochemical reactions which generate
reactive intermediates. Oxidation reactions are some of the most ubiquitous
reactions in nature and oxygen atom transfer reactions occur widely in plants
and animals and are used in the synthesis of speciality chemicals. Research
students who work on this project will gain interdisciplinary training in
aspects of synthesis and theoretical organic chemistry, both of which are skills
needed by the pharmaceutical and speciality chemicals industries.