* 0213297
* RUI:    Synthetis and Spectroelectrochemistry of Metal Complexes of Acetylenic Ketones and Esters
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Michael Shaw, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2005
* USD 210,000.00

Michael J Shaw of the Southern Illinois University (a primarily undergraduate
institution) is supported the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Chemistry Program for investigation of the factors that influence metal-mediated
reactions that produce heterocyclic aromatic compounds from alkynes. A variety
of d6-metal complexes involving acetylenic ketones and esters (including a
variety of spectroscopic labels) will be synthesized. These will be used to
probe a number of aspects of the reactions of interest. The main part of the
research will be spectro-electrochemical investigations and surface normalized
incident Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. (SNIFTIRS). These powerful
techniques will be used to detect and characterize reaction intermediates with
life-times of a few seconds or less.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The type of process
that is of principal interest in this program is widely used for practical
purposes, but the detailed course of the reaction is not well understood. The
powerful combination of experimental techniques that this study will bring to
bear on the process will greatly facilitate understanding the intermediate steps
in the reaction sequence, leading to improved effectiveness of the
transformation. This project will also provide an exceptional vehicle for
introducing undergraduate students to research, using a variety of
sophisticated, but well-tested and experimentally tractable methodologies.
Success in this project will have impact both on the technological use of
organometallic transformations, but also on the educational development of a
number of students, some training to be future science
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;