* 0213959
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Out of Sight, Out of Mind: Legislators' Perceptions and Representation in Congress
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Richard Hall, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/31/2004
* USD 11,700.00

Over twenty years ago, Fenno (1978) called attention to what he called the "key
problem facing students of the representative-constituency relationship.. .the
problem of perception." More specifically, Fenno noted the importance of viewing
the constituency as the legislator does. In other words, "what does an elected
representative see when he or she sees a constituency." (Fenno 1978). This
Doctoral Dissertation Research project addresses this question and employs
theories from cognitive and social psychology to develop a more complete theory
of congressional representation. The project centers on the ways in which
legislators' conceptions of their constituents are constrained by the
availability heuristic (Tversky and Kahneman 1974). While political scientists
have frequently invoked psychological theories in the study of public opinion,
such theories have rarely been examined in the context of political elites. Part
of the task of representation requires legislators to decide who in the district
is interested in a given issue. The student argues that the availability
heuristic offers important insight into legislators' perceptions of their
districts. When making judgments about the interests of their district,
legislators do not use all the relevant information, but rather rely on a subset
of relevant information. Those interests (whether organized or unorganized) that
are more easily accessible are more likely to be included in the legislator's
perception of the district's interests on a given issue.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this dissertation the student examines selective
perception and argues that the answer to this question requires the
consideration of the availability heuristic. The central question investigated
is what explains perceptual variations across legislators? The student offers
that any answer to this question must take into account numerous hypotheses from
the political science literature in combination with theories from cognitive
psychology. It is this latter question that constitutes the majority of the
empirical focus of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student approaches the
question of who legislators perceive as being part of the interested
constituency on a given issue by focusing on current members of the U.S. House
of Representatives and their legislative staff. Since the research is issue-
specific, he focuses on two policies within each of two issue areas: the
Patients' Bill of Rights and Medicare reform (health policy), and bankruptcy
reform and the Internet tax moratorium (financial services policy). She uses in-
person interviews with legislative staff and legislators to answer the question
of how legislators see their constituents. The dependent variable of
legislators' perceptions of who in their district is interested in a given issue
is measured by two instruments included in the interviews with legislative staff
and legislators. The combination of interviews and a dataset comprised of
economic, political, and demographic variables allows both descriptive and
qualitative analysis as well as a more conventional statistical analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;