* 0213967
* Bank Relationships and the Misallocation of Credit
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Joe Peek, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye Husbands Fealing
* 07/31/2005
* USD 155,826.00

The severe economic crisis in Japan, associated with the collapse of the
Japanese stock and real estate markets and the dramatic deterioration in the
health of the Japanese banking sector, represents one of the major economic
events of the late twentieth century. It is even more striking because the
second largest economy in the world remained stagnant for more than a decade,
and even today shows no evidence of returning to the robust health that
characterized most of its postwar history. Why this economic weakness has
persisted for so long is an important public policy issue and has been the
source of substantial speculation and debate, with problems in the financial
sector likely being a key contributor. In particular, the misallocation of
credit by troubled Japanese banks associated with pressures emanating from their
historical ties to troubled firms may be a key contributor to the continuing
stagnation of the Japanese economy. Two forms of corporate affiliations are the
focus of this study: bank-centered financial (horizontal) keiretsus and the main
bank system. A concern is that these corporate affiliations have subverted
corporate governance, insulating firms from the discipline that otherwise would
come from outside directors, shareholders, and creditors, resulting in
suboptimal business and financial decisions. While previous studies have
examined how these corporate affiliations affect investment decisions, stock
returns, and corporate governance decisions, they have not directly examined how
such affiliations impact the availability of credit. This study will utilize a
unique firm-level database that enables an examination of loans to firms to
determine the extent to which such finance is affected by corporate
affiliations, as well as the implications for macroeconomic activity and the
effectiveness of monetary policy of any such misallocation of credit. The study
has three main objectives. The first, and primary, objective is to investigate
the impact of main bank and keiretsu affiliations on credit allocation during
periods of firm and/or bank distress. Preliminary evidence suggests that credit
has been misallocated due to pressures from keiretsu and main bank ties, and
that this misallocation has been allowed, and even encouraged, by government
policies. The second objective is to investigate the macroeconomic implications
of this credit misallocation, in particular focusing on its contribution to the
continuing stagnation of economic activity in Japan. The third objective is to
investigate the contribution of the troubled banking sector to the breakdown of
the monetary policy transmission mechanism, and thus to the inability of
monetary policy to restart the Japanese economy. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; This
study has important implications for appropriate policies to deal with banking
crises, as well as the costs of inappropriate policies. If scarce credit is
allocated to uncompetitive and troubled firms, Japan will not experience the
natural cleansing which results from the major restructuring that typically
occurs in an economic downturn, with the consequence that longer-run economic
growth may be reduced. In that instance, it may not be that economic growth is
stifled from too little overall credit, but rather from scarce credit being
allocated to firms with the least productive investment opportunities. When this
misallocation of credit is combined with declining total domestic bank loans due
to pressures on banks having difficulties achieving their capital requirements,
the transmission of monetary policy can be short-circuited. Furthermore, given
that the Japanese economy remains the second largest in the world, resolving the
crisis is important for the economic prospects for other countries, especially
those in East Asia. &lt;br/&gt;