* 0213978
* Upgrade to the Superconducting Rock Magnetometer and Acquisition of a High-Sensitivity Susceptibility System, Paleomagnetism Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* John Geissman, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2004
* USD 115,585.00

0213978&lt;br/&gt;Geissman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support an
important upgrade to the superconducting rock magnetometer (2G Enterprises 760R
three axis system) and will support the addition of a high sensitivity
Kappabridge for the Paleomagnetism Laboratory at the University of New Mexico.
The upgrade and equipment acquisition will considerably enhance the capability
of our laboratory in paleomagnetic and rock magnetic research, which is and has
been utilized by a range of University of New Mexico (UNM) and outside
researchers. The magnetometer upgrade will greatly improve the overall operation
of the laboratory and will involve (1) replacing the Rf-driven SQuIDs with DC
SQuIDS, affording at least an order of magnitude greater moment sensitivity over
the existing Rf-driven SQuIDS, (2) reducing the specimen access region from 7.6
cm diameter to 4.2 cm, (3) retrofitting the magnetometer with improved
superinsulation, allowing for a considerably decreased liquid helium boil-off
rate, and (4) replacing part of the liquid helium fill line with an enlarged
access line, to prevent the nagging development of major freezing (and blockage)
of the line. These upgrades to the magnetometer will improve our ability to
measure very weakly magnetized rocks that typically defy our best attempts to
extract useful information near the current threshold of the magnetometer. The
requested new susceptibility system, will be used to measure bulk and anisotropy
of magnetic susceptibility of a range of geologic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;