* 0213491
* Preparation, Studies, and Applications of Lanthanide-Transition Metal Arrays:  Cyclic Organohydroborate Derivatives of Lanthanides and Metallocenes
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Sheldon Shore, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2005
* USD 516,000.00

Dr. Sheldon G. Shore, Chemistry Department, Ohio State University, is supported
by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division for research into lanthanide-transition metal arrays and into
lanthanide and metallocene complexes that contain cyclic organohydroborate
moieties. The project has two main objectives. The first is to prepare and study
complexes that are composed of combinations of lanthanide and transition metals.
Complexes containing an anionic three dimensional array (CuCN) into which a
lanthanide element is sequestered will be prepared. Additionally, three
dimensional extended arrays that contain carbonyl bridges between a transition
metal such as Co and a lanthanide metal such as Yb and three dimensional arrays
that are composed of hydroxo-oxo-clusters of a lanthanide such as Yb linked to
transition metal carbonylate anions will be targeted. These species will be
evaluated as catalysts for a variety of processes. The second aspect of the
project involves the preparation and study of cyclic organohydroborate
derivatives of lanthanides and metallocenes which incorporate the cyclic
organohydroborate [H2BC8H14] anion. Lanthanide hydroborates have received
sporadic attention over the years and investigations of hydrobroate derivatives
of lanthanides in the (II) oxidation state have been extremely limited.
Preliminary results indicate unusual agostic interactions in these species and
their ability to undergo hydride abstraction from the Ln-H-B bridge will be
evaluated.

Inorganic complexes that contain transition metals display a great variety of
interesting and useful properties. Many such compounds have the ability to
catalyze important chemical transformations used in industrial processes and in
the synthesis of new organic compounds, including pharmaceuticals. Compounds
that contain both transition metal atoms and also lanthanide ("rare earth
elements" such as ytterbium or gadolinium) atoms have heretofore been rare.
There are good reasons to expect that such compounds will have novel,
interesting and important properties, such as the ability to catalyze important
chemical reactions. Building on experiences gained in successful research
supported by NSF in the past, Shore and his colleagues will devise methods to
prepare compounds containing both lanthanide and transition-metal atoms,
characterize those compounds, and explore their properties. In addition, new
types of compounds containing groups of two interlinked boron atoms will also be
prepared and their properties explored. Graduate students involved in this work
will acquire expertise in several aspects of metal and main group chemistry, as
well as in related areas of engineering.