* 0213648
* Globalization, Liberalization, and Urban Restructuring in the Less-Developed World: A Comparative Study of Social and Spatial Polarization in Accra and Mumbai
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Jan Nijman, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2005
* USD 165,453.00

This research project is concerned with social and spatial change in large
cities in developing nations. The research will examine trends of social and
spatial polarization in residential areas of Accra (Ghana) and Mumbai (India).
This will involve extensive fieldwork in both cities, with support from local
universities, and employ site reconnaissance, interviews, census data analysis
and residential mapping, residential surveys and focus groups. The main
hypothesis in this study is that policies of economic liberalization in both
cities have encouraged fundamental changes in urban land use and in urban labor
markets. We expect to find increasing spatial differentiation of residential
areas with greater contrasts in terms of types of residential developments and
in terms of the socio-economic status of their residents. The choice of Accra
and Mumbai as case studies is based on a number of critical elements that they
have in common: their location in poor regions; their role as gateway cities;
their colonial histories; their post-colonial experiences in terms of national
and global phases in their countries political economy. This project builds on a
previous NSF-funded study of the changing corporate geographies of Accra and
Mumbai.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is important theoretically because it
helps to correct a bias in urban studies toward cities in the West and in more
developed regions of the world economy. It will promote understanding of the
social and spatial effects of liberalization and of corresponding trends of
globalization in major urban centers in the developing world. As such, the study
will contribute to more general theories of economic globalization. From a
practical point of view, the research is significant because it will provide
information about the changing geography of inequality in these cities. While
rapid urban growth in the less developed world is a well-known phenomenon,
little is known about the emerging human geographies of these cities. Trends of
social and spatial polarization affect community development and local politics
and also have ramifications for urban sustainable development and for urban
planning and management. The results of the research will help illuminate the
possible social and political risks of current trends and will make
recommendations regarding sustainable social and spatial development of cities
in developing nations.&lt;br/&gt;