* 0213128
* Function of the Small Hsps in Stress Tolerance, Growth and Development
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Elizabeth Vierling, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 09/30/2006
* USD 366,328.00

&lt;br/&gt;The long term goal of the proposed research is to define plant small
heat shock protein (sHsp) function at both physiological and mechanistic levels.
sHsps are a ubiquitous group of stress proteins that are believed to act as
molecular chaperones to prevent irreversible denaturation/aggregation of other
proteins. sHsp chaperone function is potentially critical to plant survival of
many different kinds of stress and to specific stages of plant growth and
development. Plants are characterized by an unusual complexity of proteins
belonging to the sHsp family; plants express both multiple cytosolic sHsps and
specific sHsp isoforms targeted to intracellular organelles. The evolutionary
expansion of the sHsp family in plants indicates that sHsps have provided a
selective advantage over time in many contexts. The complete definition of the
sHsp family from Arabidopsis, along with the biochemical framework from our
studies of sHsp structure and chaperone action in vitro, provide a new starting
point for investigations of sHsp function. Using a combination of molecular
genetic and biochemical approaches in Arabidopsis thaliana we will define the
physiological role of specific sHsps in stress tolerance, growth and
development, and identify specific sHsp substrates. The proposed research has
three specific aims. Aim 1: To determine the growth and stress tolerance
phenotypes of sHsp loss- and gain-of-function plants. RNA interference
transgenics and/or T-DNA insertional mutants for genes representing the class I
&amp; II cytosolic sHsps, as well as plants constitutively expressing class I
and/or II sHsps, will be characterized for growth and stress tolerance. Aim 2:
To identify potential sHsp substrates. We will test the hypothesis that sHsps
bind a wide range of protein substrates and that each sHsp class interacts with
unique substrates. Aim 3: To define other biochemical phenotypes of sHsp loss-
of-function mutants. With these experiments it will finally be possible to test
long-standing hypotheses about the importance of sHsps to plant stress tolerance
and development and to uncover new functions for these unique
chaperones.&lt;br/&gt;