* 0213048
* The Soil Microhabitats, Functional Diversity, and Ecological Roles of Uncultured Bacteria Within the Novel Divisions Acidobacterium and Verrucomicrobia
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Mark Liles, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2004
* USD 199,969.00

0213048&lt;br/&gt;Goodman&lt;br/&gt;Soil microorganisms impact biogeochemical
structuring and nutrient cycling on a global level. It has been estimated that a
gram of soil can contain as many as 5 x 10 11 bacterial cells and over 13,000
distinct phylotypes. However, only a small fraction of the microorganisms from
most soil samples can be readily cultured. The fraction that has been cultured
rarely includes the most abundant species and frequently is biased towards or
against particular taxonomic or physiological types. Since most of what is known
about soil microbes has come from studies of cultured species, we still know
very little about soil microbial ecology. Therefore, culture-independent methods
are an important tool in soil microbiology and promise major new insights into
the roles of soil microflora in ecosystem function. &lt;br/&gt;Culture-
independent methods have revealed that diverse members of two bacterial
divisions,&lt;br/&gt;Acidobacterium and Verrucomicrobia, are abundant in soils.
While they have a cosmopolitan&lt;br/&gt;distribution and can be numerically
dominant, we know very little about their ecology and activity&lt;br/&gt;within
the soil community. Using information derived from the application of newly
developed&lt;br/&gt;genomic approaches, we will test hypotheses about the
distribution and functions of these uncultured taxa in response to soil
environmental gradients.&lt;br/&gt;First, we will sequence, annotate, and
analyze large insert genomic DNA clones derived from&lt;br/&gt;bacterial taxa in
these two divisions (Acidobacterium and Verrucomicrobia taxa). Each of these
genomic DNA clones contains rRNA genes as well as functional information derived
from sequence analysis and annotation. These data will be integrated into a
publicly available and searchable database. We will next use the phylogenetic
information contained within these clones to develop taxa-specific primers and
probes. We will then use these molecular primers and probes to test hypotheses
concerning the ecological niches inhabited by these taxa, shedding light on
their distribution within various soil fractions, their size and membrane charge
distributions, their&lt;br/&gt;relative abundance within plant rhizospheres, and
their distribution along soil environmental&lt;br/&gt;gradients.&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this research will provide hitherto unavailable information on
specific uncultured soil&lt;br/&gt;microorganisms, including genomic
organization, gene content, and environmental distributions. The knowledge
gained from these studies will lead to further ecological hypotheses, and
provide new approaches, tools and a database that will significantly advance
microbial ecological studies of one of the most important microbial habitats on
Earth-the soil. The long-term goal is to contribute to a platform of
technologies and results that can be used to elucidate the variability, activity
and significant ecological roles of uncultured soil microorganisms in their
natural habitats.