* 0213025
* Developmental Control and Significance of knotted1 Intercellular Trafficking
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* David Jackson, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 07/31/2005
* USD 345,000.00

The development of a multicellular organism requires careful regulation of
protein activity and localization. As genome projects are beginning to reveal
the complement of genes required to build a plant, scientists now face the
complex issue of where and when genes are expressed and where proteins are
localized. Imposed on this complexity is the fact that specific plant gene
products traffic between cells through specialized channels called
plasmodesmata, so their final location may be distant from the cell where they
are made. Specifically, some developmental transcription factors are known to
traffic between cells, though little is known of the developmental significance
and regulation of this process. This project aims to understand the
developmental regulation of cell to cell trafficking of plant proteins, using
the KNOTTED1 (KN1) gene as a model system. Dominant Kn1 mutants have non-
autonomous effects on cell fate in the maize leaf, and using microinjection
assays it was shown that KN1 protein and mRNA can traffic between leaf cells,
through plasmodesmata. These assays were constrained by the type of tissue that
could be targeted, limiting the ability to ask developmentally relevant
questions pertaining to the role of KN1 trafficking in its function for stem
cell maintenance. Protein fusions of KN1 to the green fluorescent protein were
therefore developed and used to visualize trafficking in vivo in intact plant
tissues. In the future research, these studies will be extended to ask
significant questions about control of plasmodesmal trafficking in the meristem.
Specifically, the size exclusion limit of plasmodesmata in the meristem will be
estimated, and the experiments will test if symplasmic domains for protein
transport exist. Trafficking signal sequences in KN1 will also be localized. The
study will contribute to the understanding of cell to cell communication in
plants. It will also increase basic knowledge of plasmodesmata, which are poorly
characterized at the molecular level. Plasmodesmata are important for the
allocation of photosynthetic products, for plant morphogenesis and for defense
against pathogens. Therefore these studies of protein trafficking could have
significant implications for improving agricultural productivity.