* 0213488
* Computational Studies of Liquid Water, Ice, the Ice/Water Interface and Protein Hydration
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Steven Rick, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Raima Larter
* 08/31/2007
* USD 271,000.00

In this project funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of
the Chemistry Division and the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Steven Rick of the University of New Orleans
will study water interactions using computer simulation techniques. As part of
this project Rick and his co-workers will use polarizable molecular mechanics
force fields (TIP4P-FQ models) to simulate the melting behavior of water, the
ice-water interface, and water in the interior of protein structures. The
results will be used to compare, improve, and develop new methods and
intermolecular potentials.

Despite the fact that water is a key element of many computer simulations of
biological systems, most potentials used for water are flawed. Information
obtained in this project can be used to improve such potentials. The results of
this work are potentially very important in a wide variety of applications, such
as to biological systems, cryobiology, extra-terrestrial environments, and
crystallization processes for pharmaceuticals. Furthermore, what can be learned
about water can be applied to other systems that are less well characterized. In
the course of this work Rick will provide a meaningful research experience for
minority students from a four-year historically black, primarily undergraduate
institution at which he has a joint appointment.