* 0213698
* IRCEB:  Ecological Forecasting and Risk Analysis of Nonindigenous Species
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2009
* David Lodge, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2009
* USD 3,054,295.00

&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Numbers of nonindigenous species--species
introduced from elsewhere - are&lt;br/&gt;increasing rapidly worldwide. They are
a major cause of biodiversity loss and environmental&lt;br/&gt;change, and are
estimated to cost the US $137 billion/yr. The 2001 National Invasive
Species&lt;br/&gt;Management Plan (www.invasivespecies.gov) highlighted the
urgent need for more rigorous and&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive risk analysis
frameworks for nonindigenous species so that prevention and&lt;br/&gt;control
strategies can be targeted appropriately. The central public policy
consideration is how&lt;br/&gt;much of society's resources should be expended in
response to nonindigenous species, and how,&lt;br/&gt;for example, should it be
allocated between prevention and control? These
considerations,&lt;br/&gt;though, include a nexus of interacting ecological and
economic factors that require&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary effort. Species
invasions are caused by economic activities, and in turn
affect&lt;br/&gt;economic activities. This ecological and economic linkage and
feedback means that the&lt;br/&gt;assessment of risk interacts with the
management of risk, which contradicts the common notion&lt;br/&gt;that risk
assessment and risk management are independent. Social welfare and risk
assessment&lt;br/&gt;are both determined jointly by ecological and economic
processes.&lt;br/&gt;In response to the need for interdisciplinary risk
analysis, this project brings together&lt;br/&gt;experts from invasion biology,
mathematical modeling, and economics. The main goal is to&lt;br/&gt;develop and
apply a bio-economic modeling framework for nonindigenous species
that&lt;br/&gt;integrates risk assessment and risk management, includes
uncertainty distributions, and&lt;br/&gt;optimizes prevention and control
strategies in a landscape context. The overall bio-economic&lt;br/&gt;model uses
Stochastic Dynamic Programming, which allows the investigators to
incorporate&lt;br/&gt;ecological-economic feedbacks in such a way to optimize
combinations of prevention and&lt;br/&gt;control strategies to maximize social
welfare. This framework will be extended to the landscape&lt;br/&gt;scale with
Neural Network models.&lt;br/&gt;The applications will focus on freshwater
nonindigenous species in the Great Lakes&lt;br/&gt;region. A preliminary
application to zebra mussels suggested, for example, that society
should&lt;br/&gt;be spending about $240,000/yr to keep zebra mussels from
invading each lake with a power&lt;br/&gt;plant (to prevent fouling of pipes).
This is in sharp contrast to the $825,000 that the Fish &amp;&lt;br/&gt;Wildlife
Service spent in FY2001 for prevention and control efforts for all aquatic
nuisance&lt;br/&gt;species for all lakes. Our analyses will be directly relevant
to policymakers and natural resource&lt;br/&gt;managers.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts. The investigators will partner with the Shedd Aquarium in Chicago
to&lt;br/&gt;educate schoolchildren and the public about the general problem of
nonindigenous species, about&lt;br/&gt;what individuals can do to reduce the
problem, and about the role that science plays in public&lt;br/&gt;policy
decisions. By partnering with an educational software firm, they will convert
research&lt;br/&gt;models into user-friendly formats for use by schoolchildren,
the public, policymakers, resource&lt;br/&gt;managers, and stakeholders. In
partnership with the Great Lakes Commission, research
methods,&lt;br/&gt;results, and user-friendly products will be disseminated in
workshops to policymakers, managers,&lt;br/&gt;and stakeholders. Finally, they
will develop international collaborations and a reciprocal&lt;br/&gt;exchange of
information and techniques with top researchers in Australia, where NIS research
is&lt;br/&gt;advanced relative to North America.