* 0213834
* Understanding Microstructures of Mixed Group III-Nitride Layers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Nathan Newman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2005
* USD 477,142.00

This project aims for a comprehensive understanding of microstructures of mixed
group III-nitride layers, intending to advance understanding of the occurrence
of phase separation and atomic ordering in these materials. Experiments to
discern whether or not phase separation oc-curs in the bulk or on the surface
will be conducted. The approach is to examine the effects of growth rates and
growth temperatures on phase-separated microstructures. In-diffusion experi-
ments to evaluate whether or not these microstructures represent the equilibrium
state in the bulk will be carried out. The origins of atomic ordering will be
studied through growth of mixed lay-ers on [ 1 1 10 ] microfaceted GaN layers to
ascertain the role of these facets in atomic ordering. Interfaces between
differently ordered regions and distribution of ordered domains in layers that
have been grown at different growth rates will be examined. Additionally, the
influence of phase separation and atomic ordering on carrier mobility by Hall
measurements will be evaluated. These studies will utilize InGaN and AlGaN
layers, and may also include AlInN and AlInGaN films. Film growth will be done
using metalorganic chemical vapor deposition and molecular beam epitaxy.
Microstructures will be studied by X-ray diffraction and transmission electron
mi-croscopy, both conventional and high resolution. Energy loss spectroscopy,
coupled with energy filtered imaging, will be utilized to study the distribution
of atomic species in layers. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
fundamental research issues in areas of electronic materials science having
technological relevance. It is envisaged that this research could have a
significant impact on sci-ence and technology of group III-nitride materials and
devices. An important feature of the proj-ect is the strong emphasis on
education, and the integration of research and education. The avail-able
resources provide special opportunities for education and training of graduate
students in-volved in interdisciplinary forefront research.&lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;