* 0213944
* The Nature and Determinants of Regime Preference and Political Values in Jordan, Kuwait, and Palestine: Implications for Arab Politics and for the Study of Governance and Democracy
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Mark Tessler, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2008
* USD 222,898.00

Two interrelated trends in comparative political research address issues that
are pertinent to the Arab world but very much under-studied in that region. One
is the resurgence of interest in culture in general and political culture in
particular. The other concerns the attitudes and values of ordinary citizens in
countries undergoing or seeking to initiate democratic
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Against this background, the proposed research
will carry out public opinion research in three Arab countries in order to
examine the nature and determinants of attitudes and values pertaining to
governance, including democratic governance. The first goal of the investigation
is to shed light on what has often been called the "missing dimension" in the
study of Arab politics: how, why, and with what implications do ordinary
citizens think about the way their societies are and should be governed. The
second goal is to connect findings from the study of these Arab societies to
efforts in Political Science to construct generalizable insights about
governance, democratization, and political culture in developing
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information about political attitudes and values
will be collected through public opinion research in Jordan, Palestine (West
Bank and Gaza), and Kuwait. These countries have been selected for both
practical and analytical reasons. Practical reasons include the availability of
local scholars and institutions that will participate in the project, and also a
political climate that permits the conduct of opinion research. Analytical
considerations include system-level similarities and differences that make
cross-national comparison instructive, and also the availability of data from
prior research in each country, thereby permitting longitudinal as well as
cross-sectional comparison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's explanatory
contribution will be enhanced through the incorporation of both a cross-national
and a longitudinal comparative dimension. The three countries will be examined
at two different points in time. Similar findings across space and/or time will
suggest relationships that are likely to be generalizable, at least to the Arab
world and perhaps to non-democratic polities in other developing areas.
Alternatively, different findings will permit informed speculation about the
conditionalities associated with particular patterns and variable
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, further extending the project's
comparative dimension, findings from the Arab Middle East will be compared to
findings from political attitude research in other developing countries. The
goal in this connection is to reduce exclusion of the Arab experience from
efforts in comparative politics to develop theoretical insights of broad
applicability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;