* 0213666
* Auditory Source Event Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Richard Pastore, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Christopher T. Kello
* 08/31/2006
* USD 215,550.00

The child's cry that wakes you in night is not hard to identify. The footfalls
and hoof beats in a western movie supply crucial realism to the moviegoer.
Things that make noise are tightly woven into the fabric of human experience.
Nevertheless, we know very little about the actual perception of auditory
events. This is true despite our extensive knowledge of how ears work, for
example, and our extensive knowledge about the basic auditory capabilities of
ourselves and other animals. The specialized area of speech perception has made
some advances, but the perception of our environment involves sounds other than
speech, and the study of human speech has provided few insights into how we
perceive complex acoustic events. The impact of a shoe on a wooden floor will
sound differently than the same shoe on a metal floor. Acoustic properties of
auditory events reflect physical and biomechanical properties of their sources.
To understand auditory event perception, the funded project will identify the
physical and biomechanical properties of source events and then identify
relations between these source properties and the acoustic properties of the
resulting sound. With this database in hand, Dr. Pastore and his colleagues will
next conduct experiments to identify the sound attributes that listeners
correctly (or incorrectly) associate with source properties. Specifically, the
funded project employs this source-sound-perception approach to investigate
human gait as a class of auditory events. Although the proposed research focuses
on human gait as a source of sounds, the overarching goal is to develop research
procedures to study perception of almost any auditory event. This basic research
has broad implications. For example, virtual-reality technology has fostered
interests in the development of auditory virtual-reality capabilities. The
funded basic research will accomplish the crucial first step to make such
applications possible. This research could also contribute to the development of
effective surveillance systems for research, commercial, and military use.
Moreover, it will identify how listening skills may be improved with training
and which attributes of sounds are most important to aid the hearing impaired.