* 0213023
* Functional Analyses of the Narrow Sheath and Ragged Seedling2 Mutations During Development of Maize Lateral Organs
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Michael Scanlon, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Lolle
* 07/31/2005
* USD 330,000.00

0213023&lt;br/&gt;Scanlon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leaves are the fundamental organ
of plant shoots, and develop via the morphogenetic activity of shoot apical
meristems. Previous studies suggest that the precisely regulated balance of
hormone concentration and hormone transport are key components in leaf
organogenesis. Three mutations disrupting early events in maize leaf pattern
formation will be exploited in biochemical and molecular genetic investigations
probing the role of the plant hormone auxin during early stages in leaf
development. The mutations narrow sheath1, narrow sheath2 (ns1, ns2) and ragged
seedling2 (rgd2) all disrupt development of maize lateral organs, leading to
narrow leaf and shortened stem phenotypes. Maize leaves contain at least two
lateral compartments, the central and marginal domains. NS function is essential
for recruitment of the marginal compartment, but is not required for the
development of the central leaf domain. The ns mutant&lt;br/&gt;phenotype, which
mimics IAA-overexpressing mutants, is controlled by the non-homologous,
duplicate factor mutations ns1 and ns2. Narrow sheath 2 has been cloned, and
encodes a NITRILASE that has been shown to function in the production of auxin.
Transcripts of ns2 accumulate in an alternating pattern subtending the marginal
compartment of maize leaf primordia. Mutations in the ragged seedling2 gene
condition more extreme narrow leaf phenotypes, and may disturb development of
both the central and the marginal domains. Four specific aims are
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) The NS2 RNA and protein accumulation patterns
will be analyzed in all developing maize tissues by in situ hybridization and
immunolocalization. NS2-specific polyclonal antibodies will be prepared. Of
particular interest is the NS2 accumulation patterns in developing embryos and
in&lt;br/&gt;tissues unaffected by the ns mutations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) The
expression patterns of the auxin responsive Aux/IAA genes of maize will be
analyzed by in situ hybridization in ns and nonmutant samples. Non-mutant apices
will be treated with xogenous auxin transport inhibitors, and ns apices will be
treated with auxin. These assays will test the hypothesis that the ns mutant
phenotype is the result of defective auxin-mediated signalling in the ns margin
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) The ns1-R mutation is linked to a genomic
polymorphism at the aldehyde oxidase (ao) locus, which encodes an enzyme
involved in IAA biosynthesis, and ns mutants aberrantly express AO transcripts.
Reverse genetic mutagenesis of ao loci, transposon mutagenesis of new ns1
alleles, and cloning of ao genes from ns mutant plants will determine whether
ns1 encodes an AO in maize.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) Genetic and molecular
analyses will test the hypothesis that RGD2 functions during early stages of
maize leaf development. Double mutant analyses of rgd2 with ns and
leafbladeless1, and the expression profiles of genes involved in early leaf
development (ns2, terminal ear1) will be analyzed by in situ hybridization.
Additional alleles of rgd2 will be obtained by transposon tagging, for use in
attempts to clone the rgd2 gene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;