* 0213459
* Trade Liberalization, Wages, and Employment in Developing Countries:  The Role of Political Economy and the Informal Sector
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2002,07/31/2008
* Nina Pavcnik, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 359,635.00

&lt;br/&gt;The public debate on the merits and perils of trade liberalization
often centers on the question of how trade reforms affect labor markets. But
despite the prominence of this question in public policy, empirical research to
date has offered no conclusive evidence on the effects of trade liberalization
on employment and wages. This reflects two main difficulties associated with
empirical work in the area. The first one is a measurement issue: in recent
years, trade protection in developed countries has taken the form of non-tariff
barriers that are inherently hard, if not impossible, to measure. A second
limitation is that the political economy of trade protection, while having made
inroads in trade theory and empirical studies of import penetration, has
remained a second-order concern in studies of the effects of trade reform on
wages. This study makes progress on these issues by exploiting the Colombian
trade liberalization between 1985 and 1994. The Colombian trade reforms
consisted primarily of multiple tariff reduction episodes that not only
drastically lowered the average tariff, but also affected the structure of
protection across industries. The advantage of focusing on tariffs is that they
are both well measured, and -- contrary to NTB measures -- comparable across
time. The basic idea in this project is to link tariff changes, which varied
substantially across industries, to wages and employment in each industry, in
order to investigate whether trade liberalization leads to lower wages in
sectors that experienced larger tariff reductions, and/or labor reallocation
across sectors. The adopted framework explicitly accounts for the political
economy of trade protection. The focus on industry-level adjustment differs from
the previous literature that has concentrated on the effects of trade policy
changes on the returns to particular worker characteristics (most prominently,
returns to skill and education). These studies focus on the consequences of
trade reforms in the long run, when worker industry affiliation does not matter.
However, industry affiliation is crucial in predicting the impact of trade
reforms in short- and medium-run models of trade. These models seem particularly
relevant in developing economies (like Colombia) where labor market rigidities
obstruct labor mobility across sectors. Because Colombia, like many other
developing countries, is characterized by a large informal sector, a significant
part of this research is devoted to the analysis of the adjustment process in
this sector. In particular, the study examines whether trade liberalization has
contributed to the increase in informality of the workforce documented in the
1990's, and whether wages and employment were affected differentially in the
formal and the informal sectors. The analysis utilizes information on industry
tariffs from the Colombian Department of National Planning and detailed worker
level data from the National Household Survey (that include information on
workplace characteristics and informality) over the period 1984-1998.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While this work does not attempt a general analysis of
income inequality, it has implications for the current debate on the effects of
trade reform on wage dispersion. The question is of particular importance in
developing countries that are characterized by substantial inequalities. The
work identifies a source of disparity beyond the well-documented increase in the
economy-wide skill premium: to the extent that tariff reductions in developing
countries are larger in sectors with lower initial wages, employing a larger
fraction of less-skilled workers, a decrease in the industry wages of these
sectors will affect such workers disproportionately. Similarly, a trade
liberalization-induced expansion of the informal sector, which is typically
associated with lower wages and zero benefits, may increase inequality. While
such considerations do not imply that trade liberalization is undesirable, they
point to the need to identify sectors and worker groups that may need adjustment
assistance in the short and medium run. More generally, an analysis of the
adjustment process following trade liberalization may help understand and
address the resistance of particular groups to trade reforms we often observed
in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;