* 0214555
* Market Monitoring and Organizational Form
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Steven Tadelis, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/2003
* USD 64,773.00

Modern economies exhibit a broad diversity of organizational forms: from small
owner-operated firms to employee-owned partnerships, cooperatives, non-profits,
and finally investor-owned corporations. A fundamental problem in economics is
to understand the forces that lead to these different forms of organization and
thus determine the structure of productive enterprise in the economy. This
project proposes an economic framework for studying the economics of
partnerships and their role in the professional services. The approach
highlights three ingredients that favor the formation of partnerships: (1) the
importance of human capital in production; (2) a lack of information on the part
of clients that leads them potentially to be concerned about the quality of the
service they will obtain; and (3) the differing incentives of partnerships and
corporations in the hiring and selection of senior employees. The theoretical
model developed will explain why partnerships are typical in the professional
services, where human capital is primary input to production and the nature of
the service provided may be quite difficult for consumers to accurately assess,
but rarely observed in manufacturing, technology, or lower-skill service
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Associated with this project is a rich set of
broad impact policy questions concerning which forms of organization the law and
regulatory policy should accommodate. One of the most striking empirical
regularities in this area is that throughout manufacturing, technology, and many
service industries, the great majority of enterprises are either small owner-
operated firms or larger investor-owned corporations. However, in the
professional services -- law, medicine, consulting, accounting, architecture,
advertising-the traditional form of organization has been the professional
partnership. There is no single coherent framework for understanding the
differences between partnerships and corporations, or for understanding the
specific economics of professional services that have led to this particular
form of organization. This project will offer a starting point for a broader
investigation of market structure in the professional services, for examining
legal and regulatory issues in these industries, and for interpreting empirical
evidence about the structure of professional
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;