* 0214308
* The Effect of Educational Vouchers on Academic and Non-academic Outcomes: Experimental Evidence from a Natural Experiment
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Eric Bettinger, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2006
* USD 414,066.00

Educational vouchers are one of the most hotly contested policies for improving
the educational opportunities of disadvantaged students. The research presents
new evidence on the effects of educational vouchers on recipients. Data for this
research come from the Children's Scholarship Fund (CSF) of Toledo, Ohio. CSF
offers 4-year renewable, private school scholarships to low income, K-8th grade
students in Northwest Ohio. Between 1998 and 2001, almost 4,000 families applied
for CSF scholarships, and CSF awarded more than 1,500 scholarships by lottery.
The study improves on existing research in two distinct ways. First, since CSF
administered the scholarships randomly, unsuccessful applicants provide an
unbiased control group for voucher recipients. Second, whereas most voucher
research relies strongly on test scores to measure educational outcomes, this
study develops means to assess both academic proficiency and behavioral
characteristics that schools may influence.

Some of the outcome measures (e.g. test scores, school attendance, disciplinary
problems, grade retention, parental involvement and educational attitudes) in
the study are similar to other previous research on educational vouchers. This
study introduces also decision-making experiments as a means of measuring
voucher and private schooling effects on personal characteristics, including
overconfidence, generosity/altruism, patience and trust. The inclusion of non-
cognitive behavioral outcomes moves research beyond test scores to measure the
effect of schooling on the development of "behavioral and personality traits."
Recent literature argues that these behavioral characteristics influence
economic development and prosperity. If the study finds that voucher recipients
are less overconfident, more generous, more patient and/or more trusting, then
it may suggest that vouchers and private schooling help students to become less
overconfident, more generous, more and/or more patient. If this study finds that
private schools and vouchers affect these behaviors in students, then
researchers and policymakers may have to reevaluate cost/benefit analyses of
private schools and vouchers based on test scores alone.