* 0214650
* Twin Boundaries in Superconducting YBa2Cu3O7-x: Twin Boundary Energy and Its Dependence on Dopants, Additives, and Processing Parameters for Engineering Fine Twins.
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Siu-Wai Chan, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 330,000.00

Effective pinning of magnetic fluxes is imperative of sustaining critical
current. Otherwise a voltage drop is induced by moving magnetic flux lines and
resistance develops. It is now recognized that flux-pinning by twin boundaries
in YBa2Cu3O7-d (YBCO) exists but is highly dependent on the direction of flux-
line motion. Their presence has helped the YBCO to exhibit higher critical
current densities at high temperatures and high magnetic fields than those of
the Bi, Hg and Tl cuprates despite their higher critical temperatures. It
follows that a higher twin density leads to a larger flux-pinning force and a
higher critical current density in magnetic fields and temperatures that are
more attractive for applications. Yet very few efforts have been in engineering
fine twins and twin domains to exploit their flux-pinning properties. Our
project is to come up with methods to engineer fine twin structure. To identify
these methods, we first need to know the value of the twin boundary energy and
its dependence on a number of materials processing parameters. Information on
twin boundary energy and its dependence on processing parameters allows the
optimization of twin structure by controlling these processing conditions. This
information can be exploited to produce the best twin morphology, which leads to
maximum flux pinning and high critical current density. Specifically, equipped
with the information, we can refine the twin structure in YBCO systematically.
This allows the systematic investigation of critical current density (Jc) by
magnetization and twin microstructure by microscopy in search for optimal twin
structure for enhanced critical current density. Our proposed work will address
the twin contribution to flux pinning and critical current density with the goal
to obtain the optimal composition, additive, oxygenation and processing
conditions for maximum flux pinning and highest Jc. This area of microstructure
research is much ignored and can also provide excellent research training for
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact: The major problem, for
industrial applications of high temperature superconductors, is their low
critical-current density (a measure of current that can be transmitted without
electrical resistance) caused by poor current transmission at the grain
boundaries and insufficient flux-pinning centers at application temperatures and
magnetic fields. Twin boundaries in the high temperature superconductor
YBa2Cu3O7-d (YBCO) are ubiquitous and have been proved to be effective pinning
centers of magnetic fluxes in YBCO for (i) the practical range of operation at
temperature ranging from -230 C to -190C and (ii) magnetic fields of the order
of 20,000 times of the earth's magnetic field. New methods for engineering twin
morphology will emerge from this proposed work that can be applied to YBCO
coated tapes which can help to solve the long standing problem of low critical
current density of the high temperature superconductors and allow board
applications. Twinning as a material phenomenon affects important material
properties in ferroelectrics, ferromagnetics, ferroelastics and intermetallic
compounds with martensitic-transformation. As such, what we learn from twinning
in YBCO, can be directly applied to these technologically important materials to
optimize their properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;