* 0214388
* The Development of Syntactic and Semantic Patterns in Child African American English
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Lisa Green, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2006
* USD 262,898.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Lisa Green will conduct three
years of research on children's development of African American English (AAE).
AAE differs from mainstream English in its syntax and semantics (e.g.,
tense/aspect and negation). For instance, AAE can indicate habitual meaning with
the aspectual marker BE (e.g., "These printers be printing ten pages per minute"
meaning that the printers usually print ten pages per minute). This project aims
to: (1) identify such patterns in 3-5 year-old AAE-speakers; (2) analyze the
patterns; and (3) compare them to those characterizing the speech of adolescents
and adults in the same geographical area. The project will rely on several types
of data. Naturalistic speech, elicited utterances, and grammaticality judgments
will be used to test children's development of AAE grammar, with particular
focus on tense/aspect, negation, existential marking, and question systems. In
addition, children will show their understanding of relevant constructions by
acting out the meanings of sentences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
significant because it identifies developmental patterns and the stages at which
child AAE speakers make the subtle meaning distinctions that are associated with
the adult grammar. The project's findings may apply to both communication
disorders and education. Researchers in communication disorders have realized
the importance of accurate descriptions of AAE as they design tools to assess
language development. The descriptions in this research will be accessible to
them. This research may also help in developing curricula in programs such as
Head Start. It might also affect methods of language and literacy instruction in
grade school. The data description and analyses resulting from this research
will also be useful in devising psycholinguistic tests relating the use of AAE
patterns and reading achievement. &lt;br/&gt;