* 0214691
* Axiomatic and Strategic Analysis of Allocation: Theory and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* William Thomson, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2005
* USD 219,886.00

The aim of this project is the identification and the construction of allocation
rules enjoying properties of fairness and non-manipulability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to the study are the following: all agents benefit
from an enlargement of resources held in common, more generally of opportunities
open to society as a whole; each agent benefits from an enlargement of his
endowment, or of his productivity; the welfare of all agents is affected in the
same direction by changes in the environment over which no one in particular has
control (they all gain or they all lose as a result of the change); the arrival
of additional agents, when it is socially costly, implies a welfare loss for all
agents initially present; the desirability of an allocation is not affected by
the departure of some agents with their assignments; finally, if for two
economies having a group of agents in common, two allocations are chosen at
which these agents receive the same aggregate resource, then each of them
individually receives the same thing in both. The strategic component of the
program focuses on the requirement that agents should never gain by
misrepresenting the information they control, and it includes related properties
of implementability in the face of incomplete
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The possible applications of our allocation
problem are the following: dividing a resource as a function of claims agents
have on it (equivalently, assessing tax liabilities as a function of individual
resources agents control); allocating the cost of a public facility when agents'
needs are nested and when the facility has to be built so as to accommodate the
agents with the greatest need (exemplified by the so-called ``airport" problem);
allocating the cost of a public facility when agents' needs overlap, such as
when they are distributed in space (businesses along a road) or time
(overlapping generations); allocating the cost of a network, such as a road
network or an electrical network; allocating a service over time (sequencing and
scheduling); allocating private goods in standard economies.&lt;br/&gt;