* 0214481
* Population, Environment, and Land Tenure in Burkina Faso
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,01/31/2006
* Leslie Gray, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2006
* USD 35,000.00

This research project will investigate the environmental and socioeconomic
effects of population change in southwestern Burkina Faso, a region of
widespread immigration. It examines an on-going debate in African studies
literature about the role of population growth in causing environmental
degradation. The investigator argues that the scale of investigation is
important in determining conclusions. In the cotton-growing zone of southwestern
Burkina Faso, population growth has led to large reductions in forest cover and
fallow periods. Yet analyses at the macro-level may ignore other types of
population-induced landscape changes, such as the micro-level adaptive responses
of farmers. Although the research in this project counters dominant neo-
Malthusian portrayals of the relationship between people and their environments
in this region, population growth has led to several important socioeconomic and
institutional dislocations, particularly in the arena of wealth distribution,
land rights, community relations, and government policy. Among the questions
that the research will ask are: How have demographic and socioeconomic changes
affected the environment at multiple spatial scales? How are norms about land
tenure changing with population influx by migrants, particularly regarding
rights, agricultural investment, tenure security, conflict, and conflict
resolution? How do international environment, land, and population policies
interact with other government policies to affect changes on the local level,
and how do local farmers react to new policies? The research project will be a
one-year pilot project in three villages using different methodological
frameworks. Principal methods will include structured and unstructured
interviews, aerial photographic interpretation, soil and vegetation sampling,
and collection of national level data and policy
reports.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will have important outcomes
for the advancement of scientific knowledge. It will contribute to a growing
literature on how African environments are changing, on how population growth is
affecting local resource use, and on land tenure relations and agrarian change.
This research also will contribute to development of more effective policies
dealing with land rights in sub-Saharan Africa at a time when many governments,
through pressure from international institutions, are rethinking land policy in
ways that have serious implications for the welfare of villagers.&lt;br/&gt;