* 0214569
* Does Tthyrotropin (TSH) Play a Direct Role in Fish Gametogenesis
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* R Sampath Kumar, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 08/31/2004
* USD 205,000.00

Thyrotropin (TSH) is a pituitary-secreted glycoprotein hormone that is related
to the gonadotropins (follicle-stimulating hormone, FSH and luteinizing hormone,
LH). TSH interacts with its thyroidal receptors to induce the synthesis and
secretion of thyroid hormones (T3 and T4). TSH receptors were originally thought
to be solely expressed in the thyroid, however recently, TSH receptors have been
found in extra-thyroidal tissues (e.g., adipose tissue (lipolysis), lymphocytes
(immunoregulation), brain and pituitary) and convincing functional significance
has been ascribed to their activation. The principal investigators recently
cloned the first non-mammalian TSH receptor from the striped bass, a marine bony
fish. This cDNA was isolated from the gonads of the fish (as opposed to the
thyroid where they are expected to be expressed). Although this was the first
report of the expression of TSH receptors in the gonads of any vertebrate, these
findings have since been confirmed in other species of fish. Visualization of
the striped bass TSH receptor mRNA in the cytoplasm of both developing oocytes
and spermatocytes suggest that TSH may play a direct role in the development of
sperm and egg rather than merely being "maternal" mRNA stored for use during
embryo development. This results of this research will determine if TSH plays a
direct role in gametogenesis or embryogenesis, or both. Although it has been
established that thyroid hormones (as regulated by TSH) regulate gonadal
physiology both in mammals and fish, this study could provide the first evidence
of a direct role of TSH at the level of the gonad. An essential requirement for
the action of a hormone is the timely expression of its receptor in the target
tissue. Even though the expression of the TSH receptor gene in fish gametes has
been confirmed, a test of the hypothesis that TSH plays a direct role in
gametogenesis will be conducted by correlating gamete development with seasonal
changes in gene expression, production of receptor protein, and localization of
the protein within the gametes. In addition, TSH receptor transcripts will be
detected and quantified, and receptor protein will be localized in embryos and
larvae in order to test the alternate hypothesis that the TSH-receptor
transcripts are stored maternal mRNA required for embryogenesis. Proof of active
TSH receptor in gametes will strongly suggest i) a direct role of TSH in gamete
development, ii) a putative role of TSH receptor in the disruption of
gametogenesis as a causative factor of failure of fish spawning, and iii) a
basis for the re-evaluation of gonadal expression of TSH receptor in higher
vertebrates. Although studies of ligand-induced activation of the TSH receptor
on the processes of gamete development and maturation would be invaluable to
conclusively demonstrate the direct role of TSH in gametogenesis, sufficient
quantities of homologous striped bass TSH are not available at this time.

