* 0214410
* Economics of Air Travel: Network Effects, Congestion, and Scheduling Delays
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Christopher Mayer, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 336,913.00

In recent years, air traffic delays have become prevalent and are expected to
increase in frequency and magnitude. This research will examine three principal
issues: 1) What are the economic underpinnings of air traffic congestion? 2) Why
do airlines choose not to adapt their schedules to fully account for predictable
congestion? 3) What is the impact of expected travel time and scheduled travel
time on fares? Since air traffic congestion is the proximate cause of longer
travel times, the research begins by investigating its determinants. Two factors
are possibly involved. One is the hub and spoke system used by most major
carriers. Hubs enable passengers to connect to many destinations, creating
network benefits that increase in the number of markets served from the hub.
Congestion occurs when hub airlines bunch flights together in a short time
period at hub airports, accepting longer average travel times in order to serve
more cities and have shorter scheduled connections. The second factor in
congestion is that airlines may not fully account for the fact that adding their
own flights will lead to increased delays for other air carriers. Thus all
airlines will have "too many" flights relative to what is socially optimal.
Next, the project examines four reasons as to why airlines do not fully adjust
their schedules for predictable increases in travel time, especially at hub
airports, where hub airlines have especially poor on-time performance: i)
competition with other carriers to report the shortest scheduled travel time may
encourage obfuscation about accurate arrival times; ii) the uncertain nature of
aircraft arrival times, combined with the constraint that an airline cannot
schedule a departure until after the aircraft has been scheduled to arrive,
makes it costly for an airline to add a large layover on the ground to buffer
against delays; iii) hub airlines face additional incentives to have departure
delays given that the hub carrier wants to retain the option to have flights
that arrive earlier also depart earlier; iv) required minimum connection times
at hubs encourage airlines to choose unrealistic schedules. The last stage of
the research will examine how public policy could best address air traffic
delays. This analysis will involve using fare data to determine how consumers
value avoiding delays and the extent to which airlines are correctly taking the
cost to consumers of delays into account when setting their schedules. This
research will help design improved government policies with regard to air
travel. The US Government can choose to tax additional flights and/or improve
the transportation infrastructure. The results will help develop a tax that
reduces inefficient congestion caused by airlines over-scheduling airports with
fixed runway capacity while not discouraging the network benefits from operating
a hub. At many airports, an ideal congestion tax might have a small impact on
air traffic congestion since hub carriers may already internalize most of the
costs of hubbing through a high local market share. Also, a careful examination
of airline pricing and scheduling patterns allows for a more complete
understanding of how competition affects the quality of private information and
the economic value of consumer time. Such estimates provide a crucial, but often
crudely estimated input in determining the optimal public investment in costly
technology and infrastructure.