* 0214021
* Trade Bargaining with Externalities, Imperfect Competition and Rules versus Power:  Interpreting and Evaluating the Rules of the GATT/WTO
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Kyle Bagwell, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2005
* USD 411,224.00

Understanding trade negotiations from an economic perspective is not an easy
task. Within a terms-of-trade driven Prisoner's dilemma framework, the
fundamental international inefficiency that a trade agreement can solve relates
to the cost-shifting that arises through terms-of-trade movements when
governments protect import competing sectors unilaterally. By shifting some of
the costs of this protection on to foreign exporters, each government over-
protects its import competing sectors relative to what would be internationally
efficient in light of its underlying preferences and the preferences of other
governments. The result is that there is too little market access in the world
in the absence of a trade agreement. From this perspective, the purpose of a
trade agreement is to expand market access to efficient
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In our proposed research, we focus on three
distinct aspects of GATT/WTO bargaining: bilateral tariff bargaining in the
presence of multiparty externalities; bargaining over tariffs while maintaining
unilateral control over national competition policies; and the broader choice of
a rules-based versus power-based negotiating forum.This characterization of the
role of trade agreements is quite simple, yet it is also quite general, applying
to a wide variety of political-economy settings. But even given this
characterization, there is still the question of how trade negotiations might be
structured most effectively. As it happens, the World Trade Organization (WTO) -
and GATT, its predecessor organization created in 1947 - is not simply an
agreement to implement a particular point on the efficiency frontier. Rather the
GATT/WTO is a negotiating forum that is shaped by a set of rules, and subject to
these rules member governments are then left to negotiate when, what and with
whom they please. These rules may have important implications for the bargaining
outcomes, and they may play important efficiency-enhancing roles. In our
proposed research, we focus on three distinct aspects of GATT/WTO bargaining:
bilateral tariff bargaining in the presence of multiparty externalities;
bargaining over tariffs while maintaining unilateral control over national
competition policies; and the broader choice of a rules-based versus power-based
negotiating forum.&lt;br/&gt;