* 0214438
* Multi-dimensional analysis of register variation in Spanish
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Douglas Biber, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2005
* USD 139,106.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Douglas Biber and Mark Davies
will conduct two years of research on the linguistic characteristics of spoken
and written registers in Spanish (like conversation, lectures, essays, fiction,
and academic writing). The research will use corpus-based methods that depend on
computer programs to analyze the language characteristics of a large text
collection. Corpus analyses describe how speakers and writers actually use
language. While previous research has focused on building Spanish corpora, this
project is the first large-scale investigation of registers in Spanish corpora.
Researchers will use computer programs to analyze linguistic features in a
multi-million word corpus and statistical analyses to determine how linguistic
features are distributed across the texts in the corpus. The project's main goal
is to describe and compare the language characteristics of registers in Spanish.
The first step is to describe the characteristics of contemporary registers, and
then the project will describe linguistic change in Spanish registers over the
past 400 years. Finally, the project will compare the patterns of register
variation in Spanish to patterns found in other
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important for several reasons.
One immediate application is to language teaching. At present, most language
instruction does not take into account the specific goals of the student (e.g.,
for conversation vs. for academic study). But because registers differ in their
linguistic characteristics, language instruction can be more effective if
targeted to focus on the most salient features in a register. The linguistic
descriptions resulting from this research will provide information that is
relevant for teaching applications of this type. The project will also result in
computer programs and a grammatically coded (or 'tagged') corpus of Spanish. The
computer program and tagged corpus will be made available for on-site research
projects at the NAU Corpus Linguistic Research Program. The tagged corpus will
also be available as part of an existing NEH-sponsored web site. This corpus
will be the first large tagged corpus of Spanish (or any of the Romance
languages) that is freely available online for use by other researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;