* 0214037
* Collaborative Proposal: Perceptions of Risk From Nuclear Testing in Kazakhstan: A Comparative Study of Kazakh Villagers, Health Care Workers & Research Scientists
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Kathleen Purvis-Roberts, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2005
* USD 53,351.00

0214037, Purvis (collaborative with 0214406, Werner) This collaborative research
by an anthropologist at Texas A& M University, a chemist at Claremont McKenna
College, and a physician at the East-Kazakhstan Oblast State Agency for Health
Care will examine perceived risk from radiation exposure at a former Soviet
nuclear test site near Semipalatinsk, Kazakhstan. Some persons engage in high-
risk activities such as mining copper at the former test site, and some
individuals continue to live near it. The project will study how three social
groups, Kazakh villagers, local research scientists, and local health care
workers, perceive the risk from radiation exposure. Using participant
observation, a survey of 30 research scientists, 100 health care workers and 400
villagers in two villages (a test village close to, and a control village
distant from the site), the project will assess the perceived risk in the past,
the perceived risk at present, and the understanding of health risks due to
radiation exposure. The study will contribute to the understanding of cultural
differences in how people react to perceived risk in a situation where the
radiation exposure is actual, not hypothetical, where mistrust of the government
is pervasive, and where informants use traditional as well as modern ways of
dealing with their situation. The study will advance our understanding of how
local culture affects risk perception and political activity relevant to the
understanding of risk.