* 0214701
* Religious Radicals and Fertility: An Economic Approach
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Eli Berman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/2006
* USD 161,635.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the economics and demographics of religious
radicalism, particularly in Islam. Radical Islam is an ascendant geopolitical
force. Like the Christian Anabaptist sects and the Jewish Ultra-Orthodox,
Radical Islam is a relatively recent religious innovation. It arose in the mid
20th century in what historians describe as a reaction to the incursion of
secular, market driven, Western culture into traditional society. Like those
Christian and Jewish sects its growth represents a paradox to economists. As
markets increase the shadow value of time price theory predicts the evolution of
time-efficient forms of religious practice. Yet a religious sect evolves which
insists on an increasingly time-intensive version of practice, and paradoxically
it flourishes. Like radical Christian and Jewish sects, radical Islam owes part
of its remarkable growth to high fertility, especially in contrast to the
fertility decline of the mainstream Muslim majority.&lt;br/&gt; This research
makes and explores the consequences of four arguments: First, the formation of
radical religious groups has an economic explanation derived from the theory of
clubs, which rationalizse both the increased stringency of practice and high (or
even rising) fertility. Second, there is strong evidence that radical religious
groups can raise fertility rates. At least three groups have experienced
protracted episodes of fertility increases over the past 20 years: Iranians,
Palestinians and Ultra-Orthodox Jews. High fertility among the radical
religious, against a background of fertility transition among traditional and
secularizing groups could undermine political stability and economic development
in the Muslim world. Third, I propose estimating the size of differential
fertility rates of radical religious groups by linking indicators of religious
affiliation to micro data from household surveys which report on economic
variables and fertility. This allows a test of the hypothesis that subsidies to
radical religious groups are strongly pronatalist. The feasibility of these
procedures is illustrated in four cases, Israeli Ultra-Orthodox Jews, the Muslim
Brothers in Israel, Muslim religious community schools in Indonesia and the
Muslim Brothers in Palestine. In the first case results from completed work are
reported and in the next two preliminary results are given. Finally, fertility
is an easily quantified way that radical religious groups affect behavior, but
not the only way. I also examine the advantage of religious sects such as the
Taliban and Hamas in operating militias and in dispatching suicide bombers. This
advantage can explain why radical religious sects so often turn to violent
action.&lt;br/&gt;