* 0214527
* A Regulated Plant Virus Expression System for Efficient Production of Human Therapeutics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Bryce Falk, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 08/31/2006
* USD 779,013.00

The objective of this project is to produce a plant virus based expression
system combined with plant cell culture as a means for producing human
therapeutic proteins. In particular, this project will genetically engineer host
plant cells so that recombinant plant virus amplicons (self-replicating viral
RNA containing a foreign gene) can be produced intracellularly, under the
control of a chemically or metabolically-inducible promoter. The major goals of
this project include: (1) the design of the recombinant viral gene constructs
which contain all of the necessary components for high level production of viral
mRNA, efficient viral replication, efficient foreign gene expression and
extracellular targeting, 2) the design and creation of transgenic plant cell
lines utilizing tightly regulated, chemically and/or metabolically inducible
promoters which restrict viral production under non-induced conditions and allow
high level transcription of the recombinant viral RNA under induction
conditions, and 3) optimization of plant cell bioreactor conditions and
operating strategies during growth and induction to maximize volumetric
productivity of the product and minimize recovery/purification costs. This
project will focus on the production of two model proteins (green fluorescent
protein (GFP) and human a1-antitrypsin (AAT)) in tobacco cell cultures utilizing
a cucumber mosaic virus (CMV) amplicon under the control of specific chemical
and metabolically regulated promoters in a membrane bioreactor.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a multidisciplinary approach
combining molecular biology and virology strategies with quantitative process
engineering. In addition, an integrated training program consisting of a
collaborative, multidisciplinary team approach to research, combined with
coursework, a focused study group, seminars, retreats and an industrial
internship to provide breadth in biotechnology, is part of this project.
Graduate students, postdoctoral researchers and undergraduates will participate
in this training program.&lt;br/&gt;