* 0214195
* Estimating the Settlement Process in Environmental Litigation: A Game-theoretic Approach
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Eric Helland, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christopher J. Zorn
* 07/31/2004
* USD 60,000.00

Enforcement of environmental regulations takes three forms: inspection,
detection, and finally the accessing of penalties. While the first two aspects
have been extensively studied, the final stage has received little attention.
Accessing penalties for violations of environmental statutes and regulations is
a crucial part of regulatory policy. Most penalty assessment at the federal
level is done through litigation; most of that litigation results in a mutually
agreed-upon settlement between the Department of Justice (acting at the behest
of the Environmental Protection Agency) and the defendant in the case. This
research explores a simple game-theoretic model of the process that leads to
settlement in civil environmental litigation. The researchers then test an
econometrically tractable model of the attributes of the settlement process.
Understanding the settlement process in civil environmental litigation is
particularly important. The litigation process has been extensively studied in
civil matters between private parties, and in criminal litigation where one
branch of the government acts as prosecutor and another as judge. In contrast,
very little has been done on civil environmental actions, which share the
charter of criminal prosecutions in that the government is the plaintiff, but
where the possibility of incarceration is remote. There are important reasons to
believe that the government behaves differently when it is a plaintiff in civil
litigation. First, the government has different incentives than do private
litigants. Because the government is a repeat player in the courts it is likely
to be more concerned with its reputation than most private litigants. Second,
the government is interested not only in the money received from the litigation
but also in the political return. This research advances the relevant literature
in three separate ways. First, it represents an investigation into an area of
environmental policy that has not yet been previously studied. Second, the
project fills the void relating to empirical work on bargaining problems.
Finally, this project investigates the differences in how the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Department of Justice view the enforcement of cases
against violators of the environmental laws.