* 0214552
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Elite Opinion, The Public Interest, and Inter-Branch Policy Differences
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* John Zaller, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2004
* USD 8,240.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project explains persistent policy
differences between presidents and congresses, independent of party. The
prevalent view is that the President represents "the public interest" and the
Congress the "special interests." The investigator asserts that presidents are
likelier than Members of Congress (MC's) to act upon their convictions, which
will reflect any dominant view among elites, unless a dissenting lobby is bound
to their party by the issue in question. Presidents are only constrained by
lobbies linked to their parties by an issue, while MC's are sensitive to both
the secondary demands of party-linked groups and those of no-party lobbies. The
President is more apt to act on principle than is an MC (and hence Congress
generally) since his actions are more influential and he is less vulnerable than
the atomostic Congress to lobbies' tactics of "Divide and conquer" and targeting
recalcitrants. Persistent interbranch differences emerge when unified elite
opinion influences presidents of both parties but lobbies constrain Congress.
Unlike extant work the student's theory explains how the same issue can be
partisan in one era and marked by inter-branch conflict in another. It is also
free from normative assumptions.

The student will undertake two two-week trips to the Library of Congress (LOC)
and these allow him to fully operationalize a key variable in his theory, elite
opinion. By coding and tabulating the editorial positions of a sample of papers
stratified by region and partisan tendency on three issues, trade, gun control
and veterans programs from 1910-2000 he will be able to show the degree to which
an issue is contested or consensual among elite opinion. This enables him to
test his theory in a timely manner.

The database assembled should prove useful to scholars pursuing other questions
in this area of inquiry.