* 0214916
* Acquisition of a Non Destructive Inspection System for Delamination and Damage Characterization of Composite Structures and Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Heshmat Aglan, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 07/31/2004
* USD 99,900.00

Delamination fracture is a major design concern for load bearing structural
components manufactured from composite materials. Current standard test methods
describe procedures for the determination of inter-laminar fracture toughness or
the number of fatigue cycles for the onset of delamination growth using Linear
Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM) theories. These methods carry severe
limitations resulting in an inadequate characterization of the fundamental
design parameters of the materials. A fundamental approach, which has so far
been ignored, is the correlation of these material design properties with Non
Destructive Inspection (NDI) parameters such as those detected by Thermal Wave
Imaging (TWI) or other methods. If such relationships exist, the prediction
capability of the standard test methods in evaluating design and durability
related parameters of materials and structures, should be considerably enhanced.
The Thermal Wave Imaging System to be used in conjunction with the existing
state of the art mechanical properties characterization equipment will enable
the researchers to conduct fundamental research on the delamination fracture
behavior of composite materials as well as damage tolerance studies on other
metallic and nonmetallic structures. The aim is to develop guidelines to
establish delamination behavior of composite structures and damage tolerance of
materials and relate them to structural performance, as determined by standard
test methods. This will enhance the prediction capability of the current
standard test methods and reduce the premature failure of structures in
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal Wave Imaging system will not only enhance
the quality of many research projects at TU, but strongly help in training
graduate and undergraduate students at a historically black institution. At
least two graduate and two undergraduate students will be trained in this area
of research every year. The PI and two of his research associates, with a strong
background in materials characterization, will guide and advise the students'
research, which will be in the form of graduate M.Sc. thesis and senior research
projects. Some of the PI's and the research associates' time will be devoted to
maintaining the equipment. &lt;br/&gt;