* 0214946
* LTREB: Long-term Consequences of Biochemical and Biogeochemical Changes in the Horseshoe Bend Agroecosystem, Athens, GA.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* David Coleman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2008
* USD 299,999.00

0214946&lt;br/&gt;Coleman&lt;br/&gt;Understanding many soil processes, including
the accumulation of organic matter and&lt;br/&gt;the formation of soil
aggregates, requires research that is conducted over decadal
time&lt;br/&gt;periods. The dynamics of soil organic matter and soil fauna at
the Horseshoe Bend&lt;br/&gt;(HSB) agroecosystem site in Georgia have been
studied in replicated experimental&lt;br/&gt;plots since 1978. Analyses indicate
that the experimental treatments (no-tillage and&lt;br/&gt;conventional-tillage
regimes) are continuing to diverge. It is essential to continue
the&lt;br/&gt;experiments for an additional six years, to enable prediction of
what the long-term&lt;br/&gt;consequences of our manipulations will be.
Consequently, a continuation of ongoing&lt;br/&gt;LTREB research on soil
processes in no-till and conventional till plots at HSB is proposed,
with&lt;br/&gt;some significant changes. The new research focuses on two related
areas:&lt;br/&gt;1) long-term measurements of the gradually-increasing base of
soil organic matter from&lt;br/&gt;C3-pathway plants, in crop rotations that
have been in effect since 1997.&lt;br/&gt;2) following the production,
accumulation, fate and ecological effects of the Bt proteins&lt;br/&gt;from the
summer planting of Bt (and non-Bt) cotton in subplots within our main
plots.&lt;br/&gt;The relationship between these focal areas is simple. The
variation in the size of soil&lt;br/&gt;aggregates may influence the
sequestration of Bt toxins, and their breakdown products,&lt;br/&gt;within
soils. It has already been shown that no-tillage management systems at
HSB&lt;br/&gt;generate an increasing representation of soil macroaggregates in
comparison to the&lt;br/&gt;markedly reduced macroaggregates in our conventional
tillage plots. Therefore, it is&lt;br/&gt;hypothesized that no-tillage systems
will sequester more Bt-related products than will&lt;br/&gt;conventional-tillage
plots.&lt;br/&gt;Several short-term studies (see references in Project
Description) have failed to detect&lt;br/&gt;deleterious changes in non-target
soil fauna as a result of Bt in crop residues. There&lt;br/&gt;are three
possible explanations for this: a) that no deleterious effects exist, b) that
short-&lt;br/&gt;term experiments do not adequately predict the long-term
consequences of repeated&lt;br/&gt;exposure to Bt residues, and c) that effects
are contingent upon properties of the soil&lt;br/&gt;such as aggregate size. It
would seem prudent to be able to distinguish among these&lt;br/&gt;possibilities
and the long-term plantings at HSB will allow that to occur.