* 0214146
* Model Studies of Reversibly Interacting Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Kenneth Shull, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2006
* USD 309,000.00

The PI proposes to study interactions between surfaces and interfaces to which
well-characterized distributions of adhesion molecules have been added. The
molecules are based on block copolymers consisting of hydrophobic and
hydrophilic portions that are localized at a solid/liquid or liquid/liquid
interface. Experiments are designed to study a variety of attractive
interactions between two such interfaces in aqueous media. These attractive
interactions are reversible, and result from specific interactions between
functional groups attached to the hydrophilic portions of the block copolymers.
Proposed experiments include studies of hydrophobic interactions between
functional groups that are attached to the ends of the polymer chains, hydrogen-
bonding interactions between functional groups that are attached to the ends of
the polymer chains, and strong hydrogen-bonding interactions between a model
receptor/ligand pair that has been well-characterized by the biophysics
community. The experiments will determine the ways that collective forces from
individual adhesion molecules result in quantifiable attractive interactions
between surfaces bearing multiple adhesive groups. The proposed research will
define the role of the surface, the effects of spatial distribution of adhesive
molecules (uniformly distributed or clustered) and the lateral mobility of the
adhesive molecules in the plane interface. A series of contact experiments have
been designed that are sensitive to interfacial interaction energies spanning
several orders to magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research provides a
necessary link between the molecular-level information that is becoming
increasingly available as a result of recent advances in nanoscience and
nanotechnology, and the information that is needed for the appropriate design of
biomaterials or self-assembling systems, where the relevant length scales are
often in the micron range. Development of experimental methods and theoretical
models that can be utilized to make this connection between 'nanoscopic' and
'microscopic' properties will be an important outcome of this research. A
micromechanics laboratory with enhanced capabilities for studies of 'soft'
materials will also be available to scientists throughout Northwestern
University and the their collaborators. In addition, graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained in aspects of surface science and mechanics, and in
both physical and chemical aspects of polymer science.&lt;br/&gt;