* 0214705
* Homeobox Gene Regulation During Lateral Organ Development
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Marja Timmermans, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing grant
* Susan J. Lolle
* 06/30/2005
* USD 360,000.00

0214705 Timmermans

Organogenesis in higher plants is primarily post-embryonic in that lateral
organs of the shoot, such as leaves and flowers, develop progressively from the
shoot apical meristem (SAM). The mechanism that distinguishes organ founder
cells from stem cells or their derivatives in the SAM is largely unknown, but
the regulation of knotted1-like homeobox (KNOX) genes appears to be a key
determinant. The rough sheath2 (rs2), ASYMMETRIC LEAVES1 (AS1), and PHANTASTICA
(PHAN) genes from maize, Arabidopsis, and Antirrhinum, respectively, encode
highly conserved MYB domain proteins that are required to repress KNOX genes
during leaf development. Furthermore, the Arabidopsis KNOX gene SHOOT
MERISTEMLESS (STM) negatively regulates AS1. The regulatory hierarchy between
the KNOX and PHAN-related genes may thus provide a simple mechanism for
distinguishing founder cells from stem cells and their derivatives in the SAM,
simply by regulating the expression domain of the PHAN-related genes.

The mechanism by which the PHAN proteins regulate KNOX genes is not currently
understood. The variegated knox expression pattern in rs2 null-mutant leaves
suggests that other factors in the meristematic cells of the SAM are required to
control knox gene expression. Several RS2 interacting proteins have previously
been identified using the yeast two-hybrid system. Based on their homology with
known proteins from yeast and mammals, these interacting proteins can be
reconciled with a model in which rs2 is required for the assembly of a
transcriptional repressor complex that maintains knox genes silenced during leaf
development.

In order to dissect the mechanisms that control knox gene expression, the RS2
and AS1 complex as well as the origin of the variegated KNOX phenotype in rs2
mutants will be analyzed. The specific aims are:

1) To analyze the basis underlying the variegated knox expression pattern in rs2
mutants.

2) To characterize the RS2 complex from maize.

3) To begin analysis of the AS1 complex from Arabidopsis.

The proposed research will broaden our understanding of the process that
distinguishes founder cells from stem cells and their derivatives in the SAM. It
will also contribute to our understanding of the role of gene silencing
mechanisms in development. The preliminary data indicates that an as of yet
unknown silencing mechanism in plants that involves the transcriptional co-
repressor HIRA may play a central role.