* 0214746
* SBIR Phase I:  Srbi2TaO9 Thin Film Laser Annealing Tool for Ferreolectric Memory Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Nick Sbrockey, STRUCTURED MATERIALS INDUSTRIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Winslow L. Sargeant
* 03/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project will prove that
laser annealing can crystallize thin films of SrBi2Ta2O9 (SBT) to a device ready
quality, while keeping the substrate temperature at a level compatible with CMOS
components. SBT films are strong candidates for use in non-volatile
ferroelectric memory applications (FeRAM), due to their "fatigue-free"
read/write performance and low voltage operation. However, SBT films typically
require a post deposition-annealing step (> 700 C in oxygen) to crystallize the
films and achieve optimum performance. This high temperature-annealing step is
incompatible with current IC fabrication schemes, particularly designs that use
tungsten for the first level contacts. This laser-annealing tool will prevent
thermal damage to the underlying CMOS structures, and enable SBT film acceptance
in FeRAM device applications. The project will show proof of concept by
annealing films and demonstrating device performance. Ferroelectrics are poised
to rapidly expand into the several billion-dollar non-volatile memory markets.
This tool will accelerate this market penetration and thereby become a key
component of a multiple hundreds of million dollars per year tool market.