* 0214188
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Recasts, Learner Perceptions, and L2 Development
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2002,05/31/2004
* Alison Mackey, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2004
* USD 11,545.00

Under the direction of Dr. Alison Mackey, Ms. Takako Egi will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation on second language learning. She will study recasts, a
type of feedback where teachers or native speakers reformulate learners'
problematic utterances without changing the original meanings (e.g., Learner: "I
have a three key"; Teacher: "three keys"). Ms. Egi will focus on the question of
whether learners perceive recasts as responses to the content or to both the
content and grammatical form of their utterances. Her experimental research will
involve 70 learners of Japanese whose knowledge of the language will be tested
before and after communicating with a native speaker of Japanese. The native
speaker will provide recasts following learners' problematic utterances in those
conversations. The learners will also be interviewed about their perceptions of
the feedback that they receive. Their perceptions of recasts will be analyzed in
relationship to their improvement in Japanese as measured by comparing pre-test
and post-test results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is significant both
for theories of language learning and for the practice of second language
teaching. It will advance theory of second language acquisition by providing a
finely-grained analysis of the developmental benefits of recasts. The project
will also provide classroom teachers with guidelines about effective feedback in
the second language classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;