* 0214969
* Thinking and Seeing: Visual Metacognition in the Legal Process
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Daniel Levin, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher J. Zorn
* 02/29/2004
* USD 250,000.00

Recently, a number of researchers have emphasized the impact that beliefs about
mental processes can have on the legal process. Research on metamemory (e.g.
people's understanding of and control over memory) is therefore critical for
understanding how jurors might incorrectly weigh evidence. Particularly
important are situations where beliefs about mental functioning diverge from
people's actual capabilities. Recent research has demonstrated that people are
unaware of visual information that they do not attend to, and that they
typically attend to a very small proportion of visual information in a given
scene. One particularly striking manifestation of this failure occurs when
subjects have difficulty detecting large between-view visual changes. This
finding is referred to as "change blindness" (CB), and it occurs regardless of
whether the subject is actively searching for changes, and even when the
changing object is the current focus of the subject's attention. In part,
interest in these findings is based on the degree to which they conflict with
intuition - many people are incredulous when they discover that seemingly
obvious changes are missed by subjects. Three sets of experiments in this
proposal explore visual metacognition, documenting the scope of incorrect
beliefs about visual information processing. A first set of experiments tests
the degree to which beliefs about visual organization and intention underlie
this metacognitive errors in vision. In these experiments, subjects will make
estimates about changes to well organized natural scenes, jumbled scenes, and
object arrays. A second set of experiments compares predictions about picture
memory with predictions about on-line visual processes such as change detection
to determine why subjects underestimate their performance in the former case,
while they overestimate their performance in the latter case. The final
experiments in this proposal explore the possibility that inaccurate visual
metacognition can lead jurors to misevaluate evidence in criminal and civil
cases. Just as incorrect beliefs about the confidence-accuracy correlation can
lead jurors to misjudge eyewitness evidence, inaccurate beliefs about vision may
lead them to misunderstand what someone "should have seen."