* 0214068
* A Simulation-Based Information-Theoretic Estimator of Economic Models with Unobserved Variables
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Susanne Schennach, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2004
* USD 60,140.00

One of the most difficult aspects of the empirical testing of economic models is
the presence of variables that influence the behavior of the economic system
under study but that are not observed by researchers. A considerable number of
innovations in applied and theoretical economics have consisted of uncovering
specific sets of assumptions that permit the determination of the parameters of
interest, despite the presence of these unobservable, or latent, variables. The
proposed research project devises a general methodology to handle such
situations by combining two areas of research that have received a considerable
attention in the statistics and economics literature over the past decade,
namely, simulation-based and generalized empirical likelihood approaches.
Simulation-based approaches offer the advantage of replacing tedious algebraic
manipulations by a large number of simple calculations that can easily be
handled by today's computers. Unfortunately, these approaches typically require
researchers to make assumptions regarding the distribution of the unobservable
variables. The present project avoids this limitation by employing techniques
related to generalized empirical likelihood estimators which have been
specifically aimed at replacing assumptions regarding the distribution of a
variable by less restrictive assumptions regarding the moments of a variable,
such as its mean or its variance. The approach is general, in the sense that it
applies to any model that can be expressed in terms of (potentially nonlinear)
moments, conditional mean or independence assumptions, in both identified and
set-identified settings. The asymptotic, or large sample, properties of this new
estimator for latent variable models are investigated. Also, the construction of
the estimator has implications even in the absence of unobservable variables, as
it suggests the use of an estimator closely related to, but not a member of, the
widely studied generalized empirical likelihood family. In particular, the
estimator combines the two most popular generalized empirical likelihoods,
namely Empirical Likelihood and Exponential Tilting. The research project
compares this new estimator, called exponentially tilted empirical likelihood,
to existing estimators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goal of this project is to
enable researchers to employ more realistic economic models without being
hindered by the complexity of the resulting equations, through the use of
general-purpose numerical methods. It also furthers the ongoing search for
statistical methods that make the best possible use of available
data.&lt;br/&gt;