* 0214473
* Collaborative Research: Minority Protection with Partisan Judges: The Impact of Judicial Review on Distributive Legislation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* James Rogers, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher J. Zorn
* 06/30/2004
* USD 13,112.00

This collaborative project examines the impact of judicial review on
distributive choices by legislatures. More specifically, it examines the ability
of a judiciary composed solely of narrowly partisan judges to protect minority
interests in the legislative process. The project is expected to show that,
contrary to conventional wisdom, judicial review can still work well to protect
minority interests even when judges are narrowly partisan. The principal
investigators' research strategy begins by assuming a "worst-case" context for
judicial review. First, the investigators assume that judges seek singularly to
advance the narrow interests of the respective group, or "faction," to which
they belong. Secondly, the behavior of legislators and judges is considered in
the context most likely to invite nakedly partisan outcomes - the purely
distributive context of a constant-sum game in which resources allocated to one
faction are necessarily taken away from the other factions. To study the impact
of judicial review on distributive outcomes, the principal investigators develop
an infinite-horizon game of judicial-legislative interaction in which a
legislature distributes a given sum of revenue across legislative factions,
subject to judicial review. The investigators extend the extant model of
legislative bargaining by adding a judicial review stage in which a judge, who
belongs to one of the factions and seeks only its interests, reviews allocations
enacted by the legislature. With the baseline provided by the extant model,
differences in legislative outcomes between the models can be attributed
directly to the impact of judicial review on legislative behavior. The
investigators expect that the model will show, even under these "worst-case"
conditions, that judicial review still "works" in two important ways. First,
they expect to show that distributive legislation is more equitably distributed
in a system with judicial review than without it, even when judges are narrowly
partisan. Secondly, they expect to show in the remaining cases - when the
legislative allocation excludes some minority groups from receiving a share -
that judicial review reduces the amount of the inequitable legislation that is
actually implemented. The expected significance of the proposed project is
threefold. First, the results of the project will have implications for the on-
going international interest in constitutional design, specifically regarding
the inclusion of judicial review in constitutional systems. Secondly, the
project will have implications for evaluating judicial selection procedures in
American states. Finally, the model is expected to generate hypotheses capable
of being empirically tested in subsequent work.