* 0214464
* Collaborative Research:  Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressions [FAVARs] and the Analysis of Monetary Policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Mark Watson, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2005
* USD 61,107.00

A considerable literature has developed that employs vector autoregression (VAR)
methods to attempt to identify the effects of monetary policy innovations on
various macroeconomic variables. These methods generally deliver empirically
plausible assessments of the dynamic responses of variables such as output and
prices to policy shocks, and they have been widely used both for assessing the
fit of structural models and in policy applications. However, the various VAR-
based approaches have certainly not escaped criticism. Several of the criticisms
of the VAR approach to monetary policy identification center around the
relatively small amount of information used by low-dimensional VARs. The sparse
information sets used in typical VAR analyses create at least two potential
problems. First, to the extent that central banks and the private sector have
information not reflected in the VAR system, the measurement of policy
innovations is likely to be contaminated. A standard illustration of this
potential problem is the perverse response of prices to monetary policy shocks
in some VARs. It is argued that this price puzzle results from imperfectly
controlling for information that the central bank may have about future
inflation. A second problem arising from the use of sparse information sets in
VAR analyses is that impulse responses can be observed only for variables
included in the VAR, which generally constitute only a small fraction of the
variables that we care about. This project develops an econometric approach that
addresses both of these issues while retaining the benefits of small-dimension
VAR analyses. Specifically, it combines the standard VAR analyses with factor
analysis. Recent research in dynamic factor models suggests that the information
from large numbers of time series can be usefully summarized by a small number
of indexes, or factors. The investigators add estimated factors to otherwise
standard VARs, obtaining factor-augmented VARs (or FAVARs). FAVARs can be
estimated by two-step methods or by maximum likelihood methods that account for
uncertainty in the factor estimation in second-stage VAR analysis. Preliminary
work shows that FAVARs can help solve both problems alluded to above: First,
FAVAR analyses of monetary policy yield plausible and tightly estimated impulse
response functions; in particular, the price puzzle is greatly ameliorated.
Second, FAVARs allow estimates of the responses of a wide variety of macro
variables to policy shocks within a single unified approach. This project
pursues a number of extensions to the basic analysis, both econometric and
substantive. Econometric extensions include the development of empirical
weighting schemes to provide for more precise measurement of the underlying
factors in the economy. Substantive extensions include developing methods for
real-time measurement of latent variables such as the output gap; factor-based
analysis of data revisions and their forecast ability; and characterization of
the effects of monetary policy on stock prices.