* 0214574
* Bayesian Analysis of Chronometric Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,10/31/2006
* Trisha Van Zandt, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 10/31/2006
* USD 210,000.00

This research will develop accurate and powerful Bayesian modeling and
computational methods for the problem of response time (RT) analysis. Although
Bayesian techniques are well established in other fields, social scientists very
rarely use them because they require a considerable investment in computational
resources as well as additional statistical training. The project will develop a
number of strategies that will improve the analysis of RT data, including
analyses that consider theories about how RTs are produced and new procedures
that can help untrained practitioners use Bayesian methods without too much
inconvenience. The study also undertakes a program of education and
dissemination to improve the overall quality of statistical analyses of RT data.
Thus, this research will result in new and better statistical procedures
specific for RT (and similar chronometric) data.

The importance of this project is considerable. How well a person performs a
task is often evaluated by way of how quickly he or she can respond during the
task. Measurements of RTs are important for both theoretical and pragmatic
reasons. Theoretically, RTs are used to test hypotheses about cognitive
structure, the ways in which people use and process information, and how changes
in the environment influence human behavior. Pragmatically, RTs are important
for evaluating human performance in many areas. They assist machine interface
design decisions, such as the optimal way to present information to a pilot or
the best place where to put a turn signal lever. They are also used in medicine;
diagnoses of some organic brain disorders such as Alzheimer's disease or
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder can be informed by a patient's RTs on
certain kinds of tests. Many of the statistical procedures used to test
hypotheses based on RTs are suboptimal. They depend on oversimplifying
assumptions about RT data that are usually incorrect, and consequently the
inferences that are made about RTs collected in different environments can be
faulty. This project will result in more accurate characterization of RT data
and therefore improved decision making about human capabilities and disease.