* 0214769
* SBIR Phase I:  Plasticized Poly(lactic Acid) (PLA) Nanocomposites
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Andrew Myers, TDA Research, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project will develop
plasticized poly(lactic acid) (PLA) nanocomposites. PLA is a biopolymer derived
from corn that is stiff at room temperature, but that can be made more flexible
by adding significant amounts of plasticizers. Plasticizers are small, often
volatile molecules that are incorporated, but not bound, into polymers to make
them softer. These plasticizers can migrate out of PLA, forming a sticky layer
on the surface and leaving the plastic hard and brittle. Technology that could
both reduce the amount of plasticizer necessary to lower the glass transition
temperature and to prevent the plasticizer from leaching out of the polymer
would create large new market opportunities for PLA. This Phase I project
proposes to increase the permanence of plasticizers by incorporating
nanoparticle-anchored plasticizers into PLA. Anchored plasticizers would not be
volatile, and extraction and migration should be significantly lower. The
anchored plasticizer will still affect the glassy to rubbery transition of the
host material, and yet the permanence of the plasticizer will be substantially
increased. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial applications of this project
will be in a number of consumer use markets that rely on petroleum as the
starting material. They include flexible plastic films, bags, and toys. Flexible
PLA also has the potential to replace commodity thermoplastics like polyolefins
and PVC in specific applications.