* 0214789
* STTR Phase I:  Genetic Engineering of Maize for Increased Tolerance to Heat Stress
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Eugene Butler, Genetic Architecture Education Analysis (GAEA), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,990.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase 1 Project proposes
to develop transgenic maize (Zea mays L.) with increased tolerance to heat
stress. It has recently discovered that a gene encoding the maize chloroplast
protein synthesis elongation factor, EF-Tu, plays a role in the development of
heat tolerance. EF-Tu protects other proteins from heat-induced inactivation and
aggregation. The overall goal of this project is to genetically engineer maize
that overproduces EF-Tu under high temperature conditions and to exploit the
protective role that EF-Tu plays in heat tolerance. The key objectives of the
Phase 1 research include (a) the creation of EF-Tu transgenic maize protoplasts,
Arabidopsis and maize whole-plants and (b) the assessment of their heat
tolerance in the laboratory. The results of the Phase 1 project will lay the
groundwork for the follow-on Phase 2 and Phase 3 projects. They will include the
testing the performance of EF-Tu transgenic maize in the field (Phase 2) and its
commercialization (Phase 3).

The commercial applications of this project will be in the area of agriculture.
High-temperature is a major limiting factor to plant productivity, often causing
significant economic losses to both domestic and international agricultural
markets. The development and commercialization of transgenic maize with greater
ability to tolerate heat stress is expected to have enormous economic benefits
for the United States and the world.