* 0214408
* STTR Phase I:   Novel Lipid Deposition for Biosensor Surfaces
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Charles Pennington, Luna Innovations, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* F.C. Thomas Allnutt
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,984.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop
sensing instrumentation containing bioengineered surfaces that are compatible
with relevant, disease-associated proteins. Of particular interest in the fields
of pharmaceutical design and cell biology is the seven-transmembrane segment, G
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). GPCRs represent a class of bioactive proteins
that encompass 1-2 percent of all encoded protein within the human genome and
have been the focus of extensive study in signal recognition and propagation
within the human body. These receptors, it is estimated, comprise up to 70
percent of potential drug candidates. However, a valid measurement of protein-
protein interactions has been elusive due to the technical reliance upon cell
extracts or live cellular systems, both of which can convolute data. Luna
Innovations along with their partners at the University of Pennsylvania propose
a novel, cell-free system to measure the biophysical association between
hydrophobic GPCRs and their ligands. The proposed optical fiber-based system,
based on a lipid bilayer deposition, is essential not only to understand the
important components of biological systems but also to vastly improve the
accuracy of contemporary biochip measurements.

The commercial applications of this project are in the area of biosensor
instrumentation. An instrument capable of detecting and characterizing protein
interactions is expected to have a good market in the pharmaceutical industry.