* 0214585
* Mathematical Models For Processes in Bacterial Cell Division
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2008
* Donald Drew, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2008
* USD 278,399.00

Drew 0214585 The investigator derives and studies mathematical models for
several different processes involved with cell division, focusing on E. coli
cells because of the wealth of data available. A mature cell replicates its DNA.
The daughter DNA strands must move into the halves of the mature cell, and
finally, the cell divides. The relative timing of these events is crucial for
the division into viable daughter cells, and placement of the septum must divide
the cell and its DNA into relatively equal halves. Once replication begins,the
cell then must become unable to start replication again until the cell is
sufficiently mature. Sequestration is responsible for this eclipse period, where
the new DNA strand binds to sites in the membrane, thereby blocking the oriC
site and dnaA transcription regulation site, keeping the replication initiation
from occurring too soon. This process of sequestration and de-sequestration is
therefore (at least partially) responsible for the timing of cell division
events. The mathematical model predicts the probability of each of the
sequestration sites being sequestered, as a function of time. The replicated DNA
strands are moved apart in the longitudinal direction (towards the cell poles)
in order to assure exactly one set of chromosomes in each daughter cell. The
process by which this occurs is unknown, but the timing of this event is crucial
to viability. The project studies viable models for this seqregation. The site
for septation is marked by formation of a Z-ring at the center of the rod-shaped
cell, halfway between the poles. This Z-ring is involved in causing the cell to
form a septum between the daughter halves. Placement of the Z-ring at the center
is a result of the cooperative actions of three proteins from the min locus of
the DNA. Three proteins behave in an oscillatory manner, with MinD alternately
forming a layer on the cell membrane near one pole, then disassembling and re-
forming at the other pole. The investigator studies a model for the dynamics of
the Min system. The investigaor develops mathematical models to improve the
understanding of the biology of cell division in E. coli. The basic philosophy
is to determine mechanisms that can describe observed events, and to evaluate
whether these mechanisms can operate for reasonable parameter values, that is,
whether the kinetic rates, diffusivities, and concentrations are within
reasonable ranges of observed values. Location and timing of cellular events is
an important aspect of molecular biology. Moreover, mathematical models that
incorporate intracellular transport and reactions, including reactions with
organelles, should prove to be of general applicability to cellular biology.
Such models can focus biological research on aspects of molecular dynamics that
otherwise seem unconnected.