* 0214880
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Throughput Specific Cell Loading by Optoinjection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Glenn Sasaki, Cyntellect, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

0214880 Sasaki

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I projectproposes to develop a
novel technology for Laser-Enabled Analysis and Processing (LEAP ) of living
cells. The ability to load cells with compounds is critical in many areas of
research and medicine such as drug discovery and gene therapy. Current methods
have limitations with respect to specificity, efficiency, toxicity, and/or
throughput. Optoinjection is a novel and versatile procedure for cell loading
that has been demonstrated in a few laboratories. Unfortunately, it is a slow
and laborious procedure carried out on specialized microscopes. Oncosis is
developing a LEAP platform for high-speed cell scanning and purification via
lethal laser effects on unwanted cells. The LEAP platform could be used to
implement optoinjection in a high-throughput, cell-specific manner that would
enable the commercialization of this novel form of cell loading. In this Phase I
Project, feasibility studies are proposed to modify a LEAP instrument, and then
to evaluate conditions of optoinjection for different cells and compounds. Phase
I Research will yield a model/database providing greater understanding of
optoinjection, and will define the scope of feasibility. Phase II Research will
optimize and implement optoinjection in biologically relevant experimental
systems, resulting in data supporting this powerful new tool for the analysis
and manipulation of living cells within a physiological environment.

The commercial applications of this project will be in the biotechnology and
pharmaceutical industries.