* 0214152
* International Meeting of the Society for Behavioral Neuroendocrinology;  Amherst, Massachusetts, June 26-30, 2002
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Teresa Horton, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 05/31/2003
* USD 12,500.00

The Society for Behavioral Neuroendocrinology (SBN) is fairly young (founded
1995), &lt;br/&gt;and expects attendance of around 300 at this sixth Annual
Meeting. The SBN, in its &lt;br/&gt;meetings and its journal (Hormones &amp;
Behavior) uniquely emphasizes multidisciplinary &lt;br/&gt;integration of
cellular and molecular concepts into a functional framework involving the
&lt;br/&gt;brain, behavior, development, evolution and the ecology of social
behavior. This &lt;br/&gt;concentration linking hormones to many areas of
behavior, including both field and &lt;br/&gt;laboratory approaches, makes this
focal meeting different from other meetings in the &lt;br/&gt;field. The
conference organizers are highly regarded and experienced, the topics are
&lt;br/&gt;timely, and in addition to scientific talks there are particular
sessions planned for &lt;br/&gt;students and trainees on 'survival skills',
'meet-the-professor' lunches, 'alternative &lt;br/&gt;careers' and poster
sessions with awards expanded to include undergraduate work.
&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination of the conference findings will be through a special
supplemental issue of &lt;br/&gt;Hormones &amp; Behavior. The SBN meetings
strongly emphasize bringing in students &lt;br/&gt;(graduate and undergraduate,
representing 1/3 of the total membership) and postdocs &lt;br/&gt;for
interdisciplinary interactions with established investigators.&lt;br/&gt; The
potential impact of this conference is high in the fields of neuroendocrinology
and &lt;br/&gt;behavioral neuroscience, because of the focused discussions
shaping future work, the &lt;br/&gt;potential to develop new cross-disciplinary
collaborations, and the likely interactions and &lt;br/&gt;introductions
essential to career development of young investigators. Funding from NSF
&lt;br/&gt;is important to help students, postdocs, and young researchers
attend, and for some &lt;br/&gt;career development workshop speakers who are not
currently society members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;