* 0214404
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Linguistics: Young children's use of prosody in disambiguating sentences: the case of Korean children
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Reiko Mazuka, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Reiko Mazuka, Ms. Youngon Choi will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. Her research on language development will involve
5-10 year-old Korean children. Previous research suggests that, unlike adults,
young children do not use prosodic information to disambiguate syntactically
ambiguous sentences (such as "Tap the frog with the flower"). Ms. Choi asks
whether children can use prosodic cues to resolve syntactic ambiguity when the
cognitive demands of the task are not too great. Children will be asked to
listen to a sentence and judge whether it matches with a picture. In the first
study, prosodic cues will be presented along with other cues (such as
morphological cues) to test whether children are better able to use prosodic
cues when they are combined with other cues. In the second study, ambiguous noun
phrases (rather than full sentences) will be used to test if syntactically less
complex structures allow children to use prosodic cues more easily.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is significant to the fields of language
acquisition and language comprehension. In particular, since little is known
about the interaction between prosody and syntax in young children's sentence
processing, this research will contribute to our understanding of how children
develop language processing strategies. As most of the existing research has
emphasized English, the use of Korean will also provide an important contrast
for future studies.&lt;br/&gt;