* 0214176
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Political Economy of Privatization
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Wendy Hansen, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 06/30/2003
* USD 12,000.00





The political economy of economic reform has been a fertile topic for
comparative research, emphasizing the difficulties of reform given immediate,
concentrated costs and long-term, diffuse benefits (Haggard and Kaufman 1992;
Nelson, 1993; Williamson 1998). Entrenched interests are expected to pressure
politicians and impede reforms, particularly in states with weak institutions,
poorly insulated policy makers, and a diffuse concentration of power (Nelson
1990; Przeworski 1991; Waterbury 1992). However, the empirical evidence suggests
that previous research has been theoretically misspecified; countries have
introduced and sustained economic reforms despite expected opposition. What
accounts for the variation in the introduction and implementation of reforms?
The proposed research examine this question by exploring the variation in one
element of the neoliberal reform package: privatization. To understand why
countries have such varied experiences, individual elements of reform packages
(e.g., tax reform, trade policy, fiscal policy) must be examined as distinct
policies, and then reassembled to gain a complete understanding of the political
economy of reform.

The proposed research project builds on the theoretical work in the field of
economic reform to develop a multi-causal theoretical model to be tested
empirically. The objectives of the project are threefold: first, to determine
how international factors are interacting with domestic characteristics to
affect the creation of privatization agencies; second, to analyze the domestic
environment in which privatizations are sought and realized to identify those
factors that most significantly impact the transfer of public enterprises; and
third, to examine the domestic environment in-depth to unearth the causal
processes identified in the statistical analyses. To complete these objectives,
data are gathered on the creation of privatization agencies from 1975-1995 in
the 183 IMF-member countries, on individual privatizations and on state-owned
enterprises in Mexico and Brazil. Two statistical models are created and tested
using survival analysis, a statistical technique appropriate for questions
concerning the causes of events occurring through time. The first model examines
how long countries take to create privatization agencies; the second examines
when state-owned enterprises are sold to private interests. A qualitative
analysis of the domestic environment surrounding privatization in Mexico and
Brazil is nested within the study to provide greater insight into the
privatization event.

The broader uses of this project include the collected data. It could be used to
examine how international pressures and norms are interacting with domestic
characteristics to affect the occurrence of privatization agencies in any
country, N, and then what factors affect the transfer of interests from the
public to the private sector. Together, these components of the proposed
research provide a clearer understanding of why privatization is sought by
states and what factors affect its implementation, further elucidating our
understanding of the political economy of economic reform.