* 0214523
* Acquisition of New GPS Equipment in Support of the Central Andes GPS Project (CAP)
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Benjamin Brooks, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/2004
* USD 120,000.00

0214523&lt;br/&gt;Bevis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports the acquisition
of eight global positioning system (GPS) receivers for active tectonic research
in the central Andes of South America. Four of the proposed receivers will be
permanently deployed in continuous mode operation (CGPS) while the other four
will be used in campaign or survey mode (SGPS). The receivers will augment
and/or act as replacements for aging receivers used by the University of Hawaii
Geodesy group (hereafter named the Pacific Geoscience Facility - PGF) for the
on-going collection of GPS data surrounding the active fore arc region of the
central Andes. The Central Andes Project (CAP) has been funded by NSF/EAR since
1992 (EAR-9115576). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temporal and spatial densification of
GPS measurements in this region will contribute to a better understanding of two
fundamental questions in geophysics including: 1) what is the contribution of
viscoelastic relaxation to crustal deformation following a great subduction zone
earthquake?, and 2) what is the viscosity of the mantle? A densification of CGPS
measurements surrounding the epicenter of the 1960 Chilean earthquake will help
to resolve the former question while CGPS vertical positioning in Chilean
Patagonia will further constrain the rate of post-glacial rebound which can then
be used to calculate lower crustal and mantle viscosity. An understanding of the
long term seismic cycle following a great subduction zone earthquake has
significant implications for mitigating seismic hazards for population centers
along the Andean Cordillera. These receivers will also support collaborations
between the PGF and Chilean and Argentinean geoscientists. In-country scientists
will collect campaign GPS data at frequencies that are logistically unrealistic
for the PGF group, improving the output of the CAPS project for a marginal cost
to the NSF.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;