* 0214118
* Tunable THz Oscillators Based on Synchronously-Pumped Optical Parametric Oscillation in GaSe and GaAs Crystals
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Yujie Ding, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 225,000.00

We propose to investigate a new type of tunable THz oscillators based on a bulk
GaSe crystal, a bulk GaAs crystal, and bonded multiple GaAs plates, each of
which is synchronously pumped by subpicosecond laser pulses. The mechanism for
this type of the THz oscillators lies in phase-matched or quasi-phase-matched
optical parametric oscillation in these structures. By using ultrashort laser
pulses, we can take advantage of high peak laser intensities. Besides the
conventional OPO in which the idler is resonant in a cavity, we will also use a
configuration in which both pump and idler waves resonant the cavity. Such a
configuration is very stable, unlike a doubly-resonant OPO. To accomplish our
objectives, we propose to investigate THz parametric processes including phase-
matched optical rectification, difference-frequency generation, parametric
oscillation and amplification. For GaSe crystals, we can achieve phase-matching
based on birefringence of the crystals. On the other hand, for a bulk GaAs
material in order to achieve phase matching, the pump wavelength should be less
than that corresponding to the onset of two-photon absorption. Therefore, two-
photon absorption (TPA) can be an important issue. Our estimate shows that TPA
may increase the threshold intensity for the oscillation. However, it would not
cause the optical damage or sizeable thermal effect. We plan to investigate how
TPA affects the proposed THz oscillator. We also plan to theoretically explore
performance of OPOs in the presence of TPA in addition to our proposed
experimental activities. This theoretical component will be used to predict how
TPA affects OPOs and to support our experimental findings. We will also
implement all these parametric devices in alternatively-rotated diffusion-bonded
GaAs plates. In this case, however, by properly choosing the thicknesses of the
GaAs plates, we can use the pump photon energy below the half of the bandgap to
completely avoid TPA. Following our recent success in efficient THz generation
in GaSe, we will attempt to implement our new idea on an integrated, efficient,
and compact pulsed THz system based on intracavity difference-frequency
generation inside a near-degenerate optical parametric oscillator, pumped by a
frequency-doubled Nd:YAG or Nd:YVO4 laser. Our tunable THz oscillator can be
used for remote sensing, chemical identification, biomedical imaging, target
recognition, and security screening. It has temporal and spatial coherence far
more superior than the THz sources from THz antennas and other similar
techniques.

