* 0214239
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: A Fresh Perspective: Isotopic Evidence for Diet in Mississippi River Valley of W-C Illinois, and Comparison with Illinois River Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Susan Cachel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2003
* USD 812.00

This study will extend a survey of prehistoric diet in the Mississippi Valley of
west-central Illinois using stable isotopes of carbon and nitrogen. West-central
Illinois has been the subject of much research into prehistoric biology, the
result of sizeable skeletal collections and well-described archaeology. Most of
this research, however, has focused on the lower Illinois River valley while the
prehistory of the neighboring Mississippi River valley is much less well known.
This project has already successfully produced new dietary data for the
archaeological sites of Joe Gay, Lawrence Gay, Yokem, and Shild, spanning a
period of over 1200 years from the Middle Woodland to Mississippian cultural
eras, and provided interesting and unexpected findings. This study will further
investigate these initial results, and also extend the geographical coverage of
the survey to include a new site, Knight, further south in the Mississippi
Valley. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The innovative bone chemistry techniques used
provide a new type of information to archaeologists. Previously researchers
could only study the ephemeral remains of meals or tools used to produce food,
and from these try to infer what prehistoric people were eating. Since food
remains are poorly preserved, archaeologist's conclusions were only 'educated
guesses'. Bone chemistry allows us to directly study individuals who lived in
the past, and state whether they were eating native plants or the new corn
introduced from tropical regions to the south, and also compare the amount of
protein in people's diets. This ability to look at individuals also allows us
for the first time to look at variation within communities - for example
discrimination in who had access to precious meat or fish - rather than the
general statements about group diet to which archaeologists were previously
confined.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The new data from the Mississippi Valley show
that the pattern of corn introduction seems to have been similar to the Illinois
Valley, but apparently with considerable variability in maize consumption when
it became popular during the Late Woodland period. This variability in bone
isotope values is such that they encompass a dietary corn component varying from
near zero, to a very high percentage, within the same population. These intra-
population differences are an enigma. Neither sex nor age explains them. This
study will establish relative dates for the burials using fluoride dating, to
establish if this is true contemporary variation in corn consumption within the
population, or instead the result of minor temporal variation, indicating that
corn was introduced very quickly. Either conclusion would be of great relevance
to our knowledge of how maize was introduced and established in prehistoric
populations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study will also further investigate
geographical variation, both within the Mississippi Valley itself, and between
the two valleys. Initial results show that protein consumption was in the
Mississippi Valley at almost every period higher than in the Illinois Valley,
possibly the result of different access to protein in diverse riverside
environments. The Mississippi Valley sites already analyzed are, however, close
together, and this study will extend the geographical coverage of the survey to
include the Knight site, further south, and closer to the Illinois
Valley.&lt;br/&gt;