* 0214061
* Normative Studies of Portfolio Choice and Risk Management
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* John Campbell, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 245,583.00

Macroeconomists in business and government operate in a data-rich environment.
For example, in the United States data on thousands of economic time series are
available monthly. Recently, there has been theoretical and applied interest in
developing forecasting methods that exploit this wealth of information in a way
that is systematic, replicable, and subject to scientific analysis. The results
have been encouraging: the first few estimated factors from large dynamic factor
models (hundreds of predictors) appear to have predictive content for the main
economic aggregates -real activity and inflation - that is unavailable in
smaller systems. Within the past year, two Central Banks (the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago and the Bank of Italy/CEPR) have started releasing real-time
many-variable activity indexes. Research to date on many-predictor macroeconomic
forecasts has centered on approximate factor structures that, while useful as
data reduction methods, constitute only one way to approach large data sets;
moreover, the models investigated so far are essentially time-invariant. The
objective of the research outlined in this proposal is to move beyond the first
few estimated factors from time-invariant systems and thereby to investigate
many-predictor time series forecasts in potentially time-varying systems. This
proposal contains four specific projects within this broader research agenda.
The objective of the first project is to develop empirical Bayes methods for
linear time- invariant models that exploit information in the many predictors,
beyond what is contained in their first few estimated dynamic factors. The
purpose of the second project is to estimate linear prediction bounds, that is,
upper bounds on the population of forecasts made using linear time-invariant
equations with many predictors. There is substantial evidence that low-
dimensional macroeconomic forecasting relations are unstable over time. The next
two projects extend the work on many-predictor forecasting to models with time
variation. The objective of the third project is to develop tests for time
variation in models with many predictors and to develop and to implement
estimators that exploit this time variation. The objective of the fourth project
is to provide a coherent resolution of the "forecasting combining puzzle" (the
result that simple means or trimmed means of panels of macroeconomic forecasts
outperform individual forecasts and typically are stable even when the
individual forecasts are not); it is hoped that this will lead to many-predictor
forecasting methods that are robust to time variation. Finally, it is proposed
to apply some of the methods developed in this research to a different problem,
instrumental variables regression with many weak instruments, and to continue
other ongoing work in the area of weak instruments. It is hoped that the
proposed research will have broader impacts on practical forecasting. For
example, the ongoing real-time projects at U.S. and European central banks
builds on previous work by the Principal Investigators and others on high-
dimensional systems, and it is hoped that the tools developed in the proposed
research will be useful in those and related projects. &lt;br/&gt;