* 0214483
* Dissertation Research:  The Political Economy of Workers' Compensation Benefits: 1940-2000
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Price Fishback, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 12/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

Workers' compensation is one of the main forms of social insurance in the United
States, establishing the extent of compensation received by the families of
workers killed or injured in accidents arising from employment. The programs
were established and continue to be administered by state governments. The
central feature of all of the workers' compensation programs is the level of
benefits legislated by each state for the various types of injuries. The benefit
levels are key components in the employment conditions for workers and play a
central role in determining the incentives for preventing accidents for both
workers and employers. The benefit schedules are complex and at times difficult
to compare across states and time; therefore, the first phase of the research is
devoted to developing easily comparable measures of the benefit levels across
states and over time. The second phase of the research examines the impact of
changes in benefit levels on wages and earnings of workers to assess the extent
to which the well-being of workers is enhanced by increases in benefit levels.
In a variety of settings, it has been shown that the costs of improvements in
employment benefits have often been passed on to workers in the form of lower
wages. Estimates of these wage offsets will offer a more accurate picture of the
changes in the standard of living for American workers over the past 60 years.
The final phase of the research is devoted to analyzing the political and
economic factors that influence the various state governments' choices
concerning workers' compensation benefits. The goal is to document the extent to
which changes in benefits are driven by economic factors like long-term
increases in wage rates and cyclical changes in the economy or political
factors, like the relative power of political parties, interest groups, and
reform groups. The end result of the research will be a comprehensive
examination of the historical path that has led to the array of workers'
compensation programs that are in place in the various states today. &lt;br/&gt;
Workers' Compensation programs play a crucial role in the United States economy
by establishing the levels of benefits for families of workers injured or killed
in workplace accidents. By the late 1990s, employers were spending 1.5 to 2.5
percent of their payrolls on workers' compensation insurance. Although workers'
compensation was a popular program with workers and employers when it was first
introduced in the early 1900s, employers and workers have expressed increasing
dissatisfaction with the operation of the program over the past 50 years.
Employers are troubled by the rising costs of insurance, insurers have faced
increasing problems in underwriting workers' compensation risk, and workers have
expressed dissatisfaction with the level of benefits they have been receiving.
The benefit levels chosen by the various state governments play a central role
in determining the scale of the problems in the workers' compensation system.
The research program is designed to follow three phases: first, develop easily
comparable measures of benefits across states and time from the complex benefit
schedules in the state laws; second, establish more accurate measures of the
gains workers receive when benefits are raised by documenting the extent to
which wages are reduced when benefit levels increased; and third, analyze the
political and economic influences that determine the various states' choices of
benefit levels. This comprehensive analysis of workers' compensation benefits
over the past 60 years illuminate the process that has led to workers'
compensation programs that we see today. An understanding of the process should
help guide policy makers in improving the systems without returning to the same
problems that led to changes in the systems in the first place.&lt;br/&gt;