* 0214467
* Heterolocalism, Social Networks, and Migration: Refugee Nodes and Networks in the Pacific Northwest
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Susan Hardwick, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 01/31/2004
* USD 39,995.00

This research project will test the impact of scale on the spatial theory of
heterolocalism in a metropolitan area in the Pacific Northwest. This new theory
suggests that, to a degree unknown in the past, new migrants in U.S. cities may
choose to settle in widely dispersed places rather than in more concentrated
ethnic enclaves while still maintaining their ethnic identities. The research
will test this theory by comparing the settlement patterns and maintenance of
identity of the two largest groups of recent refugees now residing in the
central city, suburbs, and small towns located within the metropolitan region
centered on the city of Portland, Oregon. The two groups are migrants from
Vietnam and from the former Soviet Union. Vietnamese began settling in the
region in the mid-1970s and are now well established while the majority of
migrants born in the former USSR have arrived only within the past decade. The
selection of these two comparative groups, therefore, is based on differences in
the dates of their settlement, as well as on their internal diversity and
comparative racial, religious, and linguistic characteristics. Methodologies to
be employed in this research include cartographic analysis, survey
questionnaires, structured and unstructured interviews, and participant
observation. Outcomes will include improved knowledge of immigration and refugee
settlement in the U.S., and a set of comparative geographic data showing the
settlement patterns of the two largest refugee groups in the study area for the
years 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2002. This analysis will be based on census data,
demographic information listed in Immigration and Naturalization Service
reports, school district enrollment data, and information provided by the close
collaboration of the project team with the Director and staff of the Immigrant
and Refugee Community Organization headquartered in Portland.

Globally, the study of refugee resettlement is critically important with more
than 23 million displaced people on earth as a result of recent political,
environmental, and economic crises. At least 2.3 million of these migrants have
relocated to the U.S. in the past quarter century to seek new lives. Many choose
to settle in traditional nodes of immigrant concentrations in East Coast cities,
Chicago, or urban California. However, ever increasing numbers of refugee
newcomers to the U.S. during the past decade have relocated to smaller cities.
In northern New England, the upper Great Lakes, and the Pacific Northwest, for
example (places long dominated by homogeneous Euro-American populations)
unexpected increases in the number of foreign-born residents were recently
documented in census reports. This research project will focus on one of these
newly emerging nodes of diversity to investigate the geographic and social
patterns of settlement of recent migrants.