* 0214050
* Random and Dynamic Choice
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Faruk Gul, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 157,083.00

This proposal contains two related research projects on dynamic choice. Both of
these projects will be undertaken jointly with Wolfgang Pesendorfer of Princeton
University.&lt;br/&gt;Often, observed choice behavior will not be consistent
with a single, deterministic choice criterion (i.e., utility function). That is,
the decision-maker will make different choices in virtually identical
situations. Such behavior is best modeled as random choice. The first project
entitled "Random Utility, Uncertain Moods and Bounded Rationality," addresses
the following question: when can a random choice be interpreted as the
consequence of maximizing a randomly chosen criterion for ranking the
alternatives. Hence, we investigate the consequences of behavior that is derived
from a fixed, probabilistic rule for selecting a utility function. After the
utility function is selected, the agent chooses the alternative that maximizes
it among the available options. This way of interpreting behavior is important
for the analysis of aggregate data, boundedly rational behavior and situations
with asymmetric information. In our work, we study choice over risk prospects
and randomly selected expected utility functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
second project entitled "The Revealed Preference Theory of Changing Tastes"
studies dynamic inconsistency. Dynamic inconsistency refers to the tendency of
agents to make different choices from the same set of alternatives depending on
when they are asked to choose. For example, an individual who prefers a larger
later reward to a smaller earlier reward may reverse his preference as the date
of the smaller earlier reward gets closer. Many decision problems require the
agent to make choices at various moments in time. In such problems, the key is
how the decision-maker forms expectations about his own future behavior. This
research takes the position that the agent's beliefs regarding his future
behavior can best be analyzed through his current behavior and seeks to identify
these beliefs through choice experiments. That is, we wish to identify methods
for determining the agent's expectations about his future behavior from actual
choices made in the current period. The advantage of the revealed preference
approach is that preferences over choice problems are - at least in principal -
observable.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;