* 0214310
* Corporate Turnarounds: An Experimental Examination
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* David Cooper, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 236,321.00

For decades, organizational change has been a topic of interest for scholars in
economics and management. A particularly difficult and important sort of change
occurs when under performing firms attempt to reinvent themselves. For such
firms, executing a successful turnaround can determine whether the firm survives
with both shareholder profits and employee security riding on the outcome.
Understanding how to most efficiently turn around failing companies is therefore
a topic of great economic import. Complicating such turnarounds, a need for
coordinated changes in behavior and expectations often exists across widely
diverse groups of managers and employees. Intuitively, this is like revamping a
football team's passing game - signing the greatest wide receivers in the
history of the NFL won't help if the quarterback keeps throwing the ball ten
yards over their heads. To quote one well-known case study of a corporate
turnaround, efforts to change the firm need to be 'right-away and all at once'
(Knez and Simester, in press). In this study we examine how such coordinated
changes across a firm can be made most effectively, and how the resulting
improvements can be made permanent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine these
questions, we plan to use controlled laboratory experiments to study corporate
turnarounds. Such experiments serve as a valuable complement to field studies of
corporate turnarounds because they allow us to look at a tightly controlled
environment where we can easily observe all the possible causes of change. Our
experiments look at the performance of a small simulated firm. Using a simple
environment, we first push the experimental firm into a situation where it is
performing poorly. Firm employees are coordinated on low effort levels, causing
low productivity and producing low payoffs for both the firm and the employees.
Critically, there exist alternative situations in which employees coordinate on
higher effort levels, productivity is dramatically increased, and both firm and
employees earn higher payoffs. Our study then focuses on two issues. First, how
can the firm most efficiently be extricated from its bad situation and moved to
a good situation? Possible tools we plan to examine include changes in the
firm's incentive system for employees, improved communication within the firm,
and the provision of high performing external examples. Second, does behavior by
agents within the firm display sufficiently strong history dependence that a
shift to a better situation can be maintained even after the mechanisms used to
affect the change are removed? For example, suppose a good outcome is affected
through a large increase in incentive pay. Can the firm increase the incentive
pay without employees sliding back to their old unproductive ways?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;