* 0214301
* The Globalization of Corporate Insolvency Regimes: Law, International Institutions, Professions, and Nation-States
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Terence Halliday, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 07/31/2005
* USD 124,722.00

This project provides an empirically-based theoretical interpretation of ways
that powerful global institutions, whose internal and cooperative actions are
usually invisible, set the global norms for business insolvencies. The
researchers seek to understand how the rules of the game are set by financial
and professional institutions in global centers and subsequently are negotiated
in law-making by players in the peripheral national economies. This project
extends prior work in several new directions: the social and network
structuration of national markets to regional and global levels, the interplay
among professionals, the state and financial institutions in struggles over
property and jurisdictional rights in law-making, and lawyers and globalization.
These themes are unified around developing a socio-legal theory of law-making
that extends a theory of the recursivity of law to focus closely on the shift
from law-in-action to law-on-the books. The researchers employ a research design
with three elements: (1) they will contextualize present developments with a
cross-sectional time-series data on political, social and economic change and
bankruptcy reforms world-wide from 1973-1999; (2) they will continue interviews
and observations of the key participants in global institutions; and (3) they
will undertake six case studies which combine primary documentary sources,
consultations with country specialists, sources from international financial
institutions, secondary analysis, and interviews in each country. Through this
approach, the researchers seek to stimulate the nascent literature on the
globalization of law and to inject law into cross-disciplinary debates and
research on globalization of markets.