* 0214013
* Storable Votes
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Alessandra Casella, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 298,709.00

The inability of majority voting to account for the intensity of voters'
preferences leads to many practical problems. Where majority voting is the rule,
minorities may be inadequately protected. In addition, the obvious opportunity
for mutual gain existing whenever two voters have strong preferences over
different issues inevitably results in vote trading, compromising transparency
and penalizing less experienced outsiders. In international organizations, in
particular, the recognition that sovereign countries should not be forced to
accept decisions to which they strongly object, typically leads to national
vetoes, risking paralysis and increasing bargaining. Ideally these vetoes should
be costly, allowing member countries to express the intensity of their
preferences but only at some cost. This project studies a simple scheme that
appears potentially able to reconcile the advantages of majority voting with the
protection of more intensely felt interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consider a
committee meeting regularly over time to take decisions that affect all of its
members. Decisions are taken by majority vote. However, each committee member is
given a stock of votes at the beginning of the year, with the proviso that these
are all the votes at his disposal for the year, but he is free to cast any
number of them at any one meeting. Committee members can then choose to increase
their weight over more strongly felt decisions, at the cost of reducing their
influence over other choices. The idea of using more resources, here more votes,
when a decision is valued more is very natural, but storable votes have no
precedent in the literature. Initial results suggest that votes that can be
stored over time have better welfare properties than non-storable votes; perform
well even if voters are not fully rational, are fairer to minorities, and are
both more transparent and welfare superior to tradable votes. In addition, the
mechanism is very simple, does not violate any ethical prior and could
realistically be implemented. The theoretical results have been confirmed in
initial experiments. The research project will analyze the theoretical
properties of storable votes, moving from simple if plausible examples to more
general situations, and using experiments as check on the accuracy and practical
relevance of the theoretical analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;