* 0214265
* Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Monitoring Mass Spectrometer for H, O, C, and N in Waters, Hydrous Minerals, Carbonates, and Organic Materials, and an Accelerated Solvent Extractor
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Lisa Pratt, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 04/30/2004
* USD 194,703.00

0214265&lt;br/&gt;Schimmelmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports the
acquisition of a gas source stable isotope ratio mass spectrometer configured
for continuous flow operation (CF-irmMS) and with associated sample introduction
peripherals that will allow for the analysis of multiple stable isotopic ratios
in a wide range of natural materials including, organic matter, carbonates,
hydrous minerals and water. Specific sample inlet devices will include an
elemental analyzer (EA), a gas chromatograph (GC), and an automated carbonate
preparation device. The new CF-irmMS will complement two existing stable isotope
ratio mass spectrometers(both late model Finnegan MAT 252s) in the Geological
Sciences department at Indiana University. One was recently funded by the EAR/IF
program (NSF-9726264) to co-PI Ed Ripley and is dedicated to the analysis of the
isotopic composition of sulfide ores and the other is somewhat older (vintage
1991) and is dedicated to analysis of carbonate carbon. The new instrument will
greatly expand the current isotopic capabilities of this already well equipped
department by adding the ability to make high precision isotopic analyses of
hydrogen/deuterium (H/D) ratios in extremely small samples of organic matter and
natural waters with high throughput. The requested peripheral devices will also
allow for investigation of the stable isotopic signatures of individual
compounds of organic materials. The instrument will support the research efforts
of numerous IU faculty including Arndt Schimmelmann, Lisa Pratt, Ed Ripley,
Peter Sauer and Jeff White and their students for research spanning the fields
of paleoclimatology, oceanography, ecology and hydrology. The addition of a CF-
irmMS to this lab will undoubtedly serve to further the attraction of this
facility to a number of active geoscientists and will likely lead to future
productive collaborations with these IU scientists and their students.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;