* 0214996
* Structure and Function of Plant Protein Synthesis Initiation Factors
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Karen Browning, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jo Ann Wise
* 07/31/2008
* USD 744,792.00

The initiation of protein synthesis in all eukaryotes is an intricate process
requiring at least 8-10 known initiation factors. The long term goal of the PI's
laboratory is to elucidate a detailed molecular description of this process in
plants. Towards this end they have isolated and cloned plant initiation factors
to determine their biochemical properties and structures, and ultimately to map
their physical and functional interactions with each other, mRNA and ribosomes.
The overall objective of this research is to obtain an understanding of the
function of two forms of eIF4F in plant translation initiation. Three specific
questions will be explored. First, how does the molecular composition of eIF4F
and eIF(iso)4F complexes affect specificity of mRNA translation, and what
features of a mRNA (5' UTR, 3' UTR or coding region) affect discrimination by
eIF4F and eIF(iso)4F? Plants have a second novel form of eIF4F, eIF(iso)4F. Some
mRNAs are translated poorly in vitro by eIF(iso)4F, whereas others do not show a
preference for eIF4F or eIF(iso)4F. &lt;br/&gt;The subunit(s) of eIF4F and
eIF(iso)4F that confer specificity of mRNA translation will be determined using
mixed subunit complexes (eIF4G/eIF(iso)4E and eIF(iso)4G/eIF4E). In addition,
the portions of the mRNA (5' UTR, 3' UTR and/or coding region) that are
necessary for discrimination by eIF4F and eIF(iso)4F will be determined using
chimeric mRNAs. Second, is eIF(iso)4F redundant or necessary for plant survival?
Genetic methods will be used to determine whether knockouts or gene silenced
eIF(iso)4F subunits, eIF(iso)4E, and eIF(iso)4G produce any obvious phenotypes
and/or are necessary for viable plants. Finally, how does the binding of eIF4G
affect eIF4E structure and affinity for mRNA? A peptide derived from eIF4G that
contains the eIF4E binding site will be used to make a complex to study the
changes in eIF4E structure upon its binding. Further studies will be carried out
to measure changes in mRNA affinity for the complex compared to
eIF4E.&lt;br/&gt;Protein synthesis is an essential molecular process for all
cells. An understanding of the interactions of the factors, ribosomes and mRNA
is necessary to integrate this process and its regulation with other cellular
processes. It is clear that some aspects of the initiation of protein synthesis
are very similar among all higher organisms, but that there are some fundamental
differences. The presence of the isozyme form of eIF4F suggests that plants may
have retained a more ancient form of the eIF4F complex or evolved a second
complex for some specific purpose or function in plants. A clear understanding
of how plants manufacture their proteins will help in the development of plants
with higher nutritive value or as living factories for the production of protein
pharmaceuticals.&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Biochemistry of Gene
Expression Program and the Molecular Biochemistry Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.