* 0214260
* Development of Reaching in Human Infants
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Neil Berthier, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Christopher T. Kello
* 08/31/2006
* USD 240,686.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Neil Berthier will conduct three
years of research to examine how infants develop a capacity for dexterous manual
reaching. How experience improves dexterity is of particular interest. Adults
possess a remarkable capacity to use their hands to manipulate objects in the
world. Almost no other animals exhibit such dexterity. Remarkably, manual
dexterity involves the coordination of a vast number of muscles of the trunk,
arm, and hand-a control problem that is well beyond what we can do with control
artificial devices such as robot arms. Dexterity does not appear fully-formed in
adults, however, it requires a protracted period of development that starts soon
after birth. The funded project uses mathematical models of neural and muscular
systems to describe how one generates arm movements. Behavioral experiments will
test the model's predictions against the actual abilities of human infants.
Other behavioral experiments will focus on the role of attentive vision for
control of reaching. This research will lead to a better understanding of how
reaching and manual dexterity develop, and may also shed light on more general
processes of human development. Furthermore, the models used are closely related
to current schemes for control of reaching by robots. Thus the funded research
may suggest novel approaches to the problem of robot control.