* 0214615
* The Functionally Illiterate Consumer in the Global Marketplace
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Madhubalan Viswanathan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2005
* USD 66,653.00

This research focuses on how functionally illiterate consumers make decisions
and cope in the information age. Estimates suggest a high rate of functional
illiteracy, about a fifth of the US population or higher. Estimates of
functional illiteracy in most other countries, particularly developing
countries, are much higher. Surprisingly, very little research has been done
examining functionally illiterate consumers in the global marketplace.

The first phase of the study will provide an in-depth view of functionally
illiterate consumers. The functionally literate poor will be studied, along with
non-native speakers with very limited experience with English and the US
marketplace, as well as functionally illiterate consumers in India. Issues of
interest include (i) use of health-related information and consumption of
unhealthy products; (ii) use of credit and money management; (iii) responses to
advertising, selling and promotional appeals; (iv) use of product-related
instructions; and (v) the use of computer-related media including the internet.

Results from the first phase of the research program will serve as the basis for
the second phase in which a large-scale survey will be developed and
administered. The second phase will be designed to identify and assess possible
solutions to help functionally illiterate consumers negotiate the marketing
environment. The proposed research has important practical implications for
adult education, business and government.





