* 0214888
* U.S.-Mexico Workshop on Ascomycota (Fungi) to be held 9-12 May 2002 before the IV CONGRESO LATINOAMERICANO DE MICOLOGIA, Xalapa, Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2003
* Meredith Blackwell, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 04/30/2003
* USD 8,000.00

0214888&lt;br/&gt;Blackwell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program award
will support a workshop on Asomycota (Fungi) to be held before the IV Congreso
Latinoamericano de Micologia at the Universidad Veracruzana, in Xalapa, Mexico.
The workshop, which is being organized by Dr. Meredith Blackwell of Louisiana
State University in Baton Rouge, and Dr. Rosario Mendel Ortiz of the Instituto
de Ecologia, in Xalapa, Mexico aims to train thirty U.S. and Latin American
students in culture, identification, and systematics techniques for ascomycetes,
a group of fungi that numbers over 32,000
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout the world, about 32,000 species of
ascomycetes have been described. It is, however, estimated that the number could
in reality be double that number and many of the anticipated new species are
believed to occupy Neotropical habitats. Indeed, mycologists who work in the
region have discovered well over 100 undescribed ascomycetes in the past year
alone. It is important, therefore, to have a new generation of well-trained
mycologists from both the U .S. and Latin America to work with these
ecologically important organisms and contribute to biodiversity assessment and
monitoring. The proposed workshop, with its focus on the latest techniques,
training, and students, will promote an exchange of ideas, knowledge, and
cooperative interactions among an upcoming generation of Western Hemisphere
mycologists.&lt;br/&gt;