* 0215192
* SBIR Phase I:  Biosensor for Label-Free, Real-Time Monitoring of Environmental Pathogens
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Salvador Fernandez, CIENCIA INC
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I Project proposes to
develop a microarray-based biosensor for on-site, real-time identification and
enumeration of multiple environmental microorganisms from aqueous and/or aerosol
samples with high sensitivity and specificity. The operation of the biosensor
will be based on a recently developed novel technology involving grating-coupled
surface plasmon resonance (GCSPR). The proposed biosensor system, with the
capability for continuous on-line monitoring, would have numerous applications
where rapid assessment of a contaminated environment would be needed. The
specific objectives of the Phase I project are (a) to engineer the manner in
which aerosol and aqueous samples will be delivered to the GC-SPR biosensor flow
cell, and (b) to assess and optimize the performance of the biosensor in the
detection of a prototype microbial target. In the follow-on Phase II project,
specific target pathogens will be selected and specific chips will be
constructed to detect these pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial
applications of this project are expected to be in a large number of locations.
They include (1) hospitals, where nosocomial infections may arise; (2) office
buildings, where accidental contamination with mold spores, Legionella and other
pathogens may create health hazards; (3) natural bodies of water or commercial
water supplies, where Cryptosporidium, coliform bacteria and several other
waterborne pathogens are of great concern ; and (4) the food industry, where
there is a need for sensitive methods for on-line and real-time detection of
pathogens. Finally, the proposed technology will provide for rapid, on-site
detection of biological agents, such as spores of Bacillus anthracis, that may
be intentionally introduced into the environment.&lt;br/&gt;