* 0215764
* Characterizing Efficient Social Insurance Institutions: Theory and Computation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* John Rust, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 525,115.00

This research will develop theoretical and computational approaches for
characterizing efficient social insurance institutions. We define a social
insurance institution as a compulsory government-run program that provides a set
of state-contingent taxes (premiums or contributions) and transfers (benefits)
that cover a well-defined set of risks. An efficient social insurance
institution is one that provides a given level welfare to the individuals in the
system at minimal cost. Our research will attempt to provide characterizations
of efficient social insurance institutions that cover the following risks: 1)
longevity, via mandatory pensions or "old age insurance", 2) disability, via
disability insurance, 3) unemployment, via unemployment insurance, and 4) health
care costs, via medical insurance. Another objective of social insurance is
lifetime redistribution of income and/or wealth. This can be viewed as insurance
for a fifth class of risks, namely insurance for individuals who have certain
fixed characteristics or "types" that may lead to permanently lower lifetime
employment, earnings, wealth, and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;Social insurance programs
are large and pervasive in developed economies. In the U.S., spending on Social
Security (Old Age, Disability, and Unemployment Insurance), Medicare, Medicaid
amounted to 48.3\% of total Federal spending and 9.8\% of GDP in 2000 (U.S.
Congressional Budget Office). All forecasts indicate that unless benefits are
reduced, social insurance spending will grow rapidly over the coming decades as
the baby boomers age and start to retire. Although there have been proposals to
shift the costs of social insurance from the government to the private sector
via various "privatization" schemes, a variety of moral hazard and adverse
selection problems hinder the operation of private insurance markets. We take
market incompleteness as the principal rationale for mandatory government
provision of insurance, and as the basic point of departure for our analysis. We
assume that the government can compel universal participation, but we also
assume that it faces the same informational constraints as private insurance
institutions would face if they existed. We deal with these fundamental
informational asymmetries via two very different but related strategies: 1) a
"dynamic mechanism design" (DMD) approach where we search for an efficient
policy over an infinite-dimensional space of all possible policies that satisfy
certain participation and incentive constraints, and 2) a "parametric mechanism
design" (PMD) approach where we search for an "approximately efficient" social
insurance institution in a finite-dimensional subspace of social insurance
institutions and where incentive constraints are
ignored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using these techniques we will not only be able to
characterize the form of efficient social insurance institutions, we will also
be able to quantify the degree of inefficiency in current social insurance
institutions. We expect to be able to characterize optimal social security and
disability insurance programs as part of a comprehensive, integrated analysis of
social insurance in the U.S. and other developed economies. Given the large
share of GDP devoted to social insurance, the potential cost savings from
discovering more efficient social insurance programs provides a strong,
practical rationale for this research.&lt;br/&gt;