* 0215963
* Acquisition of a Small Molecule X-Ray Facility for the Department of Chemistry at Johns Hopkins University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Kenneth Karlin, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 07/31/2006
* USD 246,285.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Department of Chemistry at Johns Hopkins University will acquire a X-ray
diffractometer with CCD detector and low temperature capabilities for small
molecule diffractometry. This equipment will enhance research in a number of
areas including the following: a) bioinorganic modeling of metalloenzyme active
sites; b) environmental inorganic chemistry and the development of copper
mediated dehalogenation; c) synthesis, characterization and reactivity of aza-
substituted corrole macrocycles; d) new metal-carbonyl diimine compounds of
photochemical interest; e) photoinduced electron, energy, and atom transfer
processes; and f) X-ray studies of metal-organic complexes for asymmetric
catalysis. Faculty members from Morgan State University, Loyola College, Towson
University, the University of Maryland in Baltimore County, the US Naval Academy
and Gettysburg College will also have access to this equipment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise
measurements of the full three dimensional structure of a molecule, including
bond distances and angles, and it provides accurate information about the
spatial arrangement of the molecule relative to the neighboring molecules. These
studies will have an impact in a number of areas, including environmental
chemistry, preparation of more efficient catalysts, and biochemistry.