* 0215756
* Cool-Flame-Assisted Combustion of High Pressure CH4/air Mixtures for Hydrogen Synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Nick Glumac, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 08/31/2005
* USD 329,384.00

Recent studies on the autoignition behavior of fuel-rich methane/air mixtures
at elevated pressures suggests that mixtures at equivalence ratios of around 4
can be made to react rapidly for pressures above 8 atmospheres, and thus it may
be possible to stabilize the process in a modified burner configuration for
continuous production of product gases. Current mechanisms for fuel-rich methane
combustion--those used to model 'cool-flame' behavior of methane--predict that
the product gases resulting from such combustion will have hydrogen yields that
exceed current combustion approaches and hydrogen:water ratios of 3 or better.
In this work, a high-pressure reactor for combustion of methane/air mixtures at
equivalence ratios of approximately 4 is designed and constructed. The reactor
is designed to facilitate stabilization of these flows, which are characterized
by long induction times and low heat release. In addition, the reactor has
complete optical access, enabling detailed temperature and species concentration
measurements in a flow that is optimized for comparison with the predictions of
a kinetic model. Using this reactor, an extensive characterization of the
combustion of very rich methane/air mixtures at elevated pressures is conducted.
Temperature and formaldehyde spatial profiles, induction times, and detailed
product yields are measured as a functions of process parameters, and the
propensity for soot formation is examined. Using these data, current kinetic
models are evaluated and analyzed under these conditions. This study is designed
to demonstrate the feasibility of elevated pressure, air-based combustion
techniques for hydrogen synthesis from natural gas, as well as to develop the
tools for computational process analysis and optimization, while simultaneously
generating an extensive and detailed dataset on the unique combustion behavior
of this important mixture.

Economical conversion of natural gas to hydrogen fuel is critical to realization
of large-scale use of hydrogen as a fuel for transportation and for industry. In
addition, widespread use of fuel cells likewise requires an inexpensive source
for hydrogen. Most current hydrogen synthesis schemes, for example steam methane
reforming and catalytic partial oxidation, remain too costly, in part due to
high costs associated with the catalysts that are inherent in these processes.
Combustion technologies offer the promise of inexpensive hydrogen production
through non-catalytic partial oxidation of natural gas to carbon monoxide and
hydrogen (syngas). Such technologies can generate power and hydrogen
simultaneously and can be designed to involve simple reactor facilities that
require smaller capital costs. At least two such combustion processes are
currently used by industry. Significant cost reduction in combustion process for
hydrogen synthesis can be obtained if 1) the hydrogen:water ratio in the product
gases (currently ~1 to 2) can be significantly improved, and 2) the required
oxidizer is air rather than oxygen.