* 0215940
* C-RUI Collaborative Project: Intracellular and Structural Analysis of Roles of a Cytokine Precursor in Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetase Complexes
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Mark Olson, University of Mississippi Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 307,474.00

Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase complexes play a key role in protein biosynthesis. An
understanding of the structure and distribution of these complexes and their
variants is fundamental to understanding the mechanisms and regulation of this
basic biological process, which critically impacts cell growth, maintenance and
death. The core multisynthetase complex contains nine aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase
activities and three auxiliary proteins, p43, p38, and p18. A tRNA binding
protein, p43 enhances aminoacylation activity of specific synthetases within the
complex. Metabolic stress induces cleavage of p43 at a caspase-like site as well
as release and secretion of the C-terminal half of the protein (EMAPII), which
functions as an inflammatory cytokine. Due to its central location in the core
multienzyme aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase complex, a likely function of p43 is to
maintain structural integrity of this particle. This project will determine the
effect of metabolic stress on p43 cleavage and stability of the complex.
Specifically, mammalian and non-mammalian cells will be grown under various
adverse conditions. Multisynthetase complexes will be purified from these
cultures and their compositions and structures characterized. The cellular
localization and distribution of complexes, of tagged p43 and of its processed
components will be quantitated by immunoblot analysis of subcellular fractions.
This collaborative research project will be performed primarily by undergraduate
students who will receive training in molecular and structural biology.