* 0215442
* Computational Equipment for Approximation Theory, Control Theory, Graph Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Mary Ann Horn, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/2004
* USD 40,000.00

NSF Proposal DMS-0215442&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Hardin, Ellingham, Horn, Saff, and
Schumaker&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational
Equipment for Approximation Theory, Control&lt;br/&gt;Theory, and Graph
Theory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Mathematics at Vanderbilt
University will&lt;br/&gt;purchase computer equipment dedicated to supporting
research&lt;br/&gt;in the mathematical sciences. The equipment will be used
for&lt;br/&gt;several research projects, as follows. Professor
Ellingham&lt;br/&gt;will investigate conjectures in graph theory
involving&lt;br/&gt;surface embeddings, traversability, and independent
sets.&lt;br/&gt;Professor Hardin will construct and develop
applications&lt;br/&gt;of local orthogonal bases. Professor Horn will
investigate&lt;br/&gt;the controllability of linked elastic structurres
using&lt;br/&gt;numerical methods. Professors Hardin and Saff
will&lt;br/&gt;investigate discrete minimum energy problems on the
sphere.&lt;br/&gt;Professors Saff and Schumaker will research the theory
and&lt;br/&gt;applications of splines, especially on the
sphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Ellingham's research involves graphs,
which are&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models of networks.
Communication,&lt;br/&gt;transportation and other networks are often modeled
using&lt;br/&gt;techniques from graph theory. Professor Hardin's
research&lt;br/&gt;involves wavelets, which are an important tool
for&lt;br/&gt;compressing images, sounds, and other real-world
information.&lt;br/&gt;They may be applied to problems in fitting equations to
data&lt;br/&gt;points in any area of science, or processing images,
for&lt;br/&gt;example from medical scanning equipment. Professor
Horn's&lt;br/&gt;research involves control theory, which allows
computation&lt;br/&gt;of how forces should be applied to a complicated system
to&lt;br/&gt;achieve a desired outcome. There are applications to
many&lt;br/&gt;real-world structures such as trusses, robot arms,
solar&lt;br/&gt;panels, and suspension bridges. The work by
Professors&lt;br/&gt;Hardin and Saff involves the best way to place points
on&lt;br/&gt;a sphere so that the sphere is covered as uniformly
as&lt;br/&gt;possible. This problem has applications in many
fields,&lt;br/&gt;including the structure of viruses,
crystallography,&lt;br/&gt;structure of molecules, and electrostatics. The
research&lt;br/&gt;by Professors Saff and Schumaker involves trying to
provide&lt;br/&gt;accurate but easily computable representations of
quantities&lt;br/&gt;on the surface of a sphere. For example, these technique
may&lt;br/&gt;be used to construct an accurate model of the
Earth's&lt;br/&gt;gravitational field. &lt;br/&gt;