* 0215866
* Powder X-ray Diffraction Instrumentation for Undergraduate Research and Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Stanton S.H.Y. Ching, Connecticut College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 07/31/2005
* USD 56,602.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Department of Chemistry at Connecticut College will acquire a powder X-ray
diffractometer for undergraduate research and research training. This equipment
will enhance research studies involving the chemistry of microporous manganese
oxides with layered and tunneled structures. These manganese oxide projects
include a) nonaqueous sol-gel syntheses of layered and tunneled materials; b)
sol-gel preparation of thin films; c) sol-gel preparation of aerogels; d) room
temperature synthesis of manganese oxide colloids as precursors to layered
materials with a wide variety of interlayer cations; e) solventothermal
reactions of colloidal materials; f) electrochemical studies of colloidal films;
and g) control of Mn valency in colloids. Faculty will also implement X-ray
diffraction experiments in upper level laboratory courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise
measurements of the full three dimensional structure of a molecule, including
bond distances and angles, and it provides accurate information about the
spatial arrangement of the molecule relative to the neighboring molecules. These
studies will have a strong impact in materials chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;