* 0215573
* Political Science Program: EITM Competition IIIa: Empirical Implications of Theoretical Models Summer Institute
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Steven Smith, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2007
* USD 591,292.00

Beginning in the summer of 2003, four training institutes (2003-2006) on the
campus of Washington University in St. Louis will be offered to bridge the
divide between formal and empirical analysis. The goal is to advance the study
of methods and models and to expand the research community with cutting-edge
expertise. Each NSF EITM Summer Institutes is comprised of four one-week
seminars --- a basic seminar and three advanced seminars. The instructors and
the subjects addressed in the advanced seminars rotate over the four-year period
of the program. All seminars are held in the conference rooms of the Weidenbaum
Center on the Economy, Government, and Public Policy and the departments of
political science and economics. Each advanced seminar concerns the relationship
between formal models of politics and empirical research methods in a
substantive field of political science or political economy. The formal models
addressed span game theory, spatial theory, social and public choice theories,
general equilibrium models, adaptive learning models, behavioral economic
models, and hybrid approaches such as agent-based modeling. Empirical methods
include basic and advanced econometric techniques and spatial models. Students
attending the NSF EITM Summer Institute also may attend seminars in the summer
program of the Center for New Institutional Social Science that will have a
complementary schedule. The faculty for the seminars is drawn from Washington
University faculty and from faculty from several other universities. The
Washington University faculty participating in the NSF EITM Summer Institute
include Randall Calvert, John Carey, Lee Epstein, Andrew Martin, Gary Miller,
Norman Schofield, Itai Sened, and Steven Smith. The non-Washington University
faculty instructors include Charles Cameron, Keith Krehbiel, Kevin Quinn, Thomas
Palfrey, and Rick Wilson. Seminar guests include Janet Box-Steffensmeier, Eric
Brown, John Ferejohn, Simon Jackman, Rebecca Morton, Keith Poole, and Kenneth
Shepsle. 25 student participants will be recruited on a competitive basis.
Students will be offered on-campus housing and will be provided travel and
lodging subsidies. An EITM committee comprised of Washington University faculty
will administer the program.