* 0215253
* SBIR Phase I:  Highly Efficient, Long Lifetime, and Inexpensive Nanocrystal Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Yongqiang Wang, NANOMATERIALS AND NANOFABRICATION LABORATORIES
* Standard Grant
* Winslow L. Sargeant
* 12/31/2002
* USD 99,972.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will explore high
efficient, long lifetime and inexpensive light emitting diodes (LEDs) based on
semiconductor nanocrystals. The fabrication technology of the semiconductor
nanocrystal LEDs is very much similar to the one used for the fabrication of
polymer LEDs for commercial purposes. As a result, the commercial potential of
the nanocrystal LEDs relays mainly on the optical quality of the nanocrystals.
This project design adopts two recent technologies, which yields semiconductor
nanocrystals with extremely high emission efficiency and exceptional chemical
and thermal stability. The dendron ligand technology provides nanocrystals with
exceptional stability against the chemical processing and the thermal effect in
the operation of the devices. The nanocrystals synthesized using the bright
point concept produces unprecedented optical quality, about 80 percent
photoluminescence quantum yield, 23-27 nm emission full peak width at half
maximum, and tunable emission window from 450-700 nm. With those high optical
quality and highly processable semiconductor nanocrystals, it is possible that a
new generation of semiconductor nanocrystal LEDs, which have at least compatible
performance to the polymer LEDs, but with low cost and continuous tunable and
narrow emission profile.

The commercial potential of the polymer LEDs and nanocrystal LEDs will highly
depend on the lifetime and the cost of the devices. Nanocrystal LEDs possess
nearly all of the advantages of polymer LEDs, but with significantly more
tunable and narrow emission profile. At this stage, the commercial standard for
the lifetime of the polymer LEDs is around several thousand hours. The
commercial goal this project is to boost the performance of the nanocrystal LEDs
to at least the level of that of polymer LEDs. The usage of those devices is on
portable electronic devices, such as portable computer and cellular telephone.