* 0215013
* SBIR/STTR Phase I: A High Throughput Gene Discovery System in Arabidopsis using Geminivirus gene expression vectors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Susanne Kjemtrup, ICORIA INC
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 10/31/2003
* USD 99,962.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I Project proposes to
develop a geminivirus-derived gene expression system, based on cabbage leaf curl
virus, to test the effect of agronomically important genes in a transient, high
throughput model. While the genomics revolution is a major step toward
understanding gene function, the foremost challenge is correlating
bioinformatics data with actual functional responses. Paradigm Genetics, Inc.,
currently uses the plant model species, Arbidopsis thaliana in a pipeline
developed specifically to address the bottleneck between sequence and functional
data. Arabidopsis plants genetically engineered to over or underexpress single
genes are analyzed in developmental, biochemical and molecular platforms. While
this pipeline has been successful in many ways, two disadvantages remain : (1)
the amount of time required to generate stable Arabidopsis transformants, and
(2) the ability to test only one gene at a time. To address these issues, this
proposal initiates the development of an additional platform using geminivirus
vectors. First, a genetic screen of Arabidopsis ecotypes and a mutagenized
population will be carried out. This screen is designed to isolate symptomless
Arabidopsis lines supporting viral replication and spread. Second, based on the
hypothesis that lower viral levels can decrease symptom development in the
plant, the viral vector will be modified to replicate at lower levels. Results
from this research will be used to start a high throughput assay to determine
functions of agronomically important genes. Additionally, these results will
lead to important agronomic understandings of virus/host interactions.

The commercial applications of this project are in crop plant improvement.