* 0215450
* Collaborative Research: Testing the Effects of Campaign Finance Laws in State Legislative Elections
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Keith Hamm, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2006
* USD 74,999.00

This project examines the effects of laws regulating campaign financing in state
legislative elections. A comparative analysis of states with varying statutory
and regulatory provisions provides analytical leverage necessary for determining
how the legal context shapes various aspects of electoral behavior. Major
differences in the regulatory regimes across states provide an ideal laboratory
for testing how such features affect candidacy decisions, fundraising practices,
and election competition. Multiple research strategies are employed to test a
model of elections in which campaign finance laws play a prominent role. A
primary concern of this project is to evaluate the effects of legal conditions
on such electoral features as contribution strategies of interest group and
parties, candidate spending, candidate characteristics, and electoral outcomes
in the states. The investigtors have confidence this project will generate
findings that will have important theoretical and practical implications. Such
as: Define and clarify the statutory and regulatory provisions of campaign
finance laws across the fifty states for a 30-year time frame (1972-2002).
Propose a model of elections in which the influences of campaign finance laws
are posited to impact various stages of the electoral process. Collect data on
campaign contribution patterns, campaign spending, candidate characteristics,
and election competition in state legislative elections during the 2002 election
cycle. Analyze the data collected to determine both the direct and indirect
effects of campaign finance laws while holding constant a range of other factors
and conditions. Prepare written reports on the findings and disseminate the
information to scholars and policy makers. Release the data so that other
scholars may explore additional dimensions of campaign finance laws.

Overall, the results of the project promise to enhance substantially our
understanding of campaign finance regulations and how these laws shape electoral
behavior in the United States. The findings are expected to contribute to the
theoretical development of several sub-fields in the study of American politics.
In addition, the findings are likely to have practical implications by informing
the policy debate over existing campaign finance policies at both the state and
national levels.