* 0215830
* Acquisition of a white light confocal microscope for quantitative characterization of dental microwear surfaces.
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Peter Ungar, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2003
* USD 218,571.00

A National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation award will allow
the purchase a NanoSurf II Pro (NanoFocus Corp) white light confocal microscope
for use in dental microwear analysis and other research activities at the
University of Arkansas. Dental microwear analysis is the study of microscopic
use-wear patterns in teeth to infer diet. The ability to reconstruct diet from
dental microwear is important to both bioarcheologists and paleontologists
because food preferences provide a key to understanding the biology and ecology
of past peoples and fossil species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While dental microwear
has been studied for many living and fossil groups, current techniques are
stretched to their limits. Microwear feature measurement error is high, and
repeatability is low. This both reduces the power to resolve diet-related
differences within studies and limits the ability to compare results among
studies. Measurement errors stem from two problems. 1) The scanning electron
microscope (SEM) used in most such studies is not ideal for microwear analysis.
Because the SEM forms an image by a complex interaction between a surface and an
electron beam, different instrument settings can produce different images for a
single surface. 2) Because a surface can have hundreds of microscopic scratches
and pits with irregular and overlapping boundaries, it can be difficult to
identify and measure those features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Ungar, Brown and
Walker will use the Nanosurf II Pro instrument to solve both problems. This
instrument creates a true rendering of a wear surface in 3-D to provide a
repeatable, automated procedure to quantify patterns of wear. The microscope
measures z-values at fixed x,y intervals and calculates a series of attributes,
such as roughness and anisotropy for a microwear surface. This work is important
because it will give researchers a new, more repeatable way to characterize
dental microwear that should lead to new insights into the diets of past peoples
and fossil species. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This NanoSurf II Pro will also be
used by researchers and students in other disciplines on the campus of the
University of Arkansas. The combination of high resolution, long depth of field
and large field of view of this instrument will allow new research in: 1) plant
pathology (study of damaged leaves following insect predation); 2) mechanical
engineering (study of impact of cutting tools and electronic packaging systems);
3) chemistry (measurement of patterned materials for lab-on-a-chip devices); 4)
biological engineering (measurement and analysis of microorganisms for
development of biosensors); 5) food science (assessment of effects of processing
on food surface structure); and 6) geosciences (measurement and analysis of
bedrock surface modifications due to weathering). Limited research
infrastructure at Arkansas' universities contributes to a limited science and
technology environment in the state. Many students leave Arkansas for their
education and employment, contributing to the fact that the state is last in the
nation in percentage of its population with a college degree. Access to state-
of-the-art major research instrumentation, such as the NanoSurf II Pro, will
contribute toward recruiting and training students from geographically
underrepresented groups in a broad range of science and technology
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;