* 0215966
* Development of Scanning Nano-Raman Spectroscopy with Apertureless Near-Field Optics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Mark Foster, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 02/28/2006
* USD 308,777.00

Continuing the recent progress in nanoscience and nanotechnologies requires the
development of methods of chemical, conformational, and stress analysis with
nanoscale lateral resolution. The objective of this award from the MRI Program
is to develop a scanning Raman spectrometer with spatial resolution of the order
of 10-50 nm with a strongly enhanced optical signal. A central feature of the
proposed work is the use of apertureless near- field optics to provide a gain of
at least 10 exp.10 in intensity of the Raman signal over what may be achieved
with currently available commercial instruments based on aperture-limited optics
created with fibers. This approach will provide both exquisite spatial
resolution and large local enhancement of the Raman signal using a scanning
metallic tip. The enhancement is absolutely essential for measurement of the
signal from small volumes. A long-term goal of the work is development of a
Raman spectrometer capable of single molecule detection. The following specific
objectives will be met in achieving the overall goal of the work: &lt;br/&gt;(1)
Development of the technology for the creation of a metallic tip providing
strong local enhancement of the Raman signal; (2) Optimization of different
optical schemes for providing the incident light and collecting the Raman signal
for particular experimental tasks; and (3) Construction of the scanning Raman
spectrometer prototype with nanometer scale spatial resolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of a scanning nano-Raman spectrometer (SNRS)
supported under the MRI Program will be applicable to several scientific
activities. In the study of adsorption of human blood proteins to well-defined
surfaces, SNRS will provide laterally resolved information on conformational
changes in the protein upon adsorption. The distribution of surface nano-domains
in biomaterials from block copolymers, assembly of collagen fibrils, and fibrin
formation are further biomaterials problems for which the SNRS instrument will
provide unique information. Lateral variations in chemical composition at the
surface of adhesive blends can also be mapped with SNRS and correlated with
variations in surface mechanical properties. In blends of long-branched and
linear chains SNRS will provide a laterally resolved alternative non-destructive
method to study near surface composition in blends with isotopic labeling. It
will also offer a means to study near surface composition without labeling.
Additional research activities include the study of hybrid nanostructures from
polymer brushes and dendrimers and mapping of surface functionality in ultrathin
films of various sorts, including self-assembled monolayers with mixed
functionalities. Development of the scanning nano-Raman spectrometer will have a
significant impact on the Nation's academic research infrastructure not only
polymeric materials, but also semiconductor technology, biotechnology and
biology. The unprecedented measurements it will provide will promote better
understanding of structure/property relationships in materials on the nanometer
scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;