* 0215758
* Function of Activation Domains in Gene-Specific Transcription Factors
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Alexandre Erkine, LSU Health Sciences Center -Shreveport
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 10/31/2003
* USD 220,000.00

Despite major advances in characterizing components of eukaryotic transcription
machinery, the mechanisms of the recruitment of these components to gene
promoters are poorly understood. Activation domains (ADs) of gene-specific
transcription factors are critical for these recruitment steps. Amazingly, there
are little requirements for the sequences and structure of ADs, and they are
easily interchangeable with preservation of functionality not only between
different gene specific activators but even between activators belonging to
different eukaryotic phyla. The excess of hydrophobic and acidic amino acid
residues in natural and synthetic ADs suggests that their interacting targets
may be hydrophobic and basic. The nucleosomal histones are the most abundant
proteins in the nucleus with such properties. The PI hypothesizes that histones
are among the targets of some ADs and that distortion of promoter nucleosomes by
ADs triggers a chain of chromatin remodeling events involving different
coactivators. In this project, yeast HSF will be used as a model system. The
chromatin remodeling mediated by HSF ADs at heat shock promoters will be tested
in yeast strains bearing different AD deletions employing Chromatin
ImmunoPrecipitation (ChIP) technique. The involvement of known histone-modifying
and nucleosome-remodeling activities will be tested in the strains where these
activities will be inactivated. The above hypothesis of AD-nucleosome
interactions will be addressed in vivo by an attempt to create a synthetic
activator with AD substituted by known histone-binding protein and in vitro by
DNase I footprinting experiments using a reconstituted nucleosomal template and
recombinant HSF. &lt;br/&gt;This project potentially can have an impact on the
dynamically developing area of gene transcription regulation by characterizing
the general chromatin remodeling mechanisms taking place in any eukaryotic cell.
Understanding of general mechanisms of natural and especially synthetic ADs
function potentially will have an impact on pharmaceutical directions related to
the design of synthetic activators and repressors targeting disease-related
genes.