* 0215867
* MRI Instrumentation Development: Nanolithography Using Scanning Tunneling Microscope (STM) and Local Electrostatic Discharge
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Romel Gomez, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 07/31/2004
* USD 255,540.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides funds to develop an
instrument to create structures on semiconductor, metallic and oxide surfaces at
the nanometer length scales. A research grade electrostatic discharge machine
will be purchased and will be modified to enable substantially improved
resolution. A new vacuum nanolithography tool will be constructed, which
utilizes the principle of proximal probe technique wherein the highly controlled
electrostatic discharge between surface and tip can dissociate atoms on the
target surface with a high degree of specificity. The equipment will be used to
create semiconductor and magnetic devices with nanometer dimensions in order to
exploit quantum mechanical behavior such as quantization of resistance and nano-
contact ballistic magnetoresistance.&lt;br/&gt; This project will improve upon
current manufacturing capability down to1 nm feature size and will allow
relatively inexpensive fabrication of quantum devices. It will be designed as a
bolt-on addition to existing charged particle lithography tools such as focused
ion beam milling machines as well as standard electron microscopes; and can be
used by university researchers in various departments including chemical
engineering, materials science, as well as chemistry and biochemistry. It will
further strengthen the University of Maryland, College Park, in the field of
nanostructures and can promote advances in nanomachining. The technique is
straightforward and can be transferred readily to various universities and
research laboratories. The instrumentation can be converted for use to either
add or remove material by a straightforward replacement of the fluid layer, and
being vacuum-based, it is compatible with semiconductor manufacturing processes.
Nanostructures could thus be made relatively inexpensively and could stimulate
vigorous research and development of artificial nanostructures.