* 0215491
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Graeme Fairweather, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/2004
* USD 25,000.00

NSF Proposal DMS-0215491 PIs: Fairweather, Bialecki, Heremann, Rockwood, and
Wang.

ABSTRACT

The new research computing facility in the Department of Mathematical and
Computer Sciences (MCS) at the Colorado School of Mines will enhance its
research computing infrastructure by providing faculty and graduate students
with a state-of-the-art high performance computing environment. It will comprise
14 dual processor workstations, each with 1 GB memory and 40 GB hard drive, and
a dual processor server with 2GB memory and 108GB hard drive. The machines will
be configured with the latest version of RedHat Linux. These machines will be
linked with some currently existing machines at MCS to extend the local
distributed network for high performance computing purposes. Code development
will be completed in the Linux/Unix environment with programming primarily in
C/C++, FORTRAN90/95, and Java. In addition, MCS has site licenses for
Mathematica, Maple, Splus, and Matlab to provide a full suite of symbolic
computing capabilities.

The new research computing environment is required to solve the complex problems
being considered by researchers in MCS, specifically in the areas of matrix
decomposition algorithms, nodal collocation for partial differential equations,
development of symbolic software for nonlinear partial differential equations
and lattices, data interpolation by finite element methods, and generalized
least squares interpolation for modeling. Nine of the machines will form the
nucleus of a computer laboratory to be used by graduate students assisting
faculty members in their research. Under the proposed system, the machines can
be used for individual computing by researchers, and also comprise a distributed
computing network. The purchase of dual processor computers rather than single
processor computers will double the number of processors in the distributed
computing network at a cost increase of less than 20%. The distributed network
will be used for code development, compilation, debugging, and production runs.

