* 0215413
* The Sensitivity of Mesoscale Convective System Development to Land Surface Conditions in Semi-Arid Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Karen Mohr, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 06/30/2006
* USD 257,552.00

The mesoscale convective system (MCS) is an organized ensemble of deep
convective clouds with a contiguous precipitation area of about 100 km or more
in horizontal scale. In semi-arid regions with seasonal rainfall, agricultural
productivity, stream flow, and aquifer recharge depend greatly on the size and
characteristics of the MCS population. MCSs are a critical component of the
hydrological cycle on local, regional and global scales.

The purpose of this research is to quantify the influence of land surface
characteristics on the initiation and development of MCSs in a semi-arid
environment. The study will focus on Sub-Saharan Africa. The research has two
components. In the first component, contemporaneous meteorological and land-
surface satellite data products will be compared for four wet seasons, May-
September 1998-2001. From Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission microwave imager
data, convective cloud clusters will be identified and classified (e.g.,
location, size, intensity, percentage convective/stratiform). The Normalized
Difference Vegetation Index data product will be the proxy for land surface
conditions. The strength of the correlation between the characteristics of MCSs
and the underlying land surface state will be assessed from the accumulation of
statistics on convective systems at various stages of their life cycles.

In the second component of the research, a three-dimensional coupled cloud-
resolving and land surface model will be used to simulate MCSs. MCS development
will be simulated over four common land covers in Sub-Saharan Africa, semi-
desert, savanna grassland, woody savanna, and evergreen broadleaf forest. The
experiments will vary vegetation density, vegetation type, and soil moisture and
calculate the differences in MCS thermodynamic and dynamic profiles resulting
from changes in the initial land surface conditions. Because precipitation from
an MCS is a function of system size, structure and longevity, the spatial and
temporal variability of precipitation will be the most important result used to
evaluate differences among simulations.

Successful completion of this research could lead to improved understanding and
management of water resources in semi-arid climates.