* 0215516
* MRI/RUI-Acquisition of a Real-Time Quantitative PCR Instrument for Undergraduate Research and Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Thomas Vandergon, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2005
* USD 111,635.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Pepperdine University
under the supervision of Drs. Vandergon, Brewster, Nofziger Plank, and Helm to
acquire research instrumentation that will enhance the undergraduate research
and teaching programs in cell and molecular biology. The instrument funded by
this grant is designed to perform real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (QPCR) experiments. QPCR is a technique in which low copy number DNA or
RNA samples are amplified and detected in real time with fluorescent dyes as the
reactions are progressing. The ability to detect the amplified samples in real-
time is of enormous value in addressing many questions in cell and molecular
research because it allows for accurate quantitative analyses. The QPCR
instrument will be utilized in both summer undergraduate research programs and
in the Honor's research program during the academic semesters. This instrument
will facilitate research projects carried out in the context of the biology
department's current summer program funded in part through a NSF-REU site grant.
The PI's will also develop four new undergraduate laboratory teaching modules
that specifically utilize real-time QPCR in addressing low copy gene presence in
samples, and gene expression in cells, tissues, or organisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of methods have been utilized traditionally for
measurement of normal gene expression and detection of changes in gene
expression, however, it is challenging to quantify traditional PCR and RT-PCR
(reverse transcription PCR) assays which are prone to template conversion errors
and amplification errors. Recent advances in QPCR technology overcome these
problems and allow for accurate quantification of amplified templates in real
time experiments. Specific research programs in which the QPCR instrument will
be used are: (1) analysis of photolyase gene expression in response to UV
radiation in amphibians (Vandergon), (2) examination of stress-response signals
and apoptotic signals in eukaryotic cells (Brewster), (3) characterization of
Notch signal transduction in mammalian cells (Nofziger Plank) and (4)
examination of glycogen synthase regulation in animal cell culture model systems
(Helm). In addition, this instrument will be used to introduce new concepts into
the laboratories of the core cell biology and biochemistry courses, several
upper-division biology elective courses, and related courses in nutritional
science. Each faculty member associated with this grant will develop a new
undergraduate laboratory teaching modules that explores gene presence within
samples, temporal changes in gene activity, or induced changes in gene
expression. The four laboratory teaching modules that will be implemented using
this instrument include: (1) an analysis of intermediary metabolism gene
responses of E. coli grown in different nutrient media, (2) an analysis of gene
expression changes in response to environmental stress in yeast, (3) an analysis
of the expression patterns of two genes involved in vulval development in C.
elegans, and (4) an analysis of the presence of genetically modified organism
(GMO) material in foods. The developed laboratory modules will be made available
freely on the Natural Science Division Web site at Pepperdine
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will foster undergraduate research
in cell and molecular biology at Pepperdine University. This instrument will
provide a powerful new tool for use in student-generated independent research.
The grant will provide undergraduate students with access to the latest
equipment for research in molecular and cellular biology. It will aid also in
generating student interest in graduate studies in cell and molecular biology
and will provide training to students interested in employment in the
biotechnology industry. Cross-department connections will be made in research
and teaching between the biochemistry program, biology program, and nutritional
sciences program. Ultimately, this grant will assist in training scientists in
cutting edge techniques to keep research at Pepperdine University at the
forefront of science.&lt;br/&gt;