* 0215402
* Southeastern Center for Ocean Science Education Excellence:   A Systemic Approach to Forming Ocean Science Education Partnerships
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Malcolm DeVoe, South Carolina Sea Grant Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2006
* USD 969,136.00

This award provides funding for a Regional Center for Ocean Sciences Education
Excellence with administrative offices located at the South Carolina Sea Grant
Consortium Office in Charleston, SC. The center will focus on the North
Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia region, and center personnel will work to
forge stronger relationships between research organizations, researchers,
schools and informal educational sites in the region. The Southeastern Center
for Ocean Sciences Education Excellence (SECOSEE) will also reach out to
underrepresented groups in the ocean sciences by creating programs based on the
unique African American coastal heritage in the area. Activities include an
inventory of existing ocean science materials and programs, awareness workshops
for educators and researchers, collaborations between researchers and educators,
enhanced professional development opportunities, supplemental school and summer
science programs, website development, and evaluation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This center will be one of seven COSEE's that represent
the initiation of the COSEE network. The initial set of centers covers most of
the East Coast, Florida, the Gulf Coast, and California. A central coordinating
office for the seven centers will also be funded. Substantial funding for the
SECOSEE program will be provided by NOAA's Coastal Ocean Services and Office of
Ocean Exploration. &lt;br/&gt;