* 0215913
* Acquisition of a Gas Chromatography-Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry System for Interdisciplinary Environmental and Health Sciences Research at Dartmouth College
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Stefan Sturup, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2005
* USD 159,346.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Xiahong Feng, Carol Folt and Stefan Sturup at
Dartmouth College to purchase a Gas Chromatography-Inductively Coupled Plasma
Mass Spectrometry (GC-ICPMS) system. The unique feature of this instrument is
that it provides an interface between a GC and an ICPMS. This makes it possible
to simultaneously measure chemical speciation and isotope ratios of inorganic
and organic metal containing compounds. For example, one can determine
201Hg/202Hg ratios in inorganic mercury and methylmercury of water or biological
samples. Such analytical power offers a variety of opportunities for innovative
observations and experiments, involving volatile metal compounds, with important
applications in environmental and health sciences. Most organometallic compounds
are significantly more toxic than the corresponding inorganic forms. Therefore,
the importance of specific determination in environmental and biomedical samples
is widely appreciated. This instrument will be installed at the Dartmouth Trace
Element Analysis Core Facility (TEA Core), joining an existing High Resolution-
ICPMS and an ion chromatography (IC) system. The Dartmouth TEA Core serves a
large number of PIs and students doing interdisciplinary research in
environmental and health sciences. The new instrument will promote our research
activities in three ways. First, it provides new analytical capabilities, such
as mercury speciation and isotope analysis and isolation of Se from
selenoproteins. Second, it improves the quality of some elemental measurements
(e.g., rare earth elements). Finally, it will share the analytical load of our
HR-ICPMS, so that technical development work (e.g., As speciation) can be
carried out using additional machine time. A new project enabled by this
instrument is a study of the biomagnification of heavy metals, especially
mercury, in aquatic food webs. Methylmercury in the tissue of plankton and fish
from more than 20 lakes with different food web structures will be compared.
Quantitative estimates of the influence of zooplankton species, size and
relative abundance on the buildup of toxic mercury in fish from each lake will
used construct a predictive model for mercury trophic transfer across lakes.
Laboratory experiments with stable isotopes of mercury will be used to develop
mechanistic models for trophic transfer at the low levels of mercury found in
natural systems. Other new and existing projects that will benefit from this
equipment include human health effects of exposure to toxic elements,
interaction of toxic metal with cellular proteins, mechanisms of contaminant
transport through watersheds, and reconstructions of chemical and climatic
history of the earth. By becoming a part of Dartmouth's TEA Core, the new GC-
ICPMS will offer expanded opportunities for graduate and undergraduate education
in the area of emerging technology. The TEA core is served as major foci for
interdisciplinary research and scientific communication among experts in many
departments within Dartmouth. Dartmouth's TEA core is open for student research
from first year undergraduates to Ph.D. students. Eighteen graduate
students/postdocs and 15 undergraduate students have used the instruments of the
facility. The lab has also been used for classroom education in a few Dartmouth
classes, including undergraduate level Environmental Geology, and graduate level
Watershed Hydrochemistry and Analytical Chemistry and Instrumental Analysis.