* 0215896
* MRI: Acquisition of a Phosphorimager to Investigate Phosphorylation and Regulation of TACE
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Blaine Moore, Kalamazoo College
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 07/31/2005
* USD 73,863.00

A grant has been awarded to Kalamazoo College under the supervision of Dr.
Moore,to acquire a phosphoimager, which will allow faculty to investigate
phosphorylation and regulation of the TNF-alpha converting enzyme (TACE). TACE
is a protein that works as an enzyme, catalyzing the cleavage of large, full-
length precursors (known as substrates of TACE) into smaller fragments.
Understanding how the activity of the TACE enzyme is regulated will provide
insights as to how, mechanistically, these fragments are generated. Specific
experiments are planned to determine the sites (specific amino acids) on TACE
that are phosphorylated by PKC, and to determine whether the phosphorylation
state of TACE directly influences its activity. The former involves the use of
mutated versions of TACE that lack critical proposed phosphorylation sites. This
experiment will determine where on TACE these phosphate groups are added. The
latter also involves the use of the aforementioned mutant versions of TACE in
cleavage assays to determine whether the cleavage of TACE substrates (other
proteins that TACE acts on and cleaves) is affected by phosphorylation state.

In addition to providing basic science information about the regulation of the
TACE enzyme, the experiments described above will have a much broader impact.
For example, much of what we learn about the TACE enzyme may be generalized to
similar proteases that are in the same protein "family" as TACE. Furthermore,
understanding the mechanisms whereby TACE is "turned on" will illuminate general
strategies used by cells to "turn on" protein enzymes. The broader impact of
this work lies in uncovering the complexities of cellular function: the more
scientist know about how cells work normally, the better prepared scientists are
to determine what goes wrong in malfunctioning cells in disease or injury
states. Moreover, because these experiments will be done in conjunction with
undergraduate student collaborators, an important educational experience will be
provided. In addition several other faculty members in the college are anxious
to learn application of the technique, and they will benefit from the presence
of this piece of equipment on the campus. Both faculty and students from the
biology and chemistry departments will be involved in research utilizing the
equipment.

