* 0215880
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Controlled Environment Growth Chambers
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* John Constable, Slippery Rock University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2005
* USD 129,900.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. John V.H. Constable, Jerry G. Chmielewski, and
Dean M. DeNicola at Slippery Rock University to purchase four controlled
environment plant growth chambers. The requested chambers include control over
temperature and illumination and will be configured as described below to
maximize utility for all users. The configuration of the first pair of chambers
includes a high light output option that provides illumination to approximately
three-fourths of full sun level, control over humidity through linked
humidification and dehumidification systems, and the control of CO2
concentration using CO2 injection and an integrated infrared gas analyzer. The
configuration of the second pair of chambers are identical to those above, but
lack the high light output option and control over CO2. Acquisition of these
chambers will expand the future research efforts of John V.H. Constable; Jerry
G. Chmielewski; and Dean M. DeNicola in the Department of Biology. The growth
chambers will also expand Slippery Rock University's primary mission of
excellence in undergraduate education in the classroom, the laboratory and
independent faculty-supervised student research. &lt;br/&gt; The chambers will
provide the capability for a diverse array of projects to be studied according
to the primary research interests of the investigators. The goals of all
proposed studies are to enhance our understanding of mechanistic relationships
in biological systems. Dr. Constable's studies address the mechanistic
relationship between nitrate and carbon assimilation at elevated CO2 that will
enhance our predictive ability on the long-term growth response of vegetation to
elevated CO2. Dr. Chmielewski's studies develop the understanding of
evolutionary trends in reproduction between weedy and non-weedy aster species.
Dr. DeNicola's investigations seek to build a predictive model of benthic algal
succession based on growth form and potential colonizing taxa; and (ii) the
determination of the effects of Acid Mine Drainage (AMD) on benthic algal
community structure and primary production in order to improve remediation
efforts in AMD impacted streams.&lt;br/&gt;