* 0215635
* Collaborative Research: Why the Economy? The Micro-Foundations of the Economic Vote in Comparative Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Randolph Stevenson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,937.00





An important puzzle in the study of comparative political behavior is the
apparent variability, across countries and over time, of the extent and nature
of economic influences on political support for parties and politicians. In this
proposal, the Principal Investigators offer a theoretical solution to this
puzzle and outline a plan for testing it empirically. The theoretical solution
departs from previous work on comparative economic voting because it draws
heavily on relatively recent insights into the nature, sources, and impact of
information on public opinion (Zaller 1992,2001; Mutz 1998; Lupia and McCubbins
1998; Iyengar 1991; Page and Shapiro 1992; Delli Carpini and Keeter 1996). Such
work differs from earlier literature in two ways. First, it assigns a dominant
role to the media in communicating information to citizens and ultimately in
influencing their political opinions and behavior. Second, it accounts for
individual heterogeneity in political opinion and behavior largely through
differences in people's incentive and ability to receive and accept media
messages (i.e., their political awareness).

Most of the insights of this literature, however, have not yet penetrated the
comparative study of economic voting, which has maintained quite simple
conceptions of the cognitive process that leads to the empirical phenomenon of
economic voting. This is perhaps the reason that the leading explanation for
cross-national difference in economic voting, the "clarity of responsibility"
hypothesis, has had only limited empirical success.

In this project, the Principal Investigators offer a more nuanced theoretical
model of economic voting that builds on the recent literature in American public
opinion (which is itself an outgrowth of advances in cognitive psychology). The
Principal Investigators begin with the usual economic voting model, but
recognize that it is really built from a series of connected opinions (i.e., an
economic judgment, an attribution of responsibility for the economy, and an
expression of political support). Consequently, a fruitful way of building a
more fully realized model of economic voting would be to flesh out the
explanation of how voters form and change each of these opinions.

Fortunately, the public opinion literature mentioned above provides a general
theoretical framework from which these opinion models can be built. This
theoretical expansion of the economic voting model accommodates a number of the
most prominent, but more ad hoc, hypotheses about comparative economic voting
already in the literature, but it also generates a whole range of new
theoretical hypotheses. Indeed, this theory promises to reorient students of
comparative economic voting away from an exclusive focus on governmental
institutions and party systems as the sources of difference in cross-national
economic voting; and toward a focus on international differences in how the
media reports on the economy. In addition, the theory produces a number of new
sources of individual level heterogeneity in economic voting that (because of
difference in the distribution of these characteristics in different
populations) could also help explain variation in economic voting cross
nationally.

In order to explore whether this kind of theoretical expansion is useful the
Principal Investigators will need to collect data on what the media in different
countries say about the economy over time. To do this, the Principal
Investigators will collect about 30,000 front-pages of selected newspapers from
15 developed democracies from 1980-2001. These papers will be copied and coded
for economic (and some political) messages by native language speakers.

The project will also require information at the individual level. Many of the
hypotheses specify relationships between variables like political awareness and
economic judgments, political support, or responsibility attributions. To test
these, the Principal Investigators need to ask a series of survey questions to
citizens in different countries. The Principal Investigators will accomplish
this inexpensively, by including a relatively short battery of the relevant
items on the Gallup surveys conducted in each country.



