* 0215179
* SBIR Phase II:   Low-Cost Glass Fiber Composites Tailored Towards Concrete Reinforcement
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Fadhel Aouadi, DPD INC
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 07/31/2005
* USD 681,995.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will refine the
polymer matrix of glass fiber composites with ion exchangers in order to enhance
their longevity in the alkaline environment of concrete. Glass fiber composites
offer a desirable balance of performance and cost for replacement of corrosion-
prone steel reinforcement in concrete; their rapid deterioration in the alkaline
environment of concrete is, however, a major setback. Ion exchangers are
insoluble solids carrying cations (or anions) which can be exchanged with ions
of the same sign. Cation exchangers of hydrogen form replace alkali metal
cations (e.g., K + in alkaline solutions diffusing into the polymer matrix) with
H + . This exchange of cations neutralizes aggressive alkaline solutions by
converting K + OH - (and Na + OH - , etc.) into H2O. Through laboratory
investigations and industrial-scale pultrusion efforts, the Phase I research
demonstrated that introduction of selected ion exchangers into the polymer
matrix (or a surface layer of matrix) does not interfere with the pultrusion
process, and yields significant gains in alkali resistance of glass fiber
composites. The Phase I effort also established a theoretical context for
selection of the dosage of cation exchanger in the polymer matrix of glass fiber
composites, and verified the economic viability of our approach. The proposed
Phase II project will: (1) develop refined theoretical principles and design
procedures for formulation of polymer matrices with ion exchangers; (2) develop
and experimentally verify optimum polymer matrix formulations incorporating ion
exchangers; (3) optimize the pultrusion process of glass fiber composites with
the refined polymer system, and fully characterize the end products; and (4)
evaluate the structural performance and durability of concrete systems
reinforced with refined glass fiber composite bars through comprehensive
laboratory studies complemented with a field investigation involving design,
construction and monitoring of a reinforced concrete bridge deck. The Phase II
effort will receive critical support from major manufacturers of composite
rebars (including Hughes Brothers, the world leader in this field), the leading
supplier of ion exchangers (Dow Chemical), Michigan Department of
Transportation, and Michigan Economic Development Corporation. Michigan State
University (Composite Materials & Structures Center) will also take part in the
proposed research effort.

Close to one-third of reinforced concrete structures, including bridges, parking
structures, buildings in coastal areas and offshore structures, are exposed to
corrosive environments (deicer salt, seawater spray, etc.); domestic sales of
steel for reinforcement of these concrete structures is about $2 billion/yr.
Glass fiber composites embodying our technology are resistant to both corrosive
effects and the alkaline environment of concrete; they offer a desirable balance
of performance and cost to replace steel reinforcement in corrosive
environments. Major savings in life-cycle cost can be realized at competitive
initial cost through replacement of steel reinforcement with alkali-resistant
glass fiber composites in concrete structures exposed to corrosive environments.
Glass fiber composite jackets and sheets applied onto concrete surfaces for
repair/rehabilitation purposes are also prone to attack by the alkaline pore
solution of concrete, representing another market opportunity for our
technology. We have filed a patent application, and have reached agreements with
Dow Chemical (leading supplier of ion exchangers) and Hughes Brothers (world's
leading manufacturer of composite bars for concrete reinforcement) towards
transfer of the technology to marketplace.