* 0215407
* MRI/RUI:    Development of a Michelson Interferometric Imaging Refractometer for Optical Polymer Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* William Grubbs, Stetson University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 134,215.00

This Major Research Instrumentation RUI development project expands the
capabilities of a low-cost optical apparatus based on a Helium-Neon (HeNe) laser
and a Michelson interferometer that can be used to measure refractive index and
film-thickness variations in planar polymer samples. The development
incorporates a tunable light source and a visible-NIR digital camera imaging
system. The use of a coherent HeNe laser light source in the current system
greatly limits the versatility of the apparatus because it is limited to
differential refractive index measurements. These measurements can only be
carried out at 633 nm. The replacement of the coherent HeNe laser with a
tunable, low-coherence arc-lamp source makes possible the determination of
absolute and differential refractive index. These measurements can be performed
at any wavelength, thereby permitting one to characterize the dispersion
properties of samples. The addition of a visible-NIR digital camera and a
hardware-software image capture system will advance the capabilities of the
apparatus by allowing one to resolve graded refractive index profiles in optical
materials. An imaging system will permit one to confront optical wave-front
distortion problems, arising from surface roughness and sample inhomogeneity,
that have plagued previous interferometer systems. The study, involving
undergraduate students at a non-Ph.D. granting institution, will also promote
training and learning through the integration of research in the educational
process.

The expanding use of the internet and the accompanying demand for high-bandwidth
transmission media has fueled interests in 'all-optical' networking. Polymers
are emerging as key materials in the development of optical networks, owing to
their flexibility, light weight, low cost of fabrication, and the potential to
create materials with a variety of physical and optical properties. Research and
development of optical polymers is currently hindered due to a lack of
instrumentation for fully characterizing the bandwidth capacity of candidate
materials in the visible and near-infrared (NIR) spectral regions. In
particular, there is interest in developing optical imaging systems that allow
one to characterize the absolute refractive index, refractive index stability,
and overall dispersion properties of new polymeric materials. A secondary goal
of this study is to use the new instrument to measure differential and absolute
refractive indices in a wide range of freshly prepared polymer films. A
collaborative study at the University of Central Florida will focus on the
refractive index characteristics of polymer films doped with candidate
photochromic compounds. These organic compounds are capable of two-photon
induced photoisomerization. When incorporated into a polymer film, the
'switching' characteristics of these compounds make possible three-dimensional
holographic data storage.