* 0215869
* Instrument Development for Imaging and Manipulation of Single Biomolecules
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Paul Selvin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2005
* USD 395,889.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, under
the direction of Drs. Paul Selvin and Taekjip Ha to develop novel single
molecule microscopes that combine the ability to both watch and manipulate
individual biomolecules under conditions that simulate the native environment in
a cell. The molecules are tagged with a fluorescent dye or dyes that emit light
after excitation. Information about the position and/or shape of the molecule
can be gathered by monitoring this fluorescence. At the same time, the molecules
are put under a variety of environmentally realistic stresses - including
mechanical forces and torques, electrical and chemical forces, and temperature
changes. How the molecules react to these stresses can then be monitored.
&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, Selvin and Ha propose to build two microscope stations.
One will examine one molecule at a time with very high spatial and temporal
resolution. This uses what is called confocal optics, where a single molecule is
interrogated with an intense, tightly focussed laser beam, while being
manipulated. The other microscope will look at many individual molecules
simultaneously, by placing the molecules in an array and interrogating them in
parallel with more diffusely focused light. This method can acquire statistical
data much more rapidly. Such pParallel detection is particularly important for
monitoring irreversible reactions. High-resolution imaging will also be
developed on this microscope station. &lt;br/&gt;These microscopes will be used
to examine a variety of specific biological systems. One is a class of proteins
called molecular motors. These biomolecules uses the chemical energy of small
energy-rich molecules (such as adenosine triphosphate, ATP) and convert it into
mechanical (or other forms) of energy. Membrane proteins are another class of
biomolecules central to life yet in many cases poorly understood. Selvin and Ha
will study how several classes of ion channels - membrane proteins that enable
the cell to control its salt (ion) composition - open and close in response to
small molecules (ligand) and transmembrane voltage. Folding reactions of
proteins, DNA, and RNA are also essential to life. These will be studied by
inducing folding via rapid changes in temperature or chemical
concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;Single molecule studies have revolutionized our
understanding of how biomolecules work. The ability to watch one molecule at a
time reveals not only the average properties detected in ensemble measurements,
but can yield the entire distribution of relevant properties. Single molecule
studies also reveal the time evolution of biochemical reactions, which, if
asynchronous, are not observable via ensemble measurements. At the same time,
there is an ongoing revolution in the use of fluorescence, which, via specific
labeling to parts of the biomolecules, enables scientists to dissect how each
part of the biomolecule is moving. The combination of single molecule
manipulation and fluorescence techniques has the potential for revolutionizing
our understanding of how these tiny biomolecules work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;