* 0215574
* Northern Caddoan Languages Documentation Project
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,03/31/2005
* Douglas Parks, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2005
* USD 146,922.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Douglas Parks and colleagues will
conduct one year of linguistic research documenting South Band Pawnee, Skiri
Pawnee, and Arikara. These languages belong to the Caddoan language family
spoken on the Great Plains from Texas to North Dakota. Fluent speakers of these
three languages are no longer living. Most of the linguistic data included in
the project were recorded by the PI between 1965 and 2001. There are two aspects
of linguistic documentation in this project: bilingual dictionaries and analyzed
text collections (the latter primarily traditional stories, such as myths and
tales) for each of the three languages. These materials will be made available
on the World Wide Web. An integral aspect of the project is completion of
software begun under a previous NSF grant. That software facilitates the
development of multimedia dictionaries and analyzed text collections in a single
working environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to the long
tradition in anthropology and linguistics of scientific documentation of
American Indian languages. Such study contributes to the understanding of
linguistic diversity in human speech worldwide and to the understanding of the
interrelationships and historical development of American Indian languages. It
also preserves a record of the fast disappearing Native American languages.
Since South Band Pawnee, Skiri Pawnee, and Arikara are closely related to one
another, comparison among them will offer insights into the development of the
Caddoan language family and, more generally, processes of language change.
Because these languages share exceptionally complex verb structures, their
documentation will provide linguists with a large amount of new data for the
theoretical study of language history and structure. The software completed by
this project will serve as a valuable tool to aid description and analysis of
endangered languages worldwide. Finally, the dictionaries and texts will provide
critically needed resources for the three tribes in their efforts to revive and
teach their native languages, and to perpetuate their
cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;