* 0215890
* BE/CNH: Homeostasis and Degradation in Fragile Tropical Agroecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Lawrence Blume, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Ann Russell
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,668,132.00

When both people and their natural environment are "at the margin," small
changes in the natural resource base often have important effects on people's
lives. Conversely, modifications in human activities may significantly affect
ecosystem functioning. This responsiveness makes it necessary to study the
interactions between human behavior, natural capital stocks, and the flow of
ecosystem services. Farmers make many decisions about land use and improvement,
selection of crop varieties, livestock-management strategies, chemical
applications, and labor allocation. These decisions fundamentally affect the
growth of plants, livestock, and soil biology -- in short, the functioning of
the entire agroecosystem. Complex feedback loops send responses to the different
subsystems engendering dynamic reactions. Exogenous shocks, such as those
associated with climate variability and changing economic incentives, regularly
disrupt processes in this complex system. Over time, those disturbances
propagate throughout the system, causing adaptation in behaviors and performance
of the subsystems. Understanding the interplay between smallholder farmers in
Kenya and their natural environment is the primary goal of this project. Within
three Kenyan research sites, Embu in the central highlands, Siaya-Vihiga in the
Lake Victoria basin in subhumid western Kenya, and upper Baringo in the Rift
valley, some farmers have adapted their agricultural practices to sustain their
soils through crop-livestock integration and use of a variety of conservation
strategies. Within the same ecosystem, some farmers are able to maintain soil
fertility and farm productivity, while their neighbors are caught in "natural
resource poverty traps" that yield food insecurity and agroecosystem
degradation. Studies of the systems that are able to maintain homeostasis as
well as those that do not recover from human and natural shocks provide the
opportunity to understand the central biophysical and socioeconomic processes
that underpin agroecosystem functioning in the tropics. The investigators will
develop a model using a system dynamics approach that includes the complex
feedback loops among economic (conditioned by sociological constraints),
livestock, crop, and soils submodels. The model will be calibrated and tested
using data on soil status (nutrients, organic matter and microbial profiles),
crop yields, plant biomass production, and livestock growth as well as
production and socio-economic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Depletion of soil
fertility is increasingly acknowledged to be the fundamental biophysical cause
of declining food production in Africa. Unless the causes for soil depletion are
remedied, it will be impossible to increase food production to meet projected
demand due to population growth and to ensure that the 37 percent of the sub-
Saharan Africans receiving less that 2,200 calories per day are adequately
nourished. Because this project's research sites vary by ecological zone and
market access, they represent systems throughout Africa and much of the
developing world. This research project will permit a comprehensive evaluation
of socioeconomic and biophysical factors that contribute to degradation of
tropical agroecosystems. The project will add to limited understanding of the
microbial ecology of tropical soils, and to knowledge about when soils reach
thresholds beyond which replenishment is difficult. The project also will
contribute to knowledge of the processes through which people become trapped in
poverty. The integration of the contributions to individual research areas will
be made more useful through integration into a dynamic model that will permit
exploration of the responses of these vulnerable systems to economic and
biophysical shocks. This project is supported by an award resulting from the FY
2002 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the
Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;