* 0215388
* Aquatic Faunal Survey of a Peruvian Amazon Floodplain
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* James Albert, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 05/31/2005
* USD 349,001.00

0215388 Albert and Crampton Amazonian floodplains are among the most species-
rich aquatic ecosystems on earth, and contain a large proportion of specialized
and endemic species. This three-year project will survey and document the
aquatic fauna of a poorly known, megadiverse and vulnerable region in the
Peruvian Amazon. The project represents a unique combination of expertise in
Neotropical aquatic zoology, involving international collaboration among
scientists in the USA, Argentina, Brazil, Peru, Spain, and Venezuela. The
personnel will conduct a detailed inventory of the aquatic animals, including
fishes and numerous invertebrate groups, of the Pacaya Samiria National Reserve
in Peru. This reserve is the largest contiguous area of protected floodplain in
the Neotropics (21,500 square kilometers). The project will survey the principal
aquatic floodplain habitats: floating meadows, open waters, lakes and river
channels. These surveys will embrace seasonal and annual changes in the fauna in
order to sample all habitats. Collecting efforts will emphasize habitats that
provide critical low water refuge and/or reproductive substrate for most aquatic
floodplain animals. The project will provide specimens and data to taxonomic
experts in several institutions worldwide. This Project was prompted by an
invitation from leading Peruvian governmental and university scientists to
conduct the first intensive aquatic survey of the Pacaya Samiria National
Reserve. The proposed survey matches the goals and priorities of the National
Science Foundation's Biotic Surveys and Inventories program and Peruvian
Ministry of the Environment, in terms of focus, scale, and urgency. The aquatic
fauna of the Pacaya Samiria Reserve is almost completely unknown, and there are
no extensive systematic collections or electronic databases of aquatic animals
from anywhere in the Peruvian Amazon floodplains. The Pacaya Samiria Reserve
also retains a relatively intact forest and aquatic ecosystem in comparison to
unprotected sites closer to urban centers. This Project will provide training to
local and U.S. students and faculty colleagues and thus benefit the
conservation, scientific, and education communities.