* 0215760
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Computer-Aided Knowledge-Based Process Planning for Surface Mount Rework
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Ismail Fidan, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2005
* USD 24,000.00

0215760&lt;br/&gt;Fidan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a cooperative project by Professor Ismail Fidan, Department of
Manufacturing and Industrial Engineering at Tennessee Technical University,
Cookeville, Tennessee and Dr. Serdar Tumkor, Mechanical Engineering Department
at Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey. They plan to develop an
interactive knowledge based expert interface system of circuit board defects.
The trend to high pin-count high-density packaging in surface mount assembly has
highlighted inherent difficulties in the assembly line of these very fine pitch
devices. A variety of defects is still common in printed circuit board assembly
(PCBA) technology requiring rework. Increasing product complexity, decreasing
component size, and using double sided boards have made rework more difficult
and the economic reworking of PCBAs is one of the main problems facing PCB
manufacturers. PCBA manufacturing has been relatively improved with fully
automated, accurate assembly machines and the use of robots but it has been
shown that the outcomes of the automated rework line have not produced a high
enough level of the reliable yield percentage. The objective of this award is to
make a contribution towards this surface mount rework. With the development of
this knowledge-based system, the rework will be removed from the PCBA line, and
PCBA process parameters, which cause joint level reliability problems, will be
managed online with the help of the developed
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The expert interface system for electronic
boards that the investigators plan to develop may be a cost-effective solution
for detecting and correcting flaws in electronics manufacturers. The potential
contributions into "computer-aided process planning for surface mount rework"
may be a significant addition to the electronics manufacturing field by
minimizing the number of the defects and waste of the electronics printed wiring
boards. The developed system and its implementations may also be used in the
senior and graduate level courses in industrial automation and in computer
integrated manufacturing graduate courses. Funds for this project are provided
by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of
Design, Manufacturing, and Industrial Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;