* 0215847
* Acquisition of a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope for Natural Science Research and Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Steven Runge, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2006
* USD 225,155.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr. Steven W. Runge
and colleagues at the University of Central Arkansas (UCA) to obtain a Laser
Scanning Confocal Microscope (LSCM). This instrument has the ability to capture
images of cells and cellular structures that are tagged with fluorescent markers
with a resolution unmatched by other types of light microscopy. The ability of
the LSCM to acquire optical sections and construct 3-D images from a variety of
live and prepared tissues and to perform time-course analyses on living cells
and tissues will impact a wide range of research programs at UCA. Investigations
that will employ the LSCM range from 3-D reconstruction of complex tissues such
as actively growing plant shoots and brains of rats and marine snails to
tracking the movement of structures inside of cultured cells and native tissues.
Collectively, acquisition of this instrument will elevate faculty and student
research at UCA to new levels of sophistication. This will allow researchers to
address questions that previously were inaccessible. A significant benefit of
having this work conducted at UCA, rather than at distant institutions, will be
the heightened opportunities for our undergraduates to become involved in
research. Our graduate students (master's level) will also acquire important
experience and skills that will promote future research and professional
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LSCM will be used to address a wide variety of
research questions in the natural sciences. These include: the rapid assay and
localization of plant pigments involved in responses to UV-light; morphological
characterization of neurons in the white matter of mammalian brains; tracking
the exocytic insertion of potassium channels into intestinal membranes for
osmoregulation in marine gastropods; visualization of synaptic connections
involved in behavioral decisions in whole brains of marine gastropods;
understanding mechanisms that underlie the selective death of Purkinje cells
during maturation of the rat cerebellum; tracking the movement of developmental
signals that direct inflorescence architecture in flowering plants; examination
of secretory canals in plants and the effects of trenching insects on latex/oil
distribution; and ratio imaging to monitor intracellular pH and time-course
imaging of vesicular trafficking of Na+/H+ exchangers in cultured cells
undergoing apoptosis. Methodologies to be employed include visualization of
autofluorescent molecules and structures in plant tissues, tagging stuctures
with fluorescent antibodies, filling individual brain cells with fluorescent
molecules to identify connections to other cells, and labeling cell-surface
proteins with fluorescent markers to follow the movement of these proteins to
and from the cell surface under different conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to research, the LSCM will be a valuable addition to science
instruction at UCA. Confocal microscopy will help students visualize complex 3-D
processes in biology and make measurements on living cells that will be
invaluable assets to teaching. For instance, stages of frog embryo development
will be recorded as a set of 3-D, time-course images that trace this dynamic
process. These images will then be made available for analysis in the classroom.
The stunning images produced by LSCM will also be used to generate interest in
the sciences among high school students and teachers through various outreach
programs and the Arkansas education media centered here on the UCA campus. The
University's enrollment of about 8,500 students is 62% female and 19% minority,
with the later group steadily increasing in proportion over the last decade.
Acquisition of the LSCM will strengthen faculty research capabilities, support
strong undergraduate research programs, attract more women and minority students
to careers in the sciences, increase public appreciation of science, and support
programs in a historically under-supported geographic area.&lt;br/&gt;