* 0215621
* EITM Summer Training Institute(Political Science Program: EITM Competition IIIa)
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2008
* Henry Brady, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2008
* USD 828,130.00

&lt;br/&gt;The scientific study of politics requires empirical testing of
theoretical models, but theories are often produced without adequate testing and
empirical work too frequently uses sketchy and oversimplified theory. Gaps have
appeared between theory and empirical method, and these gaps impair scientific
progress. To ameliorate this scholars need to train a new generation of scholars
who can better link theory and empirical work. The Principal Investigators will
to foster this intellectual development by offering younger scholars an
opportunity to learn by seeing and doing in conjunction with older scholars who
have been leaders in advancing theory and empirical work, focusing on
substantive areas where appreciable research integrating theory and methods
already exists. &lt;br/&gt;A successful Empirical Implications of Theoretical
Models (EITM) summer program, given the current relative infancy of this
approach to social science, must as much develop as disseminate substance. Thus
the key regarding training is that each institute include significant teaching
and research components, providing students a high degree of individualized
interaction with a far wider and deeper array of EITM mentors than are available
at any individual institution. The Principal Investigators have activities
transcending passive receipt of lecture material, involving also significant
opportunities to advance participants' own research by employing their newly
gained knowledge about the integration of theory and method. &lt;br/&gt;The
investigators foster integrated training by providing, in each of the four years
from 2002-2005, in four locations (respectively Harvard, Michigan, Duke, and UC-
Berkeley), a four-week &lt;br/&gt;summer program. Each of these institutes
accommodates up to 25 advanced graduate students and junior faculty. The program
is selective and admission is based significantly on the quality and potential
of research presented. A team of up to 15 research faculty conducts each
institute in a framework detailed below. &lt;br/&gt;The investigators take a
broad view of the theoretical models and empirical methods used to evaluate and
test implications. Formal models on which instruction will build include game
theory, &lt;br/&gt;differential equation dynamic models, and simple decision
theory and more complicated behavioral decision-making models. The empirical
toolkit should cover not only statistical inference but also focused
analytically-based case studies, and experimental methods. Computational models
have both theoretical and empirical relevance in the program. Six areas are
outlined that have sufficiently matured in combining micro-oriented,
institutionally rich theory with rigorous structural estimation to offer
fruitful possibilities for integrated instruction. The six areas, with examples
of integrated research and teaching outlines, cover spatial models,
institutional analysis, macropolitical economy, bargaining and coalitions,
international security, and international political economy. The researchers
include three such areas each year, and guarantee that there will be at least
one repeat for cumulation and development and at least one new module each year.
&lt;br/&gt;Using multiple hosts capitalizes on diverse, regionally available
deep pools of talent unavailable in any single location. It offers regional
balance in accessibility and fosters outreach to other departments in several
locales. The four have complementary strengths in computational models,
experimentation, and macro- and international political economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;