* 0215934
* Acquisition of a Computational Laboratory for Regional, Interdisciplinary Investigation of Climatic and Environmental Change
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Lisa Sloan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/2005
* USD 540,539.00

Under the Major Research Instrumentation program, a computational laboratory
will be acquired that will facilitate and unite multidisciplinary research
focused on regional climate change and the effects of that climate change on
biologic, geochemical, sedimentologic, hydrologic, and societal systems. These
topics involve faculty, researchers and students from 5 departments at the
University of California, Santa Cruz (Earth Sciences, Ocean Sciences,
Environmental Toxicology, Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, and Environmental
Studies).

Two main research avenues will be supported by this facility. First, a regional
climate model will be utilized in investigations of future climate scenarios for
key regions of interest. Second, the regional climate model results will be
applied to a range of studies that focus on responses to climate change by
various regional biologic (marginal marine ecosystems, marine algal blooms,
terrestrial floral and fauna ecosystems), chemical (water quality, contaminant
dispersal), hydrologic (surface and groundwater flow), sedimentologic (land
slide and glacial hazards), and societal (water management) systems. The
researchers will use an advanced regional climate model to investigate future
climate change scenarios that include increasing levels of greenhouse gases and
aerosols and for scenarios of projected future land use changes. Regional
modeling cases will be carried out at model resolutions of 40, 30, and 20 km.,
to investigate effect of spatial resolution upon results.

This project will provide a multidisciplinary and multidimensional view of the
possible effects of future climate change at regional scales. The project will
involve graduate and undergraduate students in research and computing projects,
seek to engage underrepresented students in scientific research, and allow for
the inclusion of results from this research to be incorporated into 18 different
courses across 5 different departments.