* 0215746
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Proposal: Prenominal Adjectives in Japanese
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Richard Larson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2004
* USD 11,907.00

Under the direction of Dr. Richard K. Larson, Ms. Hiroko Yamakido will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. Her research concerns dialect variation in
Japanese, with focus on adjectival inflection. She will study the variants
spoken in seven prefectures that extend from northern to southern Japan,
including Hokkaido, Fukushima (or Niigata), Osaka, Kyoto, Hiroshima, Fukuoka,
and Kagoshima. The project's core data will be gathered though oral interviews
with native speakers, who will be consulted regarding the acceptability and
range of meanings of example sentences and phrases involving adjectives. The
adjectives include those showing the amibuity in English examples like "OLD
friend" (which can mean 'aged friend' or 'long-time friend'), as well as
adjectives found in contexts like resultatives ("Mary hammered the metal FLAT"),
causatives ("Mary made John HAPPY"), adverbials ("Mary spoke QUICK-ly"), and so-
called secondary predicate constructions ("Mary ate the fish RAW"). Ms. Yamakido
will also consult published sources available only in the relevant locales and
several Japanese dialectologists. The results of her fieldwork will bear on the
nature of prenominal adjectives in Japanese: whether they are projected into
attributive structures (like "blue house") or into relative clause structures
(like "house that is blue").&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is significant
both for theories of generative syntax and semantics generally, and for Japanese
dialectology in particular. It will not only advance understanding of Japanese
grammar, and the relation between its morphological and syntactic forms; it will
also demonstrate the rich diversity within a small sector of the grammar and the
importance of cross-dialectal comparison.&lt;br/&gt;