* 0215782
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of DNA Sequencing and Genotyping Instrumentation for Research and Undergraduate Training at Middlebury College
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Matthew Dick, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 106,359.00

Acquisition of DNA Sequencing and Genotyping Instrumentation for Research and
Undergraduate Training at Middlebury College

Matthew H. Dick, PI

Abstract

A grant has been awarded to Middlebury College under the direction of Dr. Dick
to establish a DNA sequencing and genotyping facility at the college through
acquisition of relevant instrumentation. DNA sequencing is used to determine the
sequence of 'letters' in DNA, and is best known through its application in the
Human Genome Project. DNA genotyping allows unambiguous identification of
genetically different individuals, and well-known applications include the DNA
fingerprinting used in forensic work, as well as determination of paternity.
These tools are now fundamental to all disciplines of biology. DNA sequences are
used, for example, in studies ranging from identifying genes implicated in human
diseases, to understanding the spread of HIV, to reconstructing the history of
life on earth. The DNA sequencing/genotyping facility at Middlebury College will
enhance research by the faculty, foster new research directions, and help
attract top faculty and students to the college. Furthermore, it will spark
undergraduate interest and augment training in molecular biology and its
application across biological disciplines. Dr. Dick and three other faculty in
biology, who will be involved in the project as senior personnel, will make use
of the sequencing/genotyping instrumentation to address diverse research
problems. Dr. Dick will sequence DNA from a widespread group of marine organisms
called bryozoans in order to reconstruct their evolutionary relationships, which
are poorly understood. Dr. Helen Young will use genotyping to examine the
effects of bird versus insect pollinators on the exchange of genetic material
among flowering plant populations. Dr. Vickie Backus will use genotyping to
understand the diverse life history strategies of ants in New England forests.
Dr. Joshua Kavaler will sequence DNA in a study of gene regulation in fruit fly
sense organ development. In addition, several faculty will collaborate to design
and implement a new undergraduate training course, Molecular Methods in Ecology
and Evolution. This course will provide students in ecology and evolution the
knowledge they need to utilize molecular techniques in their research. It will
also give students in molecular genetics training they do not encounter in
traditional courses. The course will thus foster communication among students of
diverse biological disciplines. The research projects to which the
instrumentation will initially be applied address basic problems in biology
which, however, have broad significance. Bryozoans, for example, are important
as indicators of environmental quality, are a source of one class of potent
anti-cancer drugs, and are exceptionally useful for evolutionary studies because
of their excellent fossil record. Studies of pollination are relevant to
conservation, because they address the impact of introduced insect pollinators
such as the honeybee on native plant populations. Studies on forest ants address
fundamental problems in evolutionary theory. Cell signaling during fruit fly
development makes use of molecular pathways identical to those in humans;
indeed, much of what we know of human gene function has derived from such
studies. Finally, the broadest and most important use of the instrumentation
will be to spark interest in biology in the next generation of physicians and
researchers, and train them in current techniques.