* 0215872
* MRI:  Development of a Spin-Polarized Field-Effect Transistor
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Paul Thibado, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 500,000.00

This grant supports development of a low-temperature, ultra-high vacuum,
scanning tunneling microscope, which employs two 100% spin-polarized tips. In
this new instrument spin-polarized electrons will tunnel into GaAs at one
location, traverse through a small region of the sample, and then tunnel out
through another tunnel junction. To achieve this, a novel double-cleaved sample
preparation procedure will be developed that uses two STM tips separated by an
adjustable parameter from a few nanometers to millimeters. This system will be
used to study the coherent transport properties of spin-polarized electrons and,
in addition, will allow the study of quantum mechanical transport properties for
coupled spin-dependent tunneling junctions. A coherent electron spin current
will be injected using a ferromagnetic-metal STM tip (100% spin-polarized
single-crystal Ni&lt;110&gt; wire), and then coherently removed using another
ferromagnetic-metal STM tip. By being at low temperatures the spin-relaxation
lifetime is significantly extended, allowing high signal-to-noise ratio data
acquisition. This development is complimented with an educational program
designed to enhance the understanding of science by the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This equipment is critical for studying the complex
properties of spintronics devices. Students will gain valuable skills in the
development of this equipment and will be able to transfer the technology to
other interested parties upon graduation. The revolutionary idea of spintronics
currently hinges on discovering how to coherently transfer the electron spin
from one material to another. This research can provide significant guidance
toward achieving this goal, thereby influencing the research fields of surface
physics, magnetism, device physics, basic electron-spin physics, electronic
materials, and microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;