* 0215366
* Absentee Ownership and Corporate Environmental Performance
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Don Grant II, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2003
* USD 40,045.00

SES-0215366&lt;br/&gt;PI (s) Don Grant II&lt;br/&gt;University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project addresses two questions
concerning the environmental performance of absentee owned plants: (1) Do plants
with out-of-state or foreign headquarters emit more toxins than locally owned
plants?, and (2) Do plants with remote headquarters pollute more depending on
the social capital of their host communities. Critics of globalization and
capitalist expansion suggest that absentee owned plants have no long-term
interest in local communities as places to live. Rather they are very willing to
plunder their natural surroundings if it will maximize their parent firm's
profits. Meanwhile literature on structural embeddedness suggest that this
organizational model is too simplistic, that regardless of where a plant's
headquarters is located, a plant's performance is conditioned by the local
institutional culture in which it is situated. The research will test several
hypothesis-(1) chemical plants with out-of-state or foreign headquarters have
higher emission rates (i.e., release a larger percent of chemicals they use on-
site to the environment), (2) chemical plants with out-of-state or foreign
headquarters have higher emission rates when located in civically disengaged
communities, and (3) chemical plants with out-of-state ore foreign headquarters
have particularly high emission rates when located in communities that are both
civically disengaged and comprised of poor minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
test these hypotheses, a data file consisting of roughly 2000 chemical plants
will be used. The file includes information on each plant's toxic releases from
the EPA's Toxics Release Inventory, its ownership status, and the social and
institutional features of its surrounding community. A cross-section design will
be used to determine the direct and conditional effects of absentee ownership on
emission rates in 1990. To assess how these effects have changed a lagged panel
design will be employed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings will provide new insights
into what is rapidly becoming the modal type of business organization: absentee
ownership. Prior research has demonstrated that absentee ownership has economic
and social effects; this study will be the first to specify some of the
conditions under which absentee ownership also has environmental consequences.
Results could potentially guide regulators in deciding whether to monitor plants
owned by foreign firms more closely, and the business community in its efforts
at self-regulation. &lt;br/&gt;