* 0215560
* Sexual Dimorphism and UV Signaling in Birds
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Peter Dunn, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Godfrey R. Bourne
* 07/31/2005
* USD 65,632.00

Lay Abstract for proposal #0215560&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sexual dimorphism and UV
signaling in birds&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The brilliant colors of birds have
played a prominent role in the study of sexual and natural selection. In many
species of birds males possess bright colors, while females are cryptic. This
sexual dimorphism in plumage is traditionally explained as a consequence of
variation in sexual selection (i.e., mating success). However, there are several
reasons why this explanation may be inadequate. First, all comparative analyses
to date have relied on subjective evaluations of plumage color and brightness by
human observers, and it is now clear that birds see quite differently than
humans. Not only do birds see in the ultraviolet (UV) spectrum to which humans
are blind, they also see differently in the human visible spectrum.
Unfortunately, there has not yet been a large-scale comparative analysis of UV
reflectance in birds, so it is not known if UV signaling is widespread or if
such signals commonly differ between the sexes. Second, recent studies of sexual
differences in plumage color have found that evolutionary changes in plumage
have been more common among females than males, suggesting that we have been
focussing on the wrong sex. Indeed, there are many cases of bright colors in
both sexes (e.g., parrots, tanagers, toucans) suggesting that selection has
acted on females as well as males. Bright plumage in females may be favored by
male mate choice or aggression between females over access to mates or food. In
addition, natural selection may favor brightly colored females when both sexes
defend a territory year-round or color patterns are involved in camouflage.
Thus, other forms of selection besides sexual selection on males appear to be
important in the evolution of avian plumage patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
three year study proposed here will examine the evolution of avian plumage
patterns and sexual differences in plumage color using objective measures of
color (spectrometer measurements) taken from museum specimens. We will measure
spectral reflectance of both sexes of the1031 species used in our previous study
of avian dimorphism. By building on our previous work, this study will lead to
significantly deeper understanding of signaling in birds and the evolution of
plumage patterns, a subject that has enthralled and perplexed both biologists
and lay persons for over 100 years. In addition, this study will provide
opportunities for training students in comparative methods, enhance research
facilities at UWM and produce a web site with spectral data of birds that can be
used by other researchers and teachers. &lt;br/&gt;