* 0215504
* RUI: Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Photoperiod Flowering in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Karen Hicks, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Banks
* 08/31/2006
* USD 270,000.00

0215504&lt;br/&gt;Hicks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental factors such as light
and temperature play a major role in regulating plant development and
physiology, and have a significant impact on agricultural production. This
proposal concerns the molecular and genetic basis for the regulation of
flowering time by daylength, or photoperiod, focusing on the model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana. Although recent progress has significantly increased the
understanding of photoperiodic regulation of flowering, it is apparent that a
number of key components of this signal transduction pathway are still
unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mutations at the EARLY FLOWERING 3 locus offer a
unique inroad to the interactions between biological clocks and complex
developmental processes such as floral initiation and light regulation. New
genes that influence photoperiodic flowering will be identified and analyzed by
isolating modifiers of the elf3 mutant phenotype using a genetic screen.
Modifiers of the strong reduced function elf3-1 allele that restore photoperiod
sensitivity (pse mutants) are likely to identify proteins that function
downstream of ELF3 in the photoperiodic pathway. A number of mutations that
restore photoperiod sensitivity in the absence of ELF3 function have already
been identified. New loci identified in this modifier screen will be mapped
using PCR-based molecular markers, and positional or candidate gene cloning will
be undertaken for at least two modifier loci. In addition, this project aims to
understand the links between photoperiodic regulation of flowering,
photomorphogenesis, and circadian regulation. Phenotypic analysis of pse elf3-1
double mutants will test the hypothesis that these three processes are
genetically separable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of new genes that
influence photoperiodic flowering time will add to the repertoire of loci that
are known to affect the transition to reproductive growth and might be
manipulated to increase agricultural yield. An integral component of this
project is the training and mentoring of undergraduate students. Their
involvement in this research program will foster the development of laboratory
skills and intellectual abilities that will enrich their lives and enable them
to contribute to further progress in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;