* 0215930
* SBIR Phase II:   Nonintrusive Species Specific Velocimeter
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Allen Flusberg, Science Research Laboratory Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2005
* USD 499,158.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop a
passive, nonintrusive species-specific velocimeter (SSV) that simultaneously
measures spatially resolved velocities of multiple species in a flame, sorting
the information by species and spatial scale size. The SSV will be geared to
spatially resolve the mixing and chemical dynamics occurring within flames, and
to track these effects in real time. No instruments are available that can make
such measurements passively and non-invasively in a com-pact geometry. The SSV
will play a critical role in a novel deposition process, combustion chemical
vapor deposition (CCVD). CCVD is a continuous open-air deposition process that
is targeting a wide spectrum of thin-film-coating markets, including
electronics, glass, anti-corrosives, superconductors, catalytics, polymers, and
nanopowders. Phase 1 demonstrated feasibility by measuring spatially resolved,
species-specific CCVD flame velocities on different spatial scales. Phase 2 will
be a proof-of-principal program to (1) construct an engineering prototype, (2)
demonstrate the correlation between SSV data and bottom-line CCVD film
properties, and (3) design an SSV-based CCVD controller that can be fabricated
economically and commercialized in a privately funded&lt;br/&gt; This technology
will facilitate smart deposition that streamlines the reliability of CCVD.
Incorporated into a CCVD system, the SSV will become the central element of a
feedback control module that maintains the consistency of the flame and
maximizes deposition efficiency. The commercial market for this technology
generates about $50 million annually. This project addresses the interest in
advanced control techniques for manufacturing. It supports the development of
improved and more reliable coatings that will enhance technology and lower the
cost of many common products, e.g. electronic memory devices in computers,
appliances, and automobiles.&lt;br/&gt;