* 0215652
* NSF Workshop on Population Connectivity in Marine Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2007
* Robert Cowen, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/2007
* USD 132,942.00

A central goal of marine ecology is to achieve a mechanistic understanding of
the factors,, regulating the abundance and distribution of marine populations.
With such an understanding, it should be possible to generate theory capable of
predicting the effects of changes in physical and biological parameters on the
dynamics of these populations. A critical component of the above goal is to
quantify rates of exchange, or connectivity, among subpopulations of marine
organisms. We have, however, little more than a rudimentary understanding of the
spatial scales over which marine populations are connected by larval dispersal.
This lack of knowledge represents a fundamental obstacle to any comprehensive
understanding of the population dynamics of marine organisms. Furthermore, a
lack of spatial context that such information would provide has limited the
ability of fisheries scientists to evaluate the design and potential benefits of
novel management strategies such as marine protected areas
(MPAs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent community debate identified marine
population connectivity as a key question in biological oceanography: Over what
spatial scales are marine populations connected via dispersal of early fife
stages? The report noted that the inability to accurately predict dispersal
makes it impossible to determine the effect of climate change and/or human
exploitation on marine ecosystems. Thus, there is a clear need for an
interdisciplinary effort to address this issue and the consequential need for
programmatic funding in support of this effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considering
the significance and scale of this problem and the obvious need for an
integrated, interdisciplinary approach, a workshop will be held
to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Develop an appropriate Science Action Plan, and
&lt;br/&gt;2) Estimate resource needs to successfully execute this
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will draw scientists from across the
broad biological and physical oceanographic community, with additional
representation, as needed, from other disciplines, especially those capable of
providing unique methodologies applicable to the resolution of this problem. The
workshop will enable scientists from all relevant disciplines to be involved in
the planning of this scientific agenda to ensure compatibility of spatial and
temporal scales in sampling strategies and model development.&lt;br/&gt;