* 0215887
* MRI:  Multisensory Human Interaction Measurement and Synthesis for Computer Graphics and Interactive Virtual Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Dimitris Metaxas, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 06/30/2005
* USD 259,598.00

EIA-0215887&lt;br/&gt;Pai, Dinesh&lt;br/&gt;DeCarlo, Douglas
M.&lt;br/&gt;Mataxas, Dimitris N.&lt;br/&gt;Nguyen, Thu D.&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers
University - New Brunswick &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI: Multisensory Human
Interaction Measurement and Synthesis for Computer Graphics and Interactive
Virtual Environments &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal, measuring multisensory
human interaction with everyday objects and with other humans, develops an
integrated facility in which it will be possible to acquire synchronized
measurements of visual, auditory, and haptic behavior with low latency. The work
includes measuring motion at up to 250Hz using a marker-based motion capture
system, acquiring dense range images, recording speech and contact sounds, and
measuring forces and pressure distributions due to human contact. The facility
will make a broad range of research activity possible. Multisensory models of
objects will be developed; it will then be possible not only to see images of a
virtual object, but to feel its stiffness and surface texture using a force
feedback haptic device, and to hear its sound when hit. Multisensory models of
human conversational behavior will be developed by tracking lip and arm
movements at the same time as recording voice. "Interaction capture" will extend
motion capture, the current state of the art for realistic computer animation.
Hence, it will be possible to not only transfer and transform the motion of an
animated character, but also the forces and sounds produced when the character
interacts with the world. Moreover, the computing infrastructure needed to
support interaction will be investigated. Multisensory interaction imposes new
constraints on system behavior, particularly latency, and could lead to new
designs of computer operating systems and communication networks. The
instrumentation will enable more students to be educated about multisensory
simulation and interaction, and to use multisensory environments in new ways to
stimulate learning and discovery. Funds are requested for&lt;br/&gt;1. Sensor
systems for interaction and measurement,&lt;br/&gt;2. Acoustical environment of
experiment,&lt;br/&gt;3. Audiovisual displays, and&lt;br/&gt;4.
Computing.&lt;br/&gt;