* 0215914
* SBIR Phase II:  Focused Beam Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis Using Doubly-Curved Crystals
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Zewu Chen, X-RAY OPTICAL SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 07/31/2006
* USD 999,696.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to meet
the demand from the microelectronics industry for improved wafer contamination
analysis. Wafer contamination control is critical for Ultra Large Scale
Integrated (ULSI) technology and there is a strong demand for a non-destructive
analytical tool with improved sensitivity and spatial resolution over the
conventional total x-ray fluorescence (TXRF) method. A new technique, focused
beam TXRF, can meet this important market need. Based on point-focusing toroidal
crystal optics, focused beam TXRF will improve the spatial resolution by a
factor of more than 100 and provide 30 times better detection sensitivity for
local contaminants on Si as compared to the conventional TXRF method. This
technique also has potential for low-level Al, Na and other low Z elements
analysis on Si that cannot be addressed effectively by the conventional TXRF and
other techniques. In this project, preliminary focused beam TXRF data will be
collected using WL1 excitation provided by a toroidal Si (220) crystal to
demonstrate the improvement of sensitivity and resolution for transition metal
detection. Theoretical calculation will be also carried out to determine the
feasibility for Al and Na detection for wafer contamination control at 10^ 9 to
10^10 atoms/cm^2 level.

Focused beam TXRF analysis has commercial applications in the microelectronics
industry for wafer contamination control including localized and homogeneous
contaminants with high resolution. These contaminants include many important
elements such as transition metals, Al, Na and other low Z elements. By being
able to identify these contaminants, the quality of silicon wafers can be
improved. This will be a tremendous cost savings to a multi-billion dollar
industry.