* 0215816
* SBIR Phase II:  High Rate Synthesis of Highly Reactive Solvated Metal Atom Dispersion Nanoparticles
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2004
* Slawomir Winecki, NANOSCALE MATERIALS INC
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2004
* USD 499,959.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project focuses on the
development and implementation of a Solvated Metal Atom Dispersion (SMAD)
technique to support high rate production and commercial application of metal
nanoparticle materials. Synthesis of gold and silver nanoparticle colloids for
commercial use in the health care industry will be pursued as part of the
proposed effort; the SMAD synthesis method will be optimized for commercial-
scale manufacturing of gold and silver colloids. This approach yields high
purity colloids, free of unwanted byproducts and ready for further processing
without the cumbersome purification steps characteristic of other synthesis
methods. This innovation significantly simplifies the manufacturing process of
colloidal products and reduces production cost. The proprietary digestive-
ripening step will be scaled up and developed to achieve monodispersion and
particle size control of the metal nanoparticles contained in the colloids.
Methods for transferring solvent-based colloids into an aqueous environment will
be developed. Synthesis steps involved in the manufacturing of colloidal gold
and silver will be integrated in a semi-continuous or continuous process. The
commercial potential of this project will be for immunological labeling and DNA
detection using the colloidal gold solutions. The project offers an alternative-
manufacturing route that significantly lowers the cost. Silver-based colloids
have potential applications in burn wound treatment or as effective
disinfectants and anti-inflammatory agents. The development of SMAD technology
will enable high-volume manufacturing of many nanoparticle materials whose
availability is currently limited by production inefficiencies. These
nanomaterials will support future technologies in industry and find application
in both commercial and academic research, as highly reactive catalytic
materials, magnetic information storage media, ferrofluids, and magnetic
tracers.