* 0215367
* Development of Parameterizations of Aerosol/Cloud Interactions and Assessment of Their Potential Climatic Impacts
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2005
* William Cotton, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/2005
* USD 501,864.00

This is a modeling-based investigation of the interactions of clouds and
aerosols and the effects of these interactions on cloud dynamics, precipitation,
and radiative transfer. It is an extension of a recent study of the cloudy
boundary layer, based on what is called the assumed probability density function
(PDF) method. Within every computational grid box of the cloud model, it is
assumed that the joint probability of vertical velocity, potential temperature,
and liquid water content satisfies a parametric form such as the multivariate
Gaussian. Large-eddy simulation (LES) provides information on the small-scale
variability of these quantities, enabling the estimation of the parameters of
the distribution. The cloud model predicts the development in time of the mean
values of the quantities in the grid boxes and the PDF model characterizes the
subgrid-scale variability. In this project, the previous work will be extended
to include precipitation processes and the estimation of the effects of variable
concentrations of cloud condensation nuclei and ice forming nuclei on the
microphysical, dynamic, and radiative properties of clouds. The feasibility of
applying the technique to large cumulonimbus clouds (deep convection) will be
investigated. Sensitivity studies will determine the extent to which changes in
aerosol characteristics can affect the clouds and influence regional climate.