* 0215808
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for Development of Reliable Technologies for Harsh Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Richard Wells, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 07/31/2005
* USD 290,280.00

Competitively awarded support for University of Idaho (UI) research
&lt;br/&gt;has steadily grown from $35 million in FY'96 to $63 million in
FY'01.&lt;br/&gt;This increase is due, in part, to the research activities of
several&lt;br/&gt;multidisciplinary research institutes and groups. For example,
UI's&lt;br/&gt;NASA Grand Challenge team provided the top-ranking concept
for&lt;br/&gt;detecting extraterrestrial life. This concept would be
accomplished&lt;br/&gt;in space using microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)
technology. At&lt;br/&gt;present, UI simply does not have the capabilities
needed to implement&lt;br/&gt;and test MEMS designs in their own laboratories
for reliability in&lt;br/&gt;harsh environments. In addition, UI researchers are
conducting other&lt;br/&gt;projects expected to result in a miniaturized tandem
mass spectrometer&lt;br/&gt;system, miniature resonators, micro pumps,
autonomous vehicle guidance&lt;br/&gt;systems, magnetic random access memories,
and magnetic films for small &lt;br/&gt;monolithic microwave integrated
circuits. All of these research activities&lt;br/&gt;will benefit from the added
capabilities requested through the Major&lt;br/&gt;Research Instrumentation
Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; As a result of current progress in funded
research projects, and with&lt;br/&gt;the support of the university's
administration, the PIs seek to acquire&lt;br/&gt;instruments to fabricate,
test, and evaluate the robustness of new&lt;br/&gt;technologies. This request
includes a plasma enhanced chemical vapor&lt;br/&gt;deposition system, an e-beam
evaporator, a vibration / shock table, a&lt;br/&gt;thermal vacuum chamber, and a
laser vibrometer. Acquisition of these&lt;br/&gt;instruments will also provide
more opportunities to integrate research&lt;br/&gt;training with graduate and
undergraduate education. The University of&lt;br/&gt;Idaho is requesting
approximately $290,000 from the National Science&lt;br/&gt;Foundation from a
total project cost of over $611,000. This equipment&lt;br/&gt;will add
significant capabilities to their region by complementing&lt;br/&gt;existing
equipment at neighboring Washington State University and by&lt;br/&gt;providing
research equipment that is currently unavailable in the
inland&lt;br/&gt;Northwest. It will also provide additional opportunities for
participants&lt;br/&gt;in Idaho's HOIST program (Helping Orient Indian Students
and Teachers to&lt;br/&gt;Science and Technology) to get hands-on experience in
engineering&lt;br/&gt;research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project will be
managed by experienced PIs who will use proven&lt;br/&gt;instrument management
approach to ensure efficient operation and&lt;br/&gt;maintenance of the
equipment. A qualified engineering technician will&lt;br/&gt;assist them. The
equipment will be housed within a single building on&lt;br/&gt;the main UI
campus, and this MRI award will receive full administrative&lt;br/&gt;support
from the Director and staff of the UI Microelectronics Research&lt;br/&gt;and
Communications Institute.