* 0215994
* IMR:  Acquisition of Modern Gel Permeation Chromatography Instrumentation for the Butler Polymer Research Laboratory
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Randolph Duran, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 140,700.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports the
University of Florida with the acquisition of of a gel permeation chromatography
(GPC) instrument equipped with four detectors and high temperature capability to
provide molecular weight information on a number of new polymers being
developed. The projects span the range of modeling conventional polyolefins, to
conjugated and electroactive polymers with especially low oxidation potentials,
to examining the structure of highly organized core-shell polymers. The
instrument is based on a Waters high temperature GPC, capable of making
measurements at temperatures up to 150 degrees C, and possessing an array of
detection systems (UV/Vis, refractive index, light scattering, and differential
viscometry) assembled from three vendors: Waters Corporation, Wyatt Technology
Corporation, and Viscotek Corporation. Several NSF initiated or funded research
in polymers science will benefit from using the instrument. In addition 40-50
undergraduate students, graduate students (including two NSF Graduate Research
Fellows) and postdocs present at any one time in the Butler Laboratory will
attain training on this instrumentation. Researchers from other Departments in
the Center for Macromolecular Science and Engineering (especially Materials
Science) will use the facility. Further, Professor Duran leads an NSF/REU site
with strong ties to France, and each of the faculty members directs REU students
through this. %%% The research team that operates out of the Butler Polymer
Research Laboratory at the University of Florida, will acquire instrumentation
to measure the size (so called molecular weight) of the large polymeric
molecules with which they work. The instrument is a gel permeation
chromatography (GPC) instrument and will be fully equipped for modern research
capability. The projects span studies of conventional polyolefins (e.g.
polyethylene), to conjugated and electrically conducting polymers, to examining
the structure of polymers for colloids. The instrument will be based on a Waters
high temperature GPC possessing an array of detection systems assembled from
three vendors: Waters Corporation, Wyatt Technology Corporation, and Viscotek
Corporation. NSF initiated or funded research that will benefit from using the
proposed instrument includes projects to make new plastics, polymers for drug
release, polymers to make all-organic displays, and polymers for biological and
chemical sensors. In addition 40-50 undergraduate students, graduate students
(including two NSF Graduate Research Fellows) and postdocs present at any one
time in the Butler Laboratory who will recieve training on this instrumentation.
Researchers from other Departments in the Center for Macromolecular Science and
Engineering (especially Materials Science) will use the facility. Further,
Professor Duran leads an NSF/REU site with strong ties to France, and each of
the faculty members directs REU students through this.