* 0215738
* Development of a Spatial-Experimental Laboratory for Research and Policy Analysis Related to Complex Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2008
* Tom Evans, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 847,874.00

This proposal aims to develop a unique combination of state-of-the-art spatial,
visualization, and experimental capabilities within a behavioral science
research laboratory facility at Indiana University. The laboratory will be
multi-purpose, with a focus on understanding complex systems at multiple
temporal and geographic scales. It will contribute to both research and
instruction. The laboratory will enable the development of new capabilities for
spatially organized agent-based modeling, three-dimensional (3-D) visualization
of social systems, multi-user 3-D virtual desktop worlds, as well as the
implementation of behavioral experiments and GIS technologies in social science
research. The research group proposing this set of development activities is
multi-disciplinary with strong records of field and laboratory research in
anthropology, economics, geography, information science, political science, and
psychology. An important aspect of the proposed laboratory facility is to
provide the infrastructure for fostering stronger linkages among the researchers
involved in this proposal. It will create opportunities for enlarging the
community of scholars and students at Indiana University interested in frontier
social science that incorporates spatial attributes of decision environments
important for understanding human and biological dimensions of social,
political, and economic decision making. The laboratory will enable faculty and
students to participate in the testing of current social science theories with
computer-simulated, agent-based systems as well as the tools of laboratory
decision-making experiments in controlled environments. Based on the research
conducted in this laboratory, we hope to develop new theories of how complex
individual interactions over space and time lead to emergent properties in
complex social-ecological systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed laboratory
will facilitate the productivity and breadth of several ongoing and future
activities: (1) a recently funded biocomplexity project integrating agent-based
modeling, laboratory experiments, and GIS technologies into the study of complex
land-use decisions and emergent land-use patterns; (2) research on networks of
political communication related to the accessibility of political attitudes,
orientations, and judgments; (3) investigation of resource allocation decision
making under risk and uncertainty; (4) multi-agent experiments in the
laboratory, in the field, and at multiple sites; (5) the incorporation of GIS
technologies into social science research integrating key incentive and outcome
effects; (6) creation of artificial 3-D environments for experimental research
and policy applications; (7) paleoanthropological research on human evolution;
(8) international relations; and (9) education and outreach. &lt;br/&gt;