* 0215461
* Laboratory in Comparative Ethnic Processes (LiCEP): Formal and Empirical Approaches to Ethnic Mobilization -- series of workshops
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2007
* David Laitin, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2007
* USD 93,579.00

The Laboratory in Comparative Ethnic Processes (LiCEP) will conduct four
biannual workshops on the theme of ethnic mobilization, nationalism and civil
war. LiCEP is an inter-university research group that seeks to improve our
understanding of the causes and consequences of ethnic mobilization through the
systematic cross examination of formal theoretical models and empirical
evidence.&lt;br/&gt;The substantive questions that LiCEP explores include: What
are the conditions under which individuals participate in ethnic as opposed to
non-ethnic collective action? What are the conditions that lead to large-scale
rebellions against the state? When and why do inter-ethnic riots occur? How are
inter- ethnic relations renegotiated in the aftermath of civil violence? What
are the conditions under which ethnic mobilization takes the more "routine"
forms in the form of ethnic voting and party formation? What is the impact that
different forms of ethnic mobilization have on policy-making and processes of
state consolidation? And how does ethnic mobilization interact with the process
of identity formation itself? &lt;br/&gt;The principal goals of the workshops
are to evaluate lab-generated datasets, reverse engineer statistical, formal and
agent-based models, and bring formal models into more direct interaction with
empirical evidence. &lt;br/&gt;