* 0215673
* The Digital Human: Towards a Unified Ontology for Biomedical Modeling and Simulation
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Gerald Higgins, Federation of American Scientists
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,913.00

EIA-0215673&lt;br/&gt;Gerald A Higgins&lt;br/&gt;Federation of American
Scientists&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Digital Human: Towards Unified Ontology for
Biomedical Modeling and Simulation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is
bringing together researchers from a variety of disciplines to develop a unified
ontology for biomedical modeling and simulation. The goal is to develop an
ontology that can specify both lower-level cellular models and higher-level
tissue, organ and systems models in a manner that is most useful for modeling
and simulation. The workshop is organized to specify requirements for the
ontology, based on existing models such as the Digital Anatomist Foundation
Model of Rosse et al and the emerging BioSPICE ontology. An initial draft of a
unified ontology that extends from gross anatomy to cellular components and a
detailed plan for converting this draft into a system that can be widely
accepted by the research community and can serve as the basis for developing
interoperable simulations and other representations of these systems is in
preparation. The draft is being prepared by the principle investigators
supported by graduate students and post-doctoral fellows, prior to the workshop
that will provide an in-depth peer review of the proposed ontology and the plan
for next steps&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A final document being generated by the
participants will be a concrete action plan for establishing a framework though
which existing ontologies may be unified, expanded and enhanced. As a result,
unification of cell-organ ontologies is enhancing the ability of researchers and
developers to prepare interoperable simulation models in biomedicine, leading to
advancement of our understanding of multiple levels of biological structure and
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;