* 0215747
* Nitric Oxide and Oxygen Delivery Among Tibetans
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Irving Kushner, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jean E. Turnquist
* 01/31/2008
* USD 185,398.00

This project will investigate a newly proposed mechanism by which humans can
adapt to life in an extreme environment. Tibetans have lived at high altitudes
for millennia and have been demonstrated to possess a number of adaptations for
dealing with life on the Tibetan Plateau and in the Himalayan Mountains. The
proposed research is designed to test the hypothesis that the high levels of
exhaled nitric oxide produced by Tibetan high-altitude natives are responses
that improve functional capacity in their environment where there are fewer
oxygen molecules in every breath, a situation called high-altitude hypoxia.
Based on the known effects of nitric oxide, it is hypothesized that high levels
of nitric oxide in the lungs helps in two ways. First, it may offset the high-
altitude hypoxia by enabling the extraction of a larger proportion of the oxygen
in the inspired air. Second, it may improve oxygen delivery by increasing blood
flow throughout the body. The recent finding that high-altitude native Tibetans
exhale more than twice as much nitric oxide as sea-level natives at sea level
requires explanation because a large body of evidence predicts less, rather than
more, synthesis of nitric oxide under hypoxic conditions. The consistent finding
of high pulmonary nitric oxide in both Tibetan and Andean indigenous high-
altitude populations suggests an adaptive, beneficial function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The hypotheses will be tested with a sample of 91 high-
altitude natives of the Tibet Autonomous Region living at 4200m (~ 14,000')
altitude. The study participants will be healthy, not pregnant, non-smokers,
18-55 years of age. The concentration of nitric oxide in exhaled breath will be
measured and it is expected that there will be a wide range of variation
including values two to three times higher than those found at sea level. The
hypothesis of greater oxygen extraction will be tested by measuring the
difference in the percent of oxygen in inspired air (20.9%) and exhaled air (to
be measured). The hypothesis of greater blood flow will be tested noninvasively
by quantifying blood flow in the lungs and in the forearm. The anticipated
outcome is a positive association between exhaled nitric oxide and oxygen
extraction, pulmonary blood flow, forearm blood flow at rest and in response to
exercise and in response to breathing 50% oxygen (without the stress of
hypoxia). These findings would indicate that Tibetan highlanders use elevated
nitric oxide in the lungs to offset high-altitude hypoxia and to deliver
adequate oxygen to body tissues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Pulmonary nitric oxide
appears central to understanding human adaptation to high altitude and hypoxia.
Nitric oxide biology has implications for explaining how Tibetan high-altitude
natives can achieve sea-level values for necessary biological processes that
require oxygen, such as basal metabolism and physical work capacity, although
they live in an environment where ambient oxygen is severely limited relative to
sea level. The Tibetan case contributes to basic knowledge of nitric oxide
biology because healthy people produce amounts that would be considered
pathological at sea level. The proposed research contributes new knowledge to a
central question in physical anthropology: the causes and consequences of human
biological variation. The significance of the proposed research lies in
improving understanding of how people adjust to life with hypoxia. It directly
investigates why the Tibetan population inhabiting a stressful, high-altitude
environment has very distinctive biological features and also has implications
for understanding the responses of sea-level visitors to altitude whether they
are vacationers in the Rockies or military personnel serving in mountainous
areas, and for understanding the pathophysiology of patients with diseases that
cause hypoxia . &lt;br/&gt;