* 0215211
* SBIR Phase I:  Ytterbium-Doped Stoichiometric Lithium Niobate for Self-Frequency Conversion Lasers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Barry Wechsler, NOVA PHASE INC
* Standard Grant
* Winslow L. Sargeant
* 12/31/2002
* USD 99,954.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the potential of new sources of laser radiation based on ytterbium (Yb) doped
stoichiometric lithium niobate (SLN) crystals. The Yb-doped SLN crystal will
serve as both the laser and nonlinear frequency converter to enable the
production of a broad range of wavelengths in a simple, compact device. As an
active lasing ion, Yb has the advantages of efficient diode pumping, low thermal
loading, and minimal reabsorption of laser radiation. This laser radiation can
be converted to various wavelengths of interest via nonlinear optical effects
that are intrinsic to lithium niobate. Recent developments in quasi-phase
matching techniques in lithium niobate have increased both the efficiency and
range of wavelengths that can be generated by nonlinear optical frequency
conversion. The use of stoichiometric lithium niobate over conventional
congruent lithium niobate leads to greater ease in fabrication of quasi-phase
matched structures via electric field poling, and higher power handling
capabilities. The combined advantages of Yb lasing, quasi-phase matched
frequency conversion, and fabrication and power handling of SLN in one single
crystal will enable the realization of new sources of laser radiation at
wavelengths not currently available. This will make possible new lasers
characterized by lightweight, compact construction, efficient operation, and
spectral versatility.

Commercial applications include the development of eye safe lasers for non-
laboratory environments such as range finders, laser surveying and mapping, and
pollution monitoring. Significant medical applications also may exist.