* 0215436
* Effects of Geographic Distance, Landscape Features and Host Adaptations on Genetic Differentiation Among Populations of a Checkerspot Butterfly: An Integrative Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Michael Singer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/2006
* USD 194,700.00

The investigators propose to use a combination of behavioral, ecological and
genetic techniques to understand the development of genetic differentiation
among populations of a butterfly species, Euphydryas editha. One outcome of this
study will be an analysis of past and current movement patterns of these
butterflies among habitats of different types. The investigators will ask
whether and to what extent the movements of insects among habitats depend on the
distance between those habitats, the nature of the landscape in the intervening
terrain, and the adaptations of the insects to particular host plant
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant-feeding insects possess sophisticated
behavioral mechanisms for choosing their hosts, that is, the plants on which
they feed. Understanding of the basic biology of these mechanisms is important
in several contexts. It assists humans in tracking and predicting the changes of
diet that insects undergo, changes that are involved in the transformation of
innocuous insects to crop pests. It also helps in assessment and manipulation of
the quality of habitats for endangered insect species. This is because insects
that are introduced to a restored habitat will leave if they are not
sufficiently attracted to the plants that are present. The proposed work
includes populations that are closely related to a federally endangered sub-
species, and will assess how the food preferences of these insects should
influence plans for habitat restoration and conservation.&lt;br/&gt;