* 0215356
* MRI:  Acquisition of Computing and Peripheral Hardware to Support Collaborative Research and Research Education in Imaging and Information Visualization
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Ikhlas Abdel-Qader, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2006
* USD 243,130.00

EIA-0215356&lt;br/&gt;Ikhlas Abdel-Qader&lt;br/&gt;Bradley
Bazuin&lt;br/&gt;Karlis Kaugars&lt;br/&gt;Abhay Sharma&lt;br/&gt;Li
Yang&lt;br/&gt;Western Michigan University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI/RUI
Acquisition of Computing and Peripheral Hardware to Support Collaborative
Research and Research Education in Imaging and Information
Visualization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal from a RUI institution,
developing an Ethernet-Based imaging and visualization infrastructure, supports
interdisciplinary research projects that span a variety of application areas
such as Information Visualization, Imaging Science, Color Analysis, Time-Varying
Images, and Real-Time Image Processing. The laboratory, consisting of one
server, multiple workstations, associated cameras, frame grabbers, output
devices, and selected network and image processing software, will be bridged to
existing departmental, college, and campus networks, and will be used to
accomplish the following goals:&lt;br/&gt; Expand research investigations
advancing image processing and information visualization,&lt;br/&gt; Encourage
interdisciplinary research, research training, and educational
activities,&lt;br/&gt; Increase industrial collaboration adding a real world
problem environment,&lt;br/&gt; Support graduate and undergraduate instruction
in related courses such as Pattern Recognition, Computer Graphics, and Digital
Imaging, and&lt;br/&gt; Attract women and minority groups at both graduate and
undergraduate levels to pursue research projects.&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure
will service the following projects within three research groups:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Information Visualization and Data Mining Group&lt;br/&gt;A. Visual Exploration
and Mining of Large Relational Datasets&lt;br/&gt;B. Algorithm
Visualization&lt;br/&gt;C. Interactive Document Management&lt;br/&gt;D.
Visualization of Association Rules&lt;br/&gt;2. Image Visualization, Color
Measurement, and Color Analysis Group&lt;br/&gt;A. Color Reproduction in Digital
Imaging&lt;br/&gt;B. Fundamental Analysis of CCD Imaging Systems Using Fourier
Theory&lt;br/&gt;3. Real-Time Image Processing and Pattern Recognition
Group&lt;br/&gt;A. Utilizing Wavelets for Target Tracking&lt;br/&gt;B. An
Integrated Image Analysis Algorithm from Dynamic Scenes&lt;br/&gt;C. Confocal
Microscopy and Image Analysis in Gamma-Ray Astronomy&lt;br/&gt;D. Wireless
Vision for Intelligent Transportation System&lt;br/&gt;E. Pavement Surface Image
Analysis System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;