* 0215205
* Stimulus-Secretion Coupling Mechanisms for Rapid, Nongenomic Corticosteroid Actions in the Teleost Prolactin Cell Model System
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Gerry Oxford, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2007
* USD 379,297.00

Prolactin has well over 300 known functions in vertebrates. It regulates
virtually every aspect of physiology including osmoregulation, behavior, growth
and metabolism, reproduction and immune function. The diversity and number of
actions of prolactin is paralleled by the complexity with which the hormone is
regulated. The investigators will address the novel mechanisms by which the
steroid, cortisol, rapidly inhibits prolactin release from the pituitary gland
of an important euryhaline food fish, the tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus).
Previously, they showed cortisol acts within minutes to inhibit prolactin
release in tilapia. This discovery as well as others have altered the prevailing
consensus that the effects of steroid hormones are mediated solely through their
ability to alter the expression of genes, a process that typically requires
hours or days to occur. Over the past decade it has become increasingly apparent
that all classes of steroids rapidly regulate various organ systems. Cortisol
and other glucocorticoids modulate hormone secretion, neuronal excitability,
behavior, cell morphology, and carbohydrate metabolism in various vertebrates
within seconds or minutes. Unlike other classes of steroids, however, most rapid
glucocorticoid actions produce inhibitory responses. Despite abundant evidence
for rapid glucocorticoid effects, the cell-signaling mechanisms mediating their
actions are poorly understood. This is due, in part, to the inherent difficulty
of studying inhibitory rather than stimulatory responses and the lack of
suitable, native model systems to address the cell biology underlying rapid
glucocorticoid actions. Over mammals and other vertebrates, fishes present an
important advantage for the study of prolactin cell function--prolactin cells
are segregated as a nearly homogenous mass that is easily separated for study.
Prolactin baseline secretory activity can be easily manipulated to study
potentially important stimulators and inhibitors of prolactin cell function and
the cell-signaling pathways that mediate their action. The investigators show
cortisol acts at the membrane, independent of gene expression to rapidly inhibit
prolactin release by reducing two cellular messengers, cAMP and calcium. These
actions may occur through a specific high-affinity pituitary membrane receptor,
and involve reductions in voltage-gated calcium channel activity and influx of
extracellular calcium. Studies also demonstrate the steroid may directly act at
the membrane to suppress phospholipase C, an enzyme critical to regulating
cellular calcium in vertebrates. In the present proposal, four specific
objectives will address in further detail the mechanisms mediating rapid,
nongenomic effects of cortisol, including several components never previously
explored in vertebrates. The first objective will address the type of receptor
that cortisol may bind to rapidly modulate prolactin secretion. The second will
examine whether the steroid acts to rapidly alter the membrane electrical
properties of prolactin cells to reduce voltage-sensitive calcium channels
either directly or through increasing potassium ion conductances across the cell
membrane. The third aim will test whether cortisol inhibits phospholipase C
activity, inositol triphosphate production, calcium release from intracellular-
sensitive pools, and activity of protein kinases in events that lead to rapid
reductions in prolactin release. The fourth objective will explore whether the
steroid might rapidly modify growth factor signaling to regulate prolactin
release. These studies will employ a combination of methods to study cell-
signaling, including both cell and tissue culture, pharmacological
manipulations, bioimaging, hormone receptor-binding, immunoassays and
electrophysiology. Completion of the proposed studies will advance the knowledge
of rapid, nongenomic actions of steroids. This is a new and growing discipline
in the field of endocrinology, regulatory biology and medicine. Specifically,
the research should lead to development of a comprehensive model describing the
signaling pathways mediating rapid actions of a "stress hormone" known to
influence, and possibly impair, several physiological processes including
memory, behavior, reproduction, and immune function. As cortisol and prolactin
exert opposing actions on hydromineral balance in fish, the detailed workings
underlying osmoregulation, an ancient and universal process critical to
physiological adaptation, will also be advanced.