* 0215522
* Corporate Citizenship and Local-Global Alliances: A Case From Ciudad Juarez
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Melissa Wright, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 08/31/2004
* USD 110,000.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
PROGRAM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RESEARCH
AWARD&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BCS-0215522&lt;br/&gt;Melissa
Wright&lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania State University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Economic
globalization proceeds through a dynamic co-ordination between global economic
activities and the localized, non-market relationships found in civil society.
Nevertheless, even as more scholars emphasize the significance of local civic
institutions for global economic processes, the dominant views articulated in
globalization studies recreate the bias that global entities are immune to the
influence of local institutions. This bias is particularly found in the
literature on multinational firms, which frequently are portrayed as
globalization's principal agents, operating beyond the influence of local
practices. As a result, such studies fail to consider how local organizations
affect multinational corporations and their impact around the world. This
research project will investigate how multinational firms and local non-profit
organizations establish common ground for action through the creation of joint
civic projects. These projects fall under the rubric of "corporate citizenship",
which is a concept increasingly employed by corporations to describe their
funding for and reliance upon local civic institutions to meet their human
resource and technology needs. Despite the proliferation of references to
"corporate citizenship" in the business press, this concept remains understudied
and its meaning for the local civic domain is virtually unexplored. The research
will be carried out in a two-year case study in Ciudad Juarez (Mexico). Three
sets of questions guide the research: 1) How do corporate requirements for human
resources and technological development contribute to the exercise of corporate
citizenship in Ciudad Juarez? 2) How do local interpretations of gender and
nationality mediate the formation of the corporate-civic alliances that
constitute the practice of corporate citizenship? 3) How do these alliances
affect the institutional practices and objectives of their participating
organizations? Ciudad Juarez has been chosen as the study are for several
reasons. It is the birthplace of the maquiladora industry (the export-processing
factories in Mexico) and is representative of many Third World industrial
enclaves where multinational firms seek to upgrade the labor force and social
infrastructure through civic activity. The city's export-processing maquiladora
industry has increased its civic participation with educational and community-
based organizations over the last five years. This increased corporate activity
in the Ciudad Juarez civic sector mirrors a global trend in the expansion of
multinational corporate citizenship across Third World regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate not only what decision-makers
in the corporate and civic sectors are doing, but also how their motives change
through interaction with other organizations and how such changes affect the
behavior of their institutions. The research methods, therefore, are qualitative
and involve both open-ended interviews and participant observation. The
qualitative techniques will be combined with archival research to put the
fieldwork data into a larger theoretical and empirical context. These methods
will investigate how leaders in corporate and non-profit organizations make they
decisions they do, how they implement and modify them and how their stated
intentions sometimes diverge from their actions. While qualitative methods do
not lend themselves to formal hypothesis testing, they will amplify and enrich
the results derived from quantitative investigations that link corporate
behavior with civic action. Further, they will provide valuable insight into
processes touched upon but not investigated by quantitative studies of the
maquiladora industry and its impact on the regional development of Mexico and
the U.S.-Mexico border. &lt;br/&gt;