* 0215374
* Acquisition of an Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectrometer for use in Research, Undergraduate and Graduate Curricula at Brooklyn College
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Richard Magliozzo, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2005
* USD 181,180.00

Abstract to proposal No. 0215374, entitled "Acquisition of an electron
paramagnetic resonance spectrometer for use in research, undergraduate and
graduate curricula at Brooklyn College"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been
awarded to the Department of Chemistry at Brooklyn College of the City
University of New York. The grant will be used toward the purchase of a new EPR
spectrometer to replace a nearly thirty-year old instrument whose function has
seriously deteriorated in the recent past. EPR spectroscopy is a basic
analytical and research tool used to study the properties of systems containing
unpaired electrons. Specifically, the method of EPR spectroscopy will be used to
study 1) the structure and mechanism of a new class of bacterial heme enzyme,
catalase-peroxidase. This enzyme is of key importance in the mechanism of action
of a first-line antibiotic used to treat tuberculosis infection; 2) the
mechanism of a radical enzyme, pyruvate formate-lyase, which provides a simple
model system for analysis of unusual enzymatic reactions; 3) the action and
toxicity in mitochondria of methamphetamine-related compounds; 4) the mechanism
of action of a DNA-cleaving molecule; 5) the molecular structure of materials
used in batteries and also the structure of chemical compounds important in
radioactive waste management; 6) the structure of metalloprotein active sites.
&lt;br/&gt;Several biochemical projects supervised by Prof. Richard S.
Magliozzo, research by auxiliary users from other universities, as well as
chemistry laboratory course curricula in undergraduate and graduate programs at
Brooklyn College of the City University of New York will derive benefit from a
new EPR instrument purchased with support from the NSF. New scientific knowledge
that will be produced during the period of funding will advance the field of
biochemical reaction mechanisms, and will provide insights into the structure
and function of biological and environmental chemicals. Undergraduate and
graduate education at Brooklyn College (the latter consisting of local Master's
Programs in Chemistry and Biochemistry, as well as Ph. D. Programs in the same
two areas coordinated at The Graduate Center of CUNY, New York, NY) will also
derive benefits from this grant. Moreover, the education and training of
undergraduate students from underrepresented minority groups in the sciences,
who participate in local, state and federally funded programs, will be directly
improved by the availability of a new instrument for their research projects at
Brooklyn College. &lt;br/&gt;