* 0215625
* Collaborative Proposal: Measuring the Earth's Lithospheric Deformation Field and Sub-Lithospheric Flow Field
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* William Holt, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 157,051.00

Holt&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0215625&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the course of this project
the investigators plan to construct two important global images that are
directly relevant to mantle dynamics: 1) The strain field within deforming
continental lithosphere and 2) The mantle flow field directly beneath the
lithosphere. The former provides a strong constraint on the allowable physical
mechanisms by which continents deform and evolve, while the latter constitutes
arguably the most direct means of evaluating the coupling of the plate-mantle
system, and the relevant forces that drive both mantle flow and plate motion. As
a way of attacking both problems, they plan to utilize two large but rarely
combined data sets: surface deformation measurements from geology and geodesy,
and mantle deformation measurements from seismic anisotropy. With respect to
lithospheric deformation, they plan to quantify the degree of vertical coherence
of deformation between the surface and lithospheric mantle. This diagnostic
constitutes an effective means of testing a wide variety of deformation models
that predict varying degrees of vertical coherence. High vertical coherence is
expected for models in which the lithosphere deforms like a thin viscous sheet.
Low vertical coherence is expected for models that involve lithospheric
delamination or flow within a weak lower crust. For mantle flow, they will
estimate the sub-lithospheric flow velocity beneath both oceans and continents
in as much of the world as possible. Observations of the surface velocity field,
together with the orientation of mantle azimuthal anisotropy, enable inference
of the mantle flow velocity at the base of the asthenosphere. Two regional
studies have been completed that illustrate both the feasibility of this
approach and its significant potential: in Tibet they have found high vertical
coherence of lithospheric deformation beneath Tibet. If this stands up with
further observations to be made in this project, it will serve to strongly
restrict the range of allowable models for this and similar regions. Second,
they have made the first direct observation of sub-lithospheric mantle flow
velocity beneath western North America, where they find eastward-directed mantle
flow of about 5 cm/yr in a hotspot reference frame. Using these new
observational constraints, the investigators seek to address basic questions
about the sub-lithospheric flow field. Is this flow field fixed in a hotspot
frame or any other reference frame? Alternatively are different subdomains, such
as the various ocean basins characterized by distinct but relatively uniform
flow velocities? Are predicted flow fields driven by deep mantle density
generally compatible with the observed sublithospheric flow field? Do flow
velocities in general require a weak asthenosphere beneath the lithosphere?
While either lithospheric deformation or sub-lithospheric flow may be dominant
within any given region, they will assume that both are contributing as two
distinct layers in general. Their modeling methodology will explicitly account
for this, thus providing the capability for separating these two important
influences in any region.&lt;br/&gt;