* 0215444
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Michael Trosset, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/2005
* USD 39,999.00

Under the SCREMS program, the Department of Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;at the College
of William &amp; Mary will purchase equipment&lt;br/&gt;for the creation of a
computing network dedicated to the&lt;br/&gt;support of research in the
mathematical sciences. The&lt;br/&gt;award will provide funds for high-bandwidth
networking&lt;br/&gt;equipment, high-performance computers for
numerical&lt;br/&gt;calculations, and a file server. This equipment,
together&lt;br/&gt;with desktop machines providing platforms for
smaller&lt;br/&gt;computations, will provide a numerical/file server
cluster&lt;br/&gt;for the faculty investigators and students working on
a&lt;br/&gt;number of research projects. This equipment will be
used&lt;br/&gt;for computationally intensive research projects
spanning&lt;br/&gt;a wide range of applied mathematics. These
include&lt;br/&gt;numerical methods for engineering design,
numerical&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, computational biochemistry, and
operations&lt;br/&gt;research. The projects specifically included in the
grant&lt;br/&gt;are: (1) Efficient approaches to the optimization of
systems&lt;br/&gt;governed by partial differential equations, (2)
distance&lt;br/&gt;parameterized methods for molecular conformation, (3)
a&lt;br/&gt;parallel Hessenberg QR eigenvalue algorithm, and (4)
the&lt;br/&gt;calculation of the exact distribution of the time
to&lt;br/&gt;traverse a stochastic activity network and the
elimination&lt;br/&gt;of resampling error in bootstrapping.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Leemis and two former doctoral students have
written&lt;br/&gt;APPL (A Probability Programming Language). This Maple-
based&lt;br/&gt;language is used to compute probabilities and
perform&lt;br/&gt;operations on random variables. The size of many
problems&lt;br/&gt;that can be solved by APPL is limited by computing
speed.&lt;br/&gt;The speed offered by the hardware obtained as part of
the&lt;br/&gt;SCREMS grant is crucial to solving problems of the
magnitude&lt;br/&gt;encountered in practice.&lt;br/&gt;