* 0215838
* MRI: Acquisition of a Small-Angle X-Ray Scattering Instrument
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Abraham Clearfield, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2004
* USD 400,600.00

This proposal seeks the acquisition of a state-of-the art small-angle X-ray
scattering instrument. The configuration of this instrument, combining a
rotating anode source with two independent cameras, has been carefully designed
around a diverse user community whose interests include protein aggregation,
polymer science, zeolite nucleation, DNA electrophoresis, and colloidal science.
A rotating anode source was chosen due to its high beam intensity, facilitating
analysis of samples that scatter weakly. The dual all-angle/wide-angle (SA/WA)
camera is a robust unit ideally suited for a multi-user instrument. This camera
employs a line source exposing a larger sample volume to the incident beam
subsequently reducing the time needed for data acquisition. The dual SA/WA
camera can be used to study Bragg diffraction for analyzing crystallinity in
polymers and the Kratky optics will allow us to characterize domains up to
approximately 1000 nm in size. The dedicated small-angle camera, though more
specialized, gives us the capability of two-dimensional imaging for samples that
scatter anisotropically (e.g. semicrystalline polymers) and a wide range of
sample-to-detector distances (100-1000 mm), making it possible to observe a wide
range of scattering angles on one camera. The instrument will be located in the
Crystal and Molecular Structure Laboratory (CMSL) in the Chemistry Department
and maintained by the Materials Characterization Facility (MCF). The MCF is
supported by the Colleges of Science and Engineering and the Office of the Vice
President for Research, and both the CMSL and MCF have a well-developed
infrastructure for student training and instrument maintenance. The user
community for this instrument is inherently multidisciplinary, including faculty
from Chemical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemistry, Biology,
Biochemistry and Biophysics, and Medical Biochemistry and Genetics. The common
need of these investigators is to understand structural issues that cannot be
probed with methods such as diffraction or spectroscopy. Specific problems that
will be addressed with this instrument include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
mechanisms of zeolite nucleation and the formation of other complex inorganic
systems made in the presence of organic molecules&lt;br/&gt;2. studies of core-
shell particles and polymer-coated particles in concentrated
systems&lt;br/&gt;3. aggregation behavior of proteins and synthetic biomaterials
in solution&lt;br/&gt;4. in-vitro studies of biological membrane assemblies and
macromolecules&lt;br/&gt;5. determination of pore structures in gels used for
DNA electrophoresis&lt;br/&gt;6. processing-property relationships of amorphous
and semi-crystalline polymers&lt;br/&gt;7. non-destructive analysis of metal
particle formation in dendritic materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument
will positively impact Texas A&amp;M at several levels. It will be a focal point
of several research programs and will give others a new tool for their current
research. The proposed instrument would likely be one of the best laboratory
SAXS instruments in the United States, so it will also enhance our ability to
recruit leading faculty in the areas of polymeric and colloidal science.
Finally, this instrument will positively impact education in two ways. Given the
multi-user nature of this instrument it will be heavily utilized in student
training of both graduates and undergraduates, with approximately 35 students
initially performing research with the instrument. Second, this instrument will
be integrated into a course one of us is developing (D. F. Shantz). As there is
currently not a SAXS instrument on campus, this instrument will fill a large
void in the infrastructure at Texas A&amp;M, with research and education
benefiting.&lt;br/&gt;