* 0215992
* Mechanism of Promoter Escape by RNA Polymerase II
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Arik Dvir, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Lei
* 07/31/2006
* USD 346,998.00

Transcription of protein-coding genes is one of the most fundamental processes
that underlies all life and is a primary mechanism of biological regulation. The
experiments included in this work are designed to provide new insights into the
mechanisms of promoter escape, a critical, early event in the process of gene
transcription by RNA polymerase II. The few initial steps in the process of mRNA
synthesis that precede the completion of promoter escape are characterized by
physical instability of the early RNA polymerase II transcription complex,
formation of abortive transcripts, and strong dependence on ATP cofactor,
downstream DNA, and the DNA-helicase activity of the general transcription
factor TFIIH. Evidence recently obtained in the P.I.'s laboratory indicates that
inhibitory interactions impede the forward movement of the polymerase and cause
its promoter-proximal arrest. These interactions are overcome by the presence of
an ATP cofactor, downstream DNA and the DNA-helicase subunits of the general
transcription factor TFIIH. Dependence on all three cofactors reflects a common
mechanism operating to facilitate promoter escape, and that this mechanism is
continuously needed through the addition of the first 14-15 nucleotides to
nascent RNA transcripts. At the transition between promoter escape and the
elongation stage of transcription, it is expected that protein-protein and
protein-DNA interactions will be disrupted or adjusted, leading to the release
of some of the general transcription factors that are required for the early
transcription complex. The focus of this project is to further explore this
hypothetical view of early transcription by RNA polymerase II and its underlying
mechanism. The studies include (i) tracking functional and physical changes in
the early elongation complex, with particular emphasis on TFIIH and CTD
phosphorylation, (ii) identifying polypeptides involved in inhibitory
interactions during promoter escape, and (iii) determining the role of specific
downstream promoter sequences in the efficiency of promoter escape. To pursue
these goals, all the experiments will be carried out using the in vitro system
assembled from highly purified polypeptide components, providing the controlled
conditions in which the contributions of individual cofactors to rate-limiting
steps can be evaluated. The experiments included in this work will enhance our
understanding of the fundamental mechanisms of transcription that are applicable
to all protein-coding genes in eukaryotic systems. The studies will also provide
information necessary to identify possible targets for cellular regulatory
mechanisms within the basal transcription machinery.