* 0215792
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Low Cost Technology for High-Performance Integrated Microcombustor/Evaporator
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Lev Tuchinskiy, Materials and Electrochemical Research Corporation (MER)
* Standard Grant
* Deepak G. Bhat
* 07/31/2006
* USD 643,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is aimed at the
continued development of novel microscale combustors/evaporators, which are
intended for evaporation of fuel and water in fuel reformers as well as for
personal portable heating and cooling systems. The general objective of the
Phase II program is to optimize and scale up a technology for microchannel
combustor/evaporators demonstrated in the Phase I and to develop a compact
device, which could generate at least 25- 30 watts of thermal energy per square
centimeter of heat transfer area and transfer that energy to fluid with
efficiency greater than 85 percent. Innovative fabrication technology and a new
microreactor concept were combined to create a highly efficient device, which
uses hydrogen or hydrocarbon fuel combustion for heating and/or boiling working
fluids. Conditions of heat transfer and combustion of hydrogen and methane in
microchannel combustor/evaporators will be determined and optimal design of the
microscale device will be established.

Potential commercial applications include lightweight, safe and high performance
microcombustors for microturbines, man-portable microheaters for cold climates,
man portable cooling microsystems for hot climates, on-board fuel processors for
hydrogen generation, distributed space conditioning of buildings, etc.
Utilization of microchannel combustor/evaporators for these applications will
result in increase of energy efficiency, reduction of air pollution and
enhancement of life quality.