* 0215868
* Acquisition of ESEM for Soil Liquefaction Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Farshad Amini, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2006
* USD 192,900.00

Research equipment will be provided for new experimental research in the area of
particulate mechanics. With the invention of the environmental scanning electron
microscope (ESEM), it will be possible for the first time to view uncoated wet
samples in their natural states, which will give a clearer insight into the
phenomenon than has not been available previously. The newly manufactured ESEM
will be used to perform advanced research on microstructure features of
liquefaction of layered soils. The particulate materials to be considered are
composed of sand, silt, gravel, and water. The long-term goal of this research
is to provide fundamental understanding of the behavior of stratified silt-sand-
gravel composites under seismic liquefaction conditions at both macroscopic and
microscopic levels. The cyclic behavior of sand-silt-gravel composites is
presently poorly understood, yet these materials are commonly found in alluvial
deposits and hydraulic fill, which have a history of liquefaction during
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research to be accomplished with this
equipment will not only provide a fundamental advancement of modeling of these
stratified soils, but also will provide insight when dealing with high hazard
civil systems such as large dams and other structures. If we could sharpen our
understanding of these materials, we would greatly benefit during earthquake
hazard mitigation process. This equipment will significantly improve the
research capability of the Department of Civil Engineering at Jackson State
University (a minority, and non-Ph.D. granting institution based on the NSF's
definition) in Mississippi. The ESEM, having wide range applications, will also
be used in the scanning microscopy of environmental and biological systems. In
addition, based on agreements with other organizations, the equipment will be
available for their use. The wide range of student activities in this project
and the student exposure to the experiments will significantly enhance the
representation of underrepresented minorities in science and engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program, by modern integration of
research into education, provides research opportunities for students and thus
enhances the existing research integration programs. A rigorous management,
maintenance, and evaluation and assessment plan is implemented to monitor
project development and outcomes, and to ensure the successful implementation of
the project activities. The project activities and results will be disseminated
broadly to enhance scientific and technological understanding. The technology
transfer, outreach programs and procedures will include the continuation of the
existing collaboration with national research laboratories such as the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers Engineering, Research, and Development Center (ERDC)
Waterways Experiment Station (WES), publication of papers in refereed journals,
presentations at the national or international conferences, undergraduate
research presentations at the annual college research seminar, laboratory
demonstration, pre-college outreach program, and the dissemination of the
project activities through the university web site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
expected that this instrumentation acquisition project, by substantially
improving the research and training infrastructure, and by making it available
to wide range of programs, applications, and students, will have a very positive
long-term impact on large numbers of underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;