* 0215731
* MRI: Development of Integrative Instrumentation for A Nation-Wide Power System Frequency Dynamics Monitoring Network
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Yilu Liu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2005
* USD 262,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The characteristics of power system
electromechanical dynamics and oscillations are complex and they are an integral
part of most major system disturbances. Understanding these characteristics is
essential for preventing catastrophic failures and blackouts. Until now, the
complete picture of how the entire US power system behaves during disturbances
is not well understood. Any information we have is from computer simulations
that are subject to model errors and simplifications. Complete models for
nonlinear loads are not available despite the critical roles they play in system
dynamics. Most of all, no model could capture the time varying nature of power
system operational conditions over long time spans. System frequency (and its
rate of change) is one of the most important measures of the electric power
system behavior. Individual frequency measurements made so far are meant for
limited local use and do not have the accuracy and synchronization necessary for
system level analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to develop
instrumentation for a wide-area frequency monitoring network (FNET) with
research focus on power system dynamics measurement, analysis, and control. The
proposed integrative instrumentation has the following unique features: (1)
Phasor Measurement techniques will be used for precise dynamic frequency
calculations, (2) Global Positioning System (UPS) synchronized time pulses will
drive data sampling and time stamps. (3) Nation-wide system frequency
information will be collected from potentially hundreds of sites chosen to
satisfy observability criteria. (4) Internet will facilitate continuous data
collection and results dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;(5) Measurements will be taken
at 110Volt single-phase power outlets with the proposed frequency recording
units (FRUs). Here, one crucial innovation is to make measurement at the 1 1OV
level to avoid many obstacles in high voltage substation installations. This
will reduce overall cost and enable measurements to be made easily and flexibly
at many locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrumentation development
work includes design and development of a GPS/Internet based frequency
monitoring network (FNET) that includes (1) frequency recording unit (FRU)
development. (2) information management system (IMS) design, and (3) both real-
time and offline data processing algorithm development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
the first time, the proposed FNET will make the global observation of the vast
power network behavior possible. New observations from FNET could take the power
system research to an entirely new level. A clear understanding of the phenomena
will lead to innovative counter-measures against system blackouts, and increased
reliability of nation's critical electric power system infrastructure under the
deregulated environment. As more understanding of the complex power system
dynamics is gained with the help of the first-hand FNET measurement data, it may
be possible to devise early warning systems and activate control actions at
selected points to damp system oscillations and prevent catastrophic power
system failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FNET opens a new window to the "world" of
large power system behavior. Such information for education and training was
never possible before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;