* 0215114
* SBIR Phase I:  Feasibility assesment for Stachybotrys Chartarum and Aspergillus Fumigatus ELISA Kits
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Yvette Piceno, MICROBIAL INSIGHTS INC
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2002
* USD 76,009.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I project will investigate a
biotechnological approach to rapidly detect two notorious toxin-producing fungi.
Indoor fungal growth related to water leaks and floods can induce a variety of
disease symptoms. The presence of some fungi, like Stachybotrys chartarum , can
cause severe morbidity. Unfortunately, the detection of harmful fungi, like
Stachybotrys, has been hampered by inadequate methods. The proposed research
will determine the feasibility of developing a rapid detection method for
toxigenic fungi that could be used at any test site. The primary objective of
this research is to isolate a diffusible spore molecule from S. chartarum spores
and one from A. fumigatus spores for the development of an antibody-based
detection kit. The molecules will be extracted in saline solution to mimic
diffusion into lung linings and used for polyclonal antibody development. If
successful, the&lt;br/&gt;antigens will be used for monoclonal antibody
development in a Phase II project. This will allow for the development of a
rapid, on-site testing kit to detect potentially dangerous fungal organisms
quickly and inexpensively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial application of
this project will be in the area of diagnostics linked to human health and
animal health.&lt;br/&gt;