* 0215953
* Acquisition and Development of an Ultra Violet Laser Sulfur Isotope Microprobe for the Analysis 32S, 33S, 34S, and 36S in Sulfide Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Douglas Rumble, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2004
* USD 211,783.00

0215953&lt;br/&gt;Rumble&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a new isotope-
ratio-monitoring, gas chromatograph inlet mass spectrometer (IRMS-GC MS)
equipped with four collectors and four channel output for simultaneous analysis
of the ion beams of SF6 will make it possible to develop a new ultraviolet (UV)
laser fluorination microprobe for the analysis of 32S, 33S, 34S, and 36S in
sulfide minerals. Based on previous experience with the successful in situ
microanalysis of oxygen isotopes in silicate minerals, it should be possible to
measure 50-micrometer diameter spots on sulfide minerals with a precision of 0.1
to 0.2 per mil in d33S and d34S and 0.05 per mil in ?33S. Analysis for d36S will
be at a lower level of precision owing to the rarity of the isotope 36S. A new
UV laser macroprobe and GC purification system has already been built and
validated for 400 micrometer diameter spot measurements of sulfur isotopes using
an existing mass spectrometer that is incapable of GC-continuous flow operation.
The new IRMS-GC MS requested from NSF-MRI is needed to improve analytical
spatial resolution from 400 to 50 micrometers. The new sulfur isotope microprobe
will be used to test the validity of the discovery of mass-independent sulfur
isotope anomalies in Archean rocks by direct fluorination of sulfide minerals.
The proposed relationship between the anomalies and the oxygenation of Earth's
atmosphere will be tested by detailed measurements of drill cores spanning the
Archean-Proterozoic transition. The mechanisms responsible for fixing mass-
independent signatures in rocks will be investigated through spatially resolved
analyses of inter-mineral fractionations and intra-mineral isotopic
heterogeneity. The new microprobe's capacity to analyze microgram samples will
be put to use in a laboratory study of the fractionation of sulfur isotopes by
microbes. Use of the new sulfur isotope microprobe will be open to qualified
users from throughout the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;