* 0215368
* Cotranslational Events and Folding Pathways of an Alpha-Helical Model Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Silvia Cavagnero, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 432,745.00

Protein folding is a multifaceted poorly understood phenomenon of great
biological significance. Most of the published literature on the subject deals
with the in vitro refolding of purified full-length denatured polypeptides. In
contrast, this project addresses cotranslational protein folding and misfolding,
as it occurs within the ribosomal machinery. The main goal of this research is
to develop a novel methodology to study the mechanistic and conformational
aspects of protein folding within the prokaryotic translation apparatus. The
folding kinetics of nascent polypeptide chains will be investigated in the
context of the Escherichia coli translation machinery. These studies will be
performed by hydrogen/deuterium exchange pulse labeling in cell-free systems.
Liquid chromatography-coupled time-of-flight electrospray mass spectrometry and
time-of-flight MALDI mass spectrometry will be employed for detection.
Apomyoglobin (apoMb) serves as a good model system for these studies since it is
a well-characterized cytoplasmic protein with single domain containing all
alpha-helical segments. An apoMb gene with E. coli-optimized codon usage will be
employed. Control experiments will also be performed in parallel on
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase. The methodology developed in this project
will set the stage to enable future investigations addressing important aspects
of biologically relevant protein folding questions. These include (a) studying
whether cotranslational folding takes place during expression of small single
domain proteins; and (b) mapping nascent polypeptide conformation, and
identifying which specific amino acids become folded or misfolded at different
stages of chain elongation. Very little is known about the structural aspects of
how proteins fold or misfold in the cell. This project aims at devising initial
steps towards filling this gap.