* 0215899
* MRI/RUI:  Acquisition of a Variable Temperature Ultra High Vacuum Scanning Probe Microscope for Undergraduate Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* James Craig, Bradley University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 277,660.00

This Major Research Instrumentation RUI grant supports the acquisition of an
OMICRON Ultra High Vacuum (UHV) Variable Temperature Scanning Tunneling/Atomic
Force Microscope (VT- STM/AFM) and surface analysis chamber. The VT-STM/AFM,
which includes an integral single cell evaporator, and the analysis chamber will
complement the current array of surface spectroscopic and diffraction probes
available by adding the capability to directly image structures at the
atomic/nano-scale in situ during formation. The MBE source will provide
epitaxial growth capabilities for ultrathin film and nanostructure fabrication.
Currently available UHV sample preparation instrumentation will be integrated
into the acquired analysis chamber. Through an in situ transfer mechanism
samples will be transferred between the STM/AFM and analysis chambers for
optimum surface preparation, imaging, and characterization. The research program
will uniquely impact undergraduate education in a very significant way through a
highly effective undergraduate involvement in research. The acquisition of the
VT- STM/AFM will make it possible for this program to become a nationally
recognized model for undergraduate materials science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this experimental capability several
fundamental and applied research activities will be pursued: investigations
involving fabrication and chemical characterization of thin nitride films for
use as a gate insulator in ULSI transistors, correlation of conductance
measurements of ultrathin films with atomic-scale morphology, atomistic studies
of mechanisms of interlayer diffusion in homo- and heteroepitaxial systems,
studies of thin semiconductor alloy film formation as a result of electron and
photon driven processes, and investigations of the role of Nb on oxidation
processes of TiAlNb alloys. Also, collaborations with industrial partners will
be established to efficiently convert fundamental research results into
practical technological applications and provide undergraduate students with
excellent work related training in applied science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;