* 0216838
* Acquisition of an Optical Parametric Amplifier for High Magnetic Field Ultrafast Exciton Spectroscopy and Education
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* David Reitze, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 07/31/2003
* USD 184,500.00

With this award from the IMR program William Marsh Rice University will acquire
an ultrafast laser system, consisting of a chirped pulse amplifier (CPA) and an
optical parametric amplifier (OPA). This system will produce intense and
coherent electromagnetic radiation with wavelength continuously tunable from
1.15 mm to 18 mm and significantly advance our on-going research at the National
High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL). The principal investigators are
currently developing an ultrafast optics facility at the NHMFL under the In-
House Research Program, for the study of semiconductor quantum structures,
especially for investigating the dynamics of excitons in high magnetic fields.
Particular emphasis is placed on how to create and control quantum coherence in
excitons that are simultaneously subjected to an intense laser field and an
intense magnetic field. Such a system provides an ideal environment in which to
address fundamental and unresolved issues in nonlinear and quantum optics in
solids in a well-controlled manner. The laser field manipulates discrete
internal states of excitons whereas the magnetic field freezes the center-of-
mass motion of excitons and tunes the internal energy levels. The large spatial
extent of excitons, compared to atoms, leads to strong light-matter coupling,
and dramatic non-perturbative phenomena are expected. Such research provides
significant insight into the fundamental physics of light-matter interaction and
can answer whether light excitation in solids is really quantum, as in quantum
optics of atoms. Undergraduate and graduate researchers, including students from
underrepresented groups will be involved and will acquire expertise in cutting-
edge techniques in ultrafast optics. %%% With this award from the
Instrumentation for Materials Research program William Marsh University will
acquire a state-of-the-art laser system, which will produce ultrashort pulses of
electromagnetic radiation with wavelength continuously tunable in a very wide
range and significantly advance our on-going research at the National High
Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL). The investigators are currently developing an
ultrafast optics facility at the NHMFL under the In-House Research Program, for
the study of semiconductor quantum structures, especially for investigating the
dynamics of excitons in high magnetic fields. Such a project provides an ideal
environment in which to address fundamental and unresolved issues in nonlinear
and quantum optics in solids in a well-controlled manner. The research will
involve a team of undergraduate and graduate researchers, including students
from underrepresented minority groups. They will acquire expertise in cutting-
edge techniques in ultrafast optics.

