* 0216981
* Dissertation Research:  Computations and Computers in the Sciences of Mind and Brain
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Peter Machamer, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 06/30/2003
* USD 12,000.00

In the 1940s, the birth and development of modern computers suggested the notion
that minds, or brains, are computers. This thesis combined the advent of
computers with both the old idea that reasoning is a form of calculation (from
Hobbes to formal logic) and the materialist doctrine that reasoning, and more
generally cognition, is carried out by the brain. The view that the mind-brain
is a computer, here called computationalism, is the topic of this dissertation
research project. The project will trace different versions of computationalism
from their historical root in the cybernetics movement to the many disciplines
that incorporated it. It will complement recent scholarship in related areas by
showing how early attempts at mathematical modeling of the brain, the
development of new mathematical and modeling tools, and new hypotheses about
memory mechanisms came together to form a novel conceptual and methodological
framework for studying the functional organization of the mind-brain. The study
will interest not only historians, but also those who work in the sciences of
mind and brain and those who are interested in their foundations. This research
includes both a philosophical and a historical component. The pioneers who
developed computationalism and many of today's concepts--A. Turing, J. von
Neumann, N. Wiener, and W. McCulloch--had clearer motivations for their views
than their followers of today. Through understanding the reasoning of the
pioneers--the roots of today's positions--within their historical context, and
studying how that context has since changed, the investigators hope to shed
light on today's views. In order to carry out the historical component of this
project, they will rely on published material in history, philosophy, and
science, as well as unpublished material. Funding for this project will support
four trips to archives containing the unpublished papers of Turing, McCulloch,
Wiener, and von Neumann. Aside from its historical interest, clarifying the
history of computationalism has several potential benefits. In the philosophy of
mind and brain sciences, this project would illuminate current discussions of
computationalism by showing what historical role computationalism played and
still plays in shaping research programs in different disciplines. In addition,
in philosophy of mind, it may stimulate functionalist philosophers, many of whom
rely on computationalism, to rethink some of their views. It may equip funding
agencies to more efficiently distribute research funds. And, finally, it would
affect science and technology education. Through the
future&lt;br/&gt;publication of articles directed at the general public and the
design of an undergraduate course on Computers, Minds, and Brains, the expertise
developed in this project would contribute to the education of the general
public about computers and their relationship with psychology and
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;