* 0216312
* MRI: Acquisition of Materials Characterization Instrumentation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Amy Moll, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 234,380.00

Boise State University (BSU) is located in a high tech region with numerous
microelectronic industries. The College of Engineering was created in 1996 and
offers B.S. and M.S. degrees in Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering, Civil Engineering and Computer Science. Faculty from Mechanical
Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engineering, Physics, Chemistry,
Geophysics, and Biology are creating a Materials Science and Engineering
(MS&amp;E) program at BSU. The program consists of a minor for the Master's
program in Engineering, a minor for undergraduates and a Master's degree in
Materials Science and Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;As part of establishing the
MS&amp;E program and in support of MS&amp;E research efforts, the team is
establishing materials characterization capabilities at BSU. This proposal is
requesting the acquisition of a number of key pieces of equipment to improve the
infrastructure for a materials analysis facility at Boise State University. This
grant will be used to purchase analytical tools that will be available to
researchers on campus, in local industry, and at other universities and
government labs around the region. It will support the work of undergraduates,
graduate students, post-doctoral students, and faculty. As part of this effort,
a mechanism to allow these tools to be used by local industry will be
implemented. &lt;br/&gt;Over the last few years, Boise State University has been
building research programs in several areas including engineering, physics,
chemistry and biology. Successful grants have been focused in microelectronic
materials and processing including a DARPA grant for 3-D circuits, fabrication
of chemical field effect transistors, and a new federal initiative to develop
environmental sensors. Several new research programs are emerging in high-k
dielectrics, reliability of ultra-thin gate oxides, microelectromechanical
systems (MEMs), ceramic MEMs, and optimization of microelectronic packaging.
&lt;br/&gt;Funding of this proposal will enable the acquisition of expanded
capabilities of the existing Atomic Force Microscope, add high frequency
capabilities to the current semiconductor parameter test system, acquire a
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer with microscope attachment, and enhance
the capabilities of a scanning reference electrode technology instrument. The
intent in this proposal is to add to the MS&amp;E equipment set and to establish
a structure by which to make these instruments readily available to researchers
at BSU, researchers in the inland northwest region (Montana State, Northern
Utah, WSU, U Idaho, INEEL), and local industry. &lt;br/&gt;These additional
capabilities will be utilized in several ways to improve the undergraduate
education at BSU. In Materials Science coursework, students will obtain direct
experience examining a wide array of materials properties in applications
ranging from magnetic to microelectronic materials. Also, data from advanced
materials characterization equipment will be used in class when relating theory
and fundamentals to application specific examples. Undergraduates provide
significant contributions in many research groups in the College of Engineering
and will be using this equipment for their research. Overall, exposure to
materials characterization at the undergraduate level will provide graduating
BSU engineers a unique and valuable advantage in the workplace. &lt;br/&gt;