* 0216083
* Development of Optical Excitation Scanning Probe Microscopes With Atomic Resolution
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Paul Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 540,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports scientists
at Penn State University to develop new atomic resolution scanning probe optical
spectroscopies by combining the spatial resolution of the scanning tunneling
microscope (STM) with well-established, readily interpreted near ultraviolet,
visible and infrared spectroscopies. A vital missing piece in the vast majority
of scanning probe measurements is the ability to make unambiguous
interpretations of images and chemical assignments of adsorbates. The
researchers focus on adding spectroscopies that are already well established for
ensemble-averaged measurements that can accomplish these assignments,
specifically ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) and infrared (IR) spectroscopies. By
coupling IR and optical spectroscopies with a local probe, the researchers will
gain the ability to characterize and to identify individual nanostructures and
even individual molecules and atoms based on their optical and electronic
properties. This work will advance the state of the art in nanometer-scale
science, measurement, and analysis. Optical spectroscopies provide well-
understood methods to determine chemical identity and bonding changes and to
determine electronic structure using IR and UV-Vis excitation, respectively.
These capabilities will be combined to create a local optical spectrometer in
the near UV, visible and IR, with wide applications in surface and interface
science. Evanescent coupling will be utilized to deliver photons to the
tunneling junction, using the STM tip as a detector. The surfaces studied will
be well characterized, as they will be grown epitaxially on a variety of prisms.
These experiments will complement the recently built dispersed photon emission
STM built under the auspices of an instrument development grant from the NSF
Divisions of Materials Research and Chemistry. These instruments will then be
transitioned to the broader scientific community after development and
optimization. Two talented graduate students and an undergraduate will
participate in the fabrication of the new
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program supports scientists at Penn State University to develop
new atomic resolution scanning probe optical spectroscopies by combining the
spatial resolution of the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) with well-
established, readily interpreted near ultraviolet, visible and infrared
spectroscopies. A vital missing piece in the vast majority of scanning probe
measurements is the ability to make unambiguous interpretations of images and
chemical assignments of adsorbates. The researchers focus on adding
spectroscopies that are already well established for ensemble-averaged
measurements that can accomplish these assignments, specifically ultraviolet-
visible (UV-Vis) and infrared (IR) spectroscopies. By coupling IR and optical
spectroscopies with a local probe, the researchers will gain the ability to
characterize and to identify individual nanostructures and even individual
molecules and atoms based on their optical and electronic properties. This work
will advance the state of the art in nanometer-scale science, measurement, and
analysis. These instruments will then be transitioned to the broader scientific
community after development and optimization. Two talented graduate students and
an undergraduate will participate in the fabrication of the new
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;