* 0216705
* RUI-IMR: Upgrade of a Transmission Electron Microscope for Materials Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Timothy Wagner, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 120,237.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports
Florida International University with the acquisition of a structural monitoring
system for a laser- molecular beam epitaxy (LMBE)-scanning tunneling microscope
system. The PI's will construct comprehensive tools with multi-component growth
capability coupled with in-situ nano-scale characterization capabilities. This
is essential for success in "Complex Materials Growth by Design." The in-situ
structural monitoring system includes a newly designed in-situ reflection high-
energy electron diffraction (RHEED) instrument for real-time monitoring of
materials growth and low-energy electron diffraction (LEED I-V) optics for
surface structure determination will be the essential component for the studies
of artificial structured materials. The system will be added on a pulsed laser
deposition (PLD) system, forming a controlled growth LMBE facility. This
facility will be integrated with a variable temperature (VT) (25 - 1500K)
scanning tunneling microscope (STM) and other existing surface characterization
probes with a growth capability in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) cluster. The
objective is to construct a unique facility capable of growing and
characterizing materials in-situ for interdisciplinary research and education of
materials scientists in the new field of nano-technology. The goal is to: 1)
exploit materials tailoring for desired functionalities, 2) explore new physical
phenomena in artificially structured materials, and 3) educate a new breed of
materials scientists with an expertise in science-driven nano-fabrication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for
Materials Research program supports Florida International University with the
acquisition of a structural monitoring system for a laser- molecular beam
epitaxy (LMBE)-scanning tunneling microscope system. The PI's will construct
comprehensive tools with multi-component growth capability coupled with in-situ
nano-scale characterization capabilities. This is essential for success in
"Complex Materials Growth by Design." The in-situ structural monitoring system
includes a newly designed in-situ reflection high-energy electron diffraction
instrument for real-time monitoring of materials growth and low-energy electron
diffraction optics for surface structure determination will be the essential
component for the studies of artificial structured materials. The system will be
added on a pulsed laser deposition system, forming a controlled growth LMBE
facility. This facility will be integrated with a variable temperature (VT) (25
- 1500K) scanning tunneling microscope and other existing surface
characterization probes with a growth capability in an ultra-high vacuum
cluster. The objective is to construct a unique facility capable of growing and
characterizing materials in-situ for interdisciplinary research and education of
materials scientists in the new field of nano-technology. The goal is to: 1)
exploit materials tailoring for desired functionalities, 2) explore new physical
phenomena in artificially structured materials, and 3) educate a new breed of
materials scientists with an expertise in science-driven nano-fabrication.
&lt;br/&gt;