* 0216165
* MRI:  Development of an Advanced Laser Communications Research Facility with Internet Accessible Instrumentation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Victor Skormin, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2005
* USD 329,804.00

EIA 02-16165&lt;br/&gt;Skormin, Victor A.&lt;br/&gt;SUNY - Binghamton
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI: Development of an Advanced Laser Communications
Research Facility with Internet Accessible Instrumentation
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal, developing an experimental research
laboratory, expands a concept of sharing advanced scientific equipment in
"cyberspace." This technology facilitates the access to equipment via the
Internet offering the most advanced instrumentation and relevant interactive
instruction to diverse groups of population; thus enhancing engineering
education and training. This development will set unique space-qualified laser
equipment intended for space communication and offer carefully designed "fixed"
and "open-ended" experiments nation- and world-wide. The proposed project is not
a virtual lab, offering instead enhanced "real" infrastructure of the laser
communications research lab. The new development involves upgrading the
equipment and auxiliary systems and enhancing its reliability, accuracy and rate
of operation. Hence the facility developed will be suitable for unlimited global
access via the Internet, enabling universities, industries, high schools, and
individual users worldwide to perform advanced experiments in real-time and to
collect data for analysis and interpretation. This project specifically enables
and services an often forgotten population, the disabled. The Laser
Communication Research Laboratory (LCRL), where the development will take place,
contributes to satellite communication technology by addressing, among others,
the following technical research problems:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Modeling,
Characterization, and Control of Electromechanical Beam Steering
Systems,&lt;br/&gt;2. Free Space Propagation, Diffraction and Alignment of Laser
Beams,&lt;br/&gt;3. Optical Beam Modulation and Steering,&lt;br/&gt;4. Rejection
of Atmospheric Effects in Communication Systems,&lt;br/&gt;5. Experimental
Analysis, Modeling and Control of Acousto-Optic Laser Beam Steering Systems with
Bragg Cells,&lt;br/&gt;6. Gimbals Systems, and&lt;br/&gt;7. Liquid Crystal
Technology.&lt;br/&gt;