* 0216919
* Acquisition of CCD X-ray Detection System
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Arthur Sleight, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 176,000.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program support will
allow Oregon State University to purchase a new X-ray detection system that will
be utilized for the determination of atomic-level structures of new high-
technology materials as well as small molecules of relevance in biology and
catalysis. The instrumentation comprises an area detector and temperature-
control devices for examining structures over the temperature range of 77 to
1273 K. Such variable-temperature measurements provide a means for establishing
relationships between atomic-level structures and bulk physical properties, such
as thermal expansion, electrical conductivity, and laser action. By extension,
such relationships establish the framework for invention and development of new
types of microelectronic and optical devices. Temperature control can also be
important for establishing the structures of small molecules that might be
thermally unstable or only weakly efficient in scattering an X-ray beam. The new
system also has considerable value in education. Because an overall view of a
diffraction pattern is available from the area detector, unlike in serial
systems, graduate students can much more readily absorb the concepts of
diffraction and crystallography, leading to more productive classroom and
research experiences. The high throughput of the system also allows an extension
of the education experience to students involved in a number of materials-
research collaborative programs, to undergraduates both at OSU and neighboring
institutions, and to others beyond the University community. Altogether, these
new opportunities will provide students with robust foundations for pursuing
their career objectives.

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program support
Oregon State University with the purchase a new X-ray detection system. The
instrumentation will be used to support research and education activities in the
areas of solid-state inorganic materials and small-molecule synthesis. The
proposed instrument cluster comprises a CCD area detector with four-circle
goniometer, low-temperature and high-temperature devices, and a fiber-optic
collimator. This cluster will provide a means to broaden and more fully
integrate the research and education missions of the University in the area of
structure determination. The area detector makes possible the ready
identification of supercells and incommensurate structures, short data-
collection times and high throughput, and much improved avenues for teaching
concepts in diffraction and crystallography. Coupling the high throughput of the
area detector with low- and high-temperature devices provides opportunities in
variable-temperature measurements that are currently unavailable. Structures of
inorganic materials can be determined at both low and high temperatures to
establish relationships between crystal structure and thermal-expansion,
electrical, or optical properties, while weakly diffracting or thermally
unstable small molecules can be analyzed at low temperatures to obtain useful
structural information. Further, local undergraduate education institutions and
companies will have access to this instrument through collaborative projects.