* 0216530
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field-Emission, Controlled Temperature Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Robert Roberson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2004
* USD 433,000.00

Developing a detailed knowledge of advanced solid state, biological,
bioengineering, and environmental materials formation and behavior will
facilitate a broad array of advanced technologies. Wide ranging advances can be
engineered based on an enhanced understanding of natural and artificial
materials and related processes. An essential component of advancing this
understanding is in situ and ex situ observation down to the nanoscale, without
significantly affecting the mechanisms and materials observed. The combination
of field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM; 2nm resolution), with
environmental control (up to 10 torr), temperature control (-186 oC to 1,000
oC), orientational imaging (e.g., phase and grain boundary characterization),
and energy dispersive spectroscopy (elemental analysis and mapping) provide such
an opportunity. The objective of this proposal is to acquire an environmental
FESEM. This E-FESEM system will be used to advance our mechanistic understanding
of a wide range of multidisciplinary materials and reaction processes through
nanoscale observation and elemental/biochemical and structural analysis. In
particular, the E-FESEM will be utilized to support projects in the following
research areas: (i) solid-state materials and processes (e.g., nanomaterials
formation, nanolithography, chemical vapor deposition, and materials corrosion),
(ii) biological materials and processes (e.g., cytoskeletal organization,
fertilization, and photosynthesis), (iii) biomaterials and processes (e.g.,
tissue interface engineering, photosynthetic and photo-detection systems), and
(iv) environmental materials and processes (e.g., atmospheric aerosols, mineral
weathering and carbonation, including CO2 sequestration, and astrobiological
systems).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASU is very well placed to provide full research,
research training and educational access to this nanoscale laboratory. The
instrument will be operated as a user facility within the Center for High
Resolution Electron Microscopy, with access being provided to all qualified
users. The proposed system will be fully integrated with the Goldwater Materials
Visualization Facility (GMVF). The GMVF (http://gmsl.eas.asu.edu/gmvf) will
house 20 copies of the associated image, elemental and structural analysis
software, enabling broad access to this advanced research tool, both in the GMVF
and via the internet and vBNS networks. This broad, off-instrument, software
access will allow the microscope to be dedicated to full-time image and data
acquisition. Simultaneously, up to 20 researchers/students will be able to
perform image, elemental and structural data analysis. This capability will
allow the diverse multidisciplinary research group using the system to integrate
their research into the classroom, including on-line system observation.
Students will be empowered to do hands-on, cutting-edge research image and data
analysis in the classroom/laboratory setting (e.g., in graduate laboratory
courses, which already heavily use the GMVF and the integrated capabilities of
the Goldwater Materials Science Laboratories). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
acquisition of the controlled-temperature E-FESEM will substantially advance the
multidisciplinary research and educational goals of a broad range of
departments, centers, and programs at ASU. These units include the Departments
of Bioengineering, Biology, Chemical &amp; Materials Engineering, Chemistry
&amp; Biochemistry, Geological Sciences, Plant Biology, and Physics &amp;
Astronomy, as well as the Center for Solid State Science (CSSS) and the
Astrobiology Program. This breadth of interest, together with the broad system
access provided by the Visualization Facility, will bring the excitement of a
wide range of multidisciplinary cutting edge research to university, and even
pre-university, classrooms via the internet and high bandwidth vBNS
networks.&lt;br/&gt;