* 0216420
* MRI:  Development of a Nanoscale Absolute Dilatometer
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Steven Patterson, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2007
* USD 586,377.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant provides resources to develop
and install an ultraprecision absolute dilatometer and necessary supporting
equipment at the Center for Precision Metrology at the University of North
Carolina at Charlotte. The dilatometer will be able to make length measurements
of a variety of samples with nanometer accuracy. This will provide the
capability of nanostrain measurements of material properties such as dimensional
stability, thermal expansion, electrostriction and magnetostriction.

A wide variety of products with critical dimensions, forms, and surfaces that
have tolerances in the nanometer domain are of rapidly increasing commercial
importance. At the same time that tolerance and feature size are becoming
smaller, the overall scale of these products has remained fixed or increased.
Where it had previously been sufficient to know properties such as creep,
dimensional stability, thermal expansion, magnetostriction and electrostriction
at the level of parts per million, current and proposed meso- and micro-scale
products demand such understanding at the part per billion level. The
instrumentation supported by this grant will enhance understanding of such
properties and provide engineering data for the design of next generation
precision systems such as semiconductor lithography machines. The facilities
developed with support from this grant will also provide the means to train both
graduate and undergraduate students in modern ultraprecision measurement
methods.