* 0216676
* SBIR Phase II:  Mechanism of the Layer Transfer Process for Silicon-on-Insulator
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Alex Usenko, Silicon Wafer Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 07/31/2004
* USD 477,220.00

This Small Business Innovations Research (SBIR) Phase II project builds on
demonstrated and patented new hydrogenation-based processes for producing
silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafers for the semiconductor manufacturing industry.
It has been demonstrated that this new techniques can be bonded for improved
activation of the surfaces of silicon wafers. The innovation also serves to
suppress layer transfer faults. The improvement in yield and the reduction in
cost in the SOI production process have also been achieved. The process is
expected to scale down to the formation of SOI surface films of thickness well
below 0.1 micron. During Phase I, an RF plasma treatment was developed which
optimizes the amount of adsorbed activating species on surfaces resulting in an
improved layer transfer yield over previous wet chemical activation techniques.
The process optimization was based on molecular dynamics simulation of the sub-
monolayer hydroxylized surface. In Phase II the simulation-based process design
continues with experimental characterization of the resulting probability of the
layer transfer faults. The Phase II work plan includes more detailed process
design and optimization leading to a characterization of best effort SOI wafers
by the venture partners.

The impact of the proposed commercialization activity on the existing $10B
worldwide silicon starting-wafer industry is potentially huge. The increasing
usage of SOI by the leading semiconductor manufacturers is optimistically
projected to grow from 1% to 10% of the worldwide silicon market. If successful,
a ramp up to commercialization SOI pilot production will begin immediately upon
the completion of this Phase II contract.