* 0216204
* RUI/MRI: Acquisition of Equipment to Support Research and Undergraduate Training in Aquatic Science
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Mark Sandheinrich, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2005
* USD 213,937.00

A grant has been awarded to the River Studies Center (Center) at the University
of Wisconsin-La Crosse for the acquisition of equipment to support research and
undergraduate student training in aquatic science. Drs. Saros, Haro, Rolfhus,
and Sandheinrich will oversee the research. The Center was established in 1972
to facilitate the University's scientific involvement with environmental and
resource-management issues pertinent to the Upper Mississippi River.
Subsequently, it has expanded its research activities to other aquatic resources
in Wisconsin, the Upper Midwest and the nation, providing research opportunities
to nearly 100 graduate students and more than 250 undergraduates. The Center has
become nationally recognized for its investigations of non-point source
pollutants in rivers, streams, lakes, and wetlands. Ongoing studies in the
Center are focusing on two pollutants, nitrogen (as essential element) and
mercury (a highly toxic metal), which have caused widespread degradation of
aquatic resources. Members of the Center are currently exploring the extent to
which atmospheric N deposition may be altering alpine lake communities in the
western U.S. and are investigating how groundwater/surface water interactions
affect N dynamics and export in watersheds under multiple land management
practices in the Upper Midwest. The Center's mercury investigations are
assessing landscape factors controlling methylmercury contamination in food webs
of lakes of Voyageurs National Park, the production and accumulation of
methylmercury in nearshore environments of southern Lake Superior, and the
linkages between methylmercury exposure and endocrine disruptors in wild fish.
Collectively, the Center's investigations of non-point source pollutants provide
a broad array of research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students
of aquatic science. The grant will support the purchase of equipment to further
enhance the Center's capabilities in investigations of non-point source
pollution and education of students in aquatic
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analyses of water chemistry and aquatic food webs
are critical to understanding the source and effects of non-point source
pollution in lakes and streams. Nitrogen enrichment can alter the composition
and dynamics of food webs, whereas the exposure of humans and wildlife to
methylmecury occurs via the aquatic food web. The equipment purchased through
this grant includes an elemental analyzer to measure ratios of various nutrients
in aquatic organisms, and a total organic carbon analyzer to quantify dissolved
organic carbon, an important factor influencing the transport and availability
of inorganic mercury and methlmercury to aquatic organisms. Two microscopes will
enhance the Center's imaging capabilities An automated mercury analyzer and
temperature-controlled bath will enhance the Center's ability to determine
mercury in water, sediment, and aquatic organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
variety and extensive nature of theses activities will promote the understanding
of several issues related to non-point source pollution by nitrogen and mercury.
Nitrogen enrichment and mercury contamination of aquatic ecosystems are problems
of pressing regional and national concern, both from an ecological and human
health perspective. The acquisition of this equipment will foster the synthesis
of results among aquatic ecosystems that span an array of ecological,
geological, and chemical characteristics; this information will aid managers and
scientists in making more informed decisions. Moreover, the equipment will
enhance the research of Center faculty, whose scientific credentials and
motivation ensure competitiveness in obtaining financial support for research in
aquatic science. In addition, the equipment will further enhance the training
and research of the many undergraduate and graduate (M.S.) students who will
benefit from ready access to well-equipped, scientific facilities.&lt;br/&gt;