* 0216929
* SBIR Phase II:   High Performance Nano-Fe/SiO2  Soft Magnetic Cores Based on Exchange Coupling
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Yide Zhang, INFRAMAT CORP
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 12/31/2004
* USD 499,997.00

This Small Business Innovation Phase II project is directed toward optimizing
and scaling up fabrication of exchange coupled Fe/ceramic nanocomposites for
high performance soft magnetic applications. In Phase I, Inframat Corporation
took pioneering steps to develop Fe/ceramic magnetic nanocomposites, which
resulted in significant improvements over microsized ferrites including higher
saturation magnetization and lower power loss. The design of the Fe/ceramic
nanocomposite is based on an exchange coupling effect between neighboring
nanoparticles, where Fe nanoparticles are uniformly distributed within an
insulating ceramic matrix. Successful Phase I efforts have provided the
scientific and technological groundwork for further magnetic nanocomposite
technology advancement in Phase II. The proposed Phase II program scales-up the
Fe/ceramic nanocomposite technology performed in Phase I. Emphasis is on rapid
commercialization of nanocomposite cores. Key Phase II milestones include (1)
scale-up of the demonstrated chemical synthesis into pilot-scale production, (2)
demonstration of prototype cores having desirable magnetic properties through
exchange coupling, and (3) demonstration of high performance prototype DC-to-DC
converters using the exchange coupled magnetic nanocomposite cores.

Phase II participants include Ceramic Magnetics, UConn, Villanova Univ., Georgia
Tech, and a converter specialist, Colonel William McLyman. Ceramic Magnetics has
pledged $75,000 cost share to the Phase II and will carry a $250,000 follow-on
funding.