* 0216286
* Acquisition of an Axial Servo Hydraulic Test System (Universal Testing System) for Research and Teaching in Civil and Mechanical Engineering at Clarkson University
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* John Dempsey, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2005
* USD 206,794.00

This award funds the acquisition of an axial Servo Hydraulic Test System,
consisting of a closed loop control-loading frame with the appropriate
electronic interface. The specific Test System requested by this proposal is
manufactured by MTS with the following components: &lt;br/&gt;Model 810.25,
220,000 lbs (1000 kN) System &lt;br/&gt;Model 505.60 (60 GPM, 3000 psi)
Hydraulic Power Unit &lt;br/&gt;MTS TestStar IIm Digital Control System and
Software &lt;br/&gt;MTS Load cell, COD gage, grips and testing
fixtures&lt;br/&gt;Desktop Pentium III Computer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The test
system provides a broad range of testing capability for performing load or
displacement controlled testing. Testing capabilities include tension,
compression, shear, flexural and cyclic testing of most materials and structural
components. This test system was selected in order to fulfill the testing needs
of not only the proposed research projects but also the current and future
undergraduate and graduate laboratories in the area of materials and structural
mechanics for the Civil and Mechanical Engineering programs at Clarkson
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The awarded equipment will be used in the
following research activities:&lt;br/&gt;- Characterization of the Interfacial
Crack Propagation in Reinforced Concrete Beams Strengthened by Externally Bonded
FRP Laminates.&lt;br/&gt;- Time-Dependent Cleavage Fracture of Ice.&lt;br/&gt;-
Conditions for Localized Deformation in Rock.&lt;br/&gt;- Testing of Composite
Materials for Model Validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of the testing
system will also strengthen the following undergraduate and graduate courses at
Clarkson University: Introduction to Design, CE212; Fracture Mechanics of
Concrete Structures, CE 401; Reinforced Concrete Design, CE 441; Structural
Steel Design, CE 442; Advanced Design of Structural Concrete, CE 544;
Manufacturing Processes, ME 390; Analysis of Materials Processing, ME 393; and
Composite Mechanics and Design, ME 457.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The awarded
equipment will provide a critical enhancement to both the research capability
and pedagogical scope of faculty as well as the relevant educational experiences
of students. Moreover, these enhancements will affect students and faculty
across several academic units as well as interdisciplinary work that cuts across
customary departmental lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;