* 0216639
* Acquisition of a Time-of-Flight SIMS System
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* David Johnson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 500,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
University of Oregon with the acquisition of a Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion Mass
Spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) instrument. The instrument will be actively used in
research programs in physics and chemistry under the auspices of the Materials
Science Institute at the University of Oregon, as well as by research groups in
the Departments of Geological Sciences and Neuroscience. It will also represent
an important component of a unique University-based facility in Oregon and will
be made available to other researchers in the state. The spectrometer will
significantly impact a broad base of research programs. One of these involves
developing and understanding the properties of a distinct class of complex
semiconducting materials. A second area involves understanding a broader range
of materials synthesis issues of metastable phases of ternary and quaternary
superconducting, semiconducting, and thermoelectric materials. A third research
project which will benefit from the requested instrument is the study of self-
assembled inorganic/organic multilayer thin films. The instrument will have
enormous potential range of applications at the University of Oregon: (1)
characterization of Er-doped glasses for photonic device applications; (2)
measurement of boundary-layer compositional gradients around melt inclusions in
naturally formed glasses; (3) characterization of a new family of peptide-
containing alkanethiol adsorbates that form highly ordered monolayers on gold,
and (4) characterizing the distribution of subcellular Ca2+ in sensory hair
cells in the ear, and (5) characterization of an insulating layer at in InP
doped conjugated polymer interface. The spectrometer, Trift III (Phi Model
TFS-3100), will be purchased from Physical Electronics. It includes a pulsed and
bunched liquid metal (Ga) ion gun, a dual microchannel plate detector and
includes the associated vacuum pumps, electronics, and computer hardware and
software. An oxygen ion source will also be purchased to ensure optimal depth-
profiling capability and enhanced sensitivity in depth profiles. The gallium
source will allow chemical imaging with a lateral resolution of 0.3 microns.

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
University of Oregon with the acquisition of a Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion Mass
Spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) instrument. The instrument will be actively used in
research programs in physics and chemistry under the auspices of the Materials
Science Institute at the University of Oregon, as well as by research groups in
the Departments of Geological Sciences and Neuroscience. It will also represent
an important component of a unique University-based facility in Oregon and will
be made available to other researchers in the state. The spectrometer will
significantly impact a broad base of research programs. One of these involves
developing and understanding the properties of a distinct class of complex
semiconducting materials. A second area involves understanding a broader range
of materials synthesis issues of metastable phases of ternary and quaternary
superconducting, semiconducting, and thermoelectric materials. A third research
project which will benefit from the requested instrument is the study of self-
assembled inorganic/organic multilayer thin films. Availability of the requested
instrumentation will also improve research training at the advanced
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral levels, first and foremost because of
the importance of hands-on experience.