* 0216035
* SBIR Phase II:  New Elastomeric Microelectrodes for Improved Neuroprostheses
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Francis Keohan, Cape Cod Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* George B. Vermont
* 03/31/2005
* USD 522,740.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is to develop
electrically conductive polymer-silicone composite materials for improving the
performance of implantable neural prostheses. Prior Phase I study has
demonstrated the feasibility of synthesizing electrically conductive polymer
nanocomposites with mechanical properties of silicone elastomers. Polymer-based
prototype electrical devices were found to be stable toward simulated
physiological conditions and cyclic current pulsing. The Phase II program will
extend the benefits of these systems to the fabrication of more complex devices
such as multi-poled cuff electrodes for chronic peripheral nerve stimulation and
recording. An expanded test plan would include development of advanced device
fabrication methods and extensive testing of the prototype neural prostheses for
electrical response, tissue compatibility, and durability in chronic
implantation applications. The optimized elastomeric electrodes will be
characterized for biocompatibility, stability and electrical properties.
Methodology will be developed for fabricating prosthetic electrodes for
extensive in vitro pulsing studies and acute animal testing. Finally, test
protocols for the new electrode products will be established in an effort to
obtain FDA approval. The commercial applications of this project will be in the
area of biomedical devices and systems that serve the needs of disabled
individuals following stroke or spinal cord injury.