* 0216628
* STTR Phase II:  Light Transparent, Electrically Conductive Coatings by Filtered Cathodic Arc Plasma Deposition
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2004
* Michael McFarland, Alameda Applied Sciences Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/2004
* USD 499,993.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will build upon
and extend the encouraging results obtained in the Phase I program, which
investigated the properties of thin, electrically conductive, UV transparent
films and tri-layer metal coatings as possible diamond switch electrode
structures for power electronics. Phase I benchmarked UV transmission,
electrical conductivity and substrate adhesion for 14 to 44 nm Mo films,
deposited using an energetic filtered cathodic arc deposition process. A
companion program demonstrated a significant reduction in the diamond switch on-
state resistance, and hence, improvement in switch efficiency, using these films
as contact electrodes. The Phase II program will apply these results to a
commercially relevant specification by demonstrating that the thin film
deposition process can be scaled and the complex thin film mesa-shaped electrode
topology can be realized. The anticipated mesa-shaped design will consist of a
series of narrow tri-layer conduits, with the relatively large spaces in between
coated with the thin UV transparent, electrically conductive film. This design
maximizes the UV input into the diamond, which is used to activate the switch,
while minimizing the electrical resistance. The properties of the electrode will
be benchmarked against commercially relevant operating
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's commercial potential is
considered significant since it both supports the entry of diamond switch
technology into the $21 billion per year power electronic device market as well
as advancing the energetic deposition process thin film knowledge base, which in
turn provides an improved platform for launching additional commercial ventures.