* 0216149
* Acquisition of A Load Actuator System for Enhancing Civil Engineering Research and Research Training in an Undergraduate Institute (MRI/RUI)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Jie Han, Widener University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2005
* USD 114,344.00

This award funds the acquisition of an automatic load actuator system for
enhancing civil engineering research and research training at an undergraduate
institute. Currently the Department of Civil Engineering at Widener University
has a Geotechnical, Concrete, and Structures Testing Laboratory that houses a
50,000 lb capacity testing frame equipped with a manually operated Enerpac
hydraulic ram. The available loading system, although crude, is suitable for
teaching purposes and for destructive testing of structural members under static
load conditions only. The PIs are constructing a geotechnical testing box for
future research purposes. Planning for these and other research projects makes
the acquisition of a closed loop loading system suitable for dynamic testing and
deflection studies highly desirable. Some of the areas of research include: (1)
responses of geosynthetic-reinforced and pile-supported foundations under
dynamic loads; (2) performance of fiber-reinforced polymer piles under
horizontal dynamic loads; (3) geosynthetic-reinforced slopes under dynamic
footing loads; (4) use of geosynthetic to span over sinkholes, (5) load-
deflection response and crack patterns in FRP-reinforced concrete beams; (6)
shear capacity of FRP-reinforced concrete beams; and (7) behavior of semirigid
bolted connections in steel frames.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of this
automatic load actuator will provide the testing facility necessary for faculty,
graduate, and undergraduate students at Widener University to conduct high-
quality research projects in structural and geotechnical engineering. This
advanced testing system will establish a solid infrastructure for faculty to
seek research funds from governmental agencies and private sectors and research
collaborations with researchers at other research institutes. The unique
combination of the load actuator and the geotechnical testing box will attract
high-quality researchers to use this advanced testing system for different
research purposes. Because students in the master's degree program at Widener
University are primarily part-time, working full-time during the day and
attending graduate courses part-time in the evening, most research projects have
significant undergraduate participation. A closed loop load actuator with
dynamic data acquisition capabilities would provide the students with valuable
knowledge of state-of-the-art tools for experimental work and the analysis and
interpretation of data. With increased research funds, more full-time students
(including underrepresented groups and women) can be supported to pursue
advanced degrees in civil engineering. The acquisition of a load actuator system
would also allow for significant enhancement of the civil engineering/structural
portion of the Summer Camp program that has a five-year track record of success
to inspire local high school students' interests in engineering research and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;