* 0216281
* BE/CNH: Neighborhood Ecosystems:  Human-Climate Interactions in a Desert Metropolis
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Anthony Brazel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/28/2005
* USD 91,597.00

This interdisciplinary research project explores human-ecosystem-climate
interactions at the neighborhood scale in metropolitan Phoenix. The project
draws upon social and ecological theories of spatial heterogeneity in cities in
order to understand how urban development leads to economic, social, and
physical inequalities among neighborhoods, which in turn produce neighborhood
differences in microclimate conditions. Microclimate conditions influence the
biotic environment, which then completes the cycle by influencing the
socioeconomic and physical systems of neighborhoods. Because neighborhoods have
unequal resources for responding to climate stress, socioeconomic status of the
neighborhood and other local characteristics will moderate the effects of this
process. The research has three specific objectives. First, the project will
show how the settlement of neighborhoods between 1970 and 2000 transformed the
landscape by altering land use, land cover, and climate. Second, the project
will demonstrate whether and to what extent the resulting differences among
neighborhood microclimates expose humans and other biota to unequal levels of
climate-induced stressors, such as heat, poor air quality, and storm hazards.
Third, the project will investigate the resilience of human and plant
communities in neighborhoods that have unequal amounts of capital to cope with
climate stress. The research sites are seven Phoenix neighborhoods located at
monitoring sites of the Central Arizona-Phoenix Long-Term Ecological Research
project. The neighborhoods, bounded by census block groups, include cases that
vary by age, distance to urban center, land cover, income, and ethnic
composition. The project will use data from a wide variety of sources, including
the census, social surveys of residents, historical land-use surveys and climate
records, field measures of environmental conditions, and remotely sensed images
of land cover and temperature. GIS mapping, graphing tools, spatial statistics,
and multivariate statistical analysis will be used to develop indicators of
human, ecosystem, and climate activities and changes over time using. Using key
indicators, neighborhood socioecological cycles will be compared for places that
differ by social class, physical features, and distance from the urban center.
Research results will be disseminated through publications in several
disciplines and presentations at professional
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on urban development in arid regions
will contribute to understanding the regional dimensions of global climate
change. This project will advance the development of integrative theory in the
social and ecological sciences by explaining how human actions influence climate
change at the neighborhood scale. This is a necessary link between fine-scale
ecosystem processes, such as variation in neighborhood microclimates, and
coarse-scale environmental phenomena, such as global warming. The research will
help improve models of urban growth and models of regional climate change. The
project also informs human vulnerability theory, which explains how social
inequalities expose poor people to higher risks of environmental hazards. While
many studies of vulnerability focus on "natural" disasters that are more likely
to harm poor people, this project will study chronic environmental conditions,
specifically climatic variability and change, which poses a more lasting but
less obvious threat to vulnerable populations. This project will also provide
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to participate and learn
about the interface between science and public issues as well as the conduct of
interdisciplinary research. This project is supported by an award resulting from
the FY 2002 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on
the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;