* 0216368
* BE/IDEA: Multifunctional Scanning Nanoprobes for In-Situ Analysis of Chemical Processes at Microbe/Mineral Interfaces
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Andrei Fedorov, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,287,332.00

0216368&lt;br/&gt;Mizaikoff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main thrust of this multi-
disciplinary BE (IDEA) project is to develop and apply novel scanning probe
microscopic (SPM) techniques for imaging chemical and biochemical processes at
microbe-mineral interfaces. The ability to obtain chemical, topographical and
ultimately optical information simultaneously at microbe-mineral interfaces has
limited investigation of complex biological systems in previous research. Our
project fosters interactions between experts in the fields of chemistry,
biochemistry, geochemistry, microbiology, fluids and mass transport,
microfabrication and spectroscopy. For the investigation of complex chemical and
physical processes at microbe-mineral interfaces, correlation of in-situ
obtained chemical, topographical and optical information is necessary, in order
to understand microbial cell chemistry. Micro- and nanoelectrodes are integrated
into atomic force microscopy (AFM) or scanning nearfield optical microscopy
(SNOM) tips based on optimized microfabricated cantilevers. Besides mercury/gold
amalgam electrodes for detecting Fe2+ production, nano-pH-electrodes will be
integrated into scanning probe tips, mapping pH variations at the microbe-
mineral interface. Such multifunctional SPM tips will provide simultaneous
topographical, optical and (electro)chemical information correlated in space and
time down to the nanoscale. Quantitative mathematical modeling and simulation of
the electrochemical and physical processes taking place during the scanning
process is essential for fundamental understanding and interpretation of
obtained results. The developed multifunctional scanning nanoprobes will be used
to determine the mechanism of reductive dissolution of Fe(III) minerals in the
presence of FeRB and/or chemical reductants. Dissimilatory Fe(III) reduction is
a relatively recent addition to the suite of anaerobic respiratory processes
carried out by microorganisms and plays a significant role in global carbon
cycling. Finally, this combined analytical technique can be extended to other
environmental microbial processes involving minerals, such as the reductive
dissolution of uranium, the precipitation of rhodochrosite and siderite, and the
formation of manganese oxides. In addition, multifunctional scanning nanoprobes
will be applicable to a wide variety of electrochemically active complex
processes in a multitude of relevant fields, such as corrosion/biocorrosion,
neurophysiology and cell signaling.&lt;br/&gt;