* 0216347
* Acquisition of a Virtual Presence Surface Profiling Microscope for Nanomanipulation and Nanoassembly
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Robert Cohn, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2005
* USD 159,553.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the invention of the scanning
tunneling microscope (STM) in 1982 and the atomic force microscope (AFM) in 1986
there have been many vivid demonstrations of nanometer, molecular and even
atomic -scale manipulation. Performing such experiments usually is non-trivial,
tedious and labor intensive. Probably the most critical limitation to the wider
use of nanometer-scale manipulation with commercial scanning probe microscopes
(SPM) is their lack of real-time, interactive feedback. With current SPM's an
object is found by scanning the surface to produce an image. Then the tip is
positioned on or near the object. Mechanical forces are applied to move the
object by typing in a tip motion command. The result of the operation is
evaluated by re-imaging. This tedious procedure may need to be repeated
countless times to achieve the objective (of say. bringing two nanoparticles on
a surface into contact.) The SPM electronics do provide signals that could be
used to make this process more interactive: however, traditional SPM interfaces
are designed primarily to scan and collect an image, which can delay access to a
single image data set by a few minutes. A related problem is that sight is not
the best sense to use for all applications. For instance, even when two
nanoparticles appear to be touching in the scanned image, they might instead be
separated by a gap smaller than the width of the probe tip. Using the sense of
touch it might be possible to feel when the particles are engaged. The
increasing value and importance of nanometer-scale manipulation and assembly,
both in fundamental and applied research, requires SPM interfaces that provide
real-time interactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A University of North Carolina
research group developed the first such commercial interface to a SPM, which in
now being marketed through 3rdTech. Inc. The interface provides the operator a
"virtual presence" on the surface of the sample. The operator views the surface
topography in three dimensions from a chosen perspective, illumination and
shading. A six degrees of freedom joystick is used to position the tip and
manipulate objects on the sample surface. The operator can scan the tip over the
surface in a non-perturbing "tapping mode" and feel the topography through the
joystick. Then the SPM is switched to "contact mode" to apply prescribed forces
(again, through the joystick) to move or modify the object. Force versus
position of the manipulation is recorded to provide a quantitative understanding
of the effect of (either in-plane or out-of-plane) forces applied to the object.
Thus, the force-feedback or "haptic" interface enables the operator to find
objects on the surface, to correct for thermal drifts and hysteresis in the
piezoscanner in-real time, and to immediately determine the positional change
after a manipulation. This tactile sense, in particular, greatly enhances the
capabilities of the SPM as a nanomanipulation tool. Accelerated three-
dimensional image rendering further assists the operator in viewing objects as
they are moved or modified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The virtual presence SPM has
been used to find the seam between two nanotubes and then to separate the
nanotubes by pressing on the seam. Also, this SPM has been used to qualitatively
feel (and also quantitatively measure) differences in how smoothly a nanotube
rolls as it is pushed in different directions on a graphite surface. This result
reflects the degree to which the atomic lattices of the graphite and the
nanotube mesh. The virtual presence interface greatly enhances intuition, which
is essential for using the SPM for fundamental discovery and for simplifying the
custom assembly and fabrication of nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
3rdTech virtual presence SPM will be acquired and installed. It will be used
regularly in several ongoing research studies, in a hands-on laboratory class in
nanotechnology practice, and in outreach presentations to secondary schools and
the general public. The instrument will significantly enhance the capabilities
of the proposers to measure electronic and mechanical properties of nanotubes,
nanowires, nanoparticles and biological materials, and to construct networks,
clusters and suspended structures with these materials. General interest
demonstrations of the instrument will vividly illustrate the current abilities
of man to probe, interact with, and manipulate the nanoworld. These outreach
activities can profoundly influence more students to pursue education in
scientific disciplines and promote increased public support of
science.&lt;br/&gt;