* 0216710
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Evolution of the Cetacean Body Plan--Eocene Whales from India
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Johannes Thewissen, Northeast Ohio Medical University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2007
* USD 34,000.00

0216710&lt;br/&gt;Thewissen &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award
supports the US-India Cooperative Research: Evolution of the Cetacean Body Plan-
Eocene Whales from India. US PI Hans Thewissen, Northeastern Ohio University
College of Medicine and Sunil Bajpai, Indian Institute of Technology (IITR),
Roorkee, India will study one of the most remarkable evolutionary
transformations in the vertebrate fossil record, the transformation of cetaceans
(whales, dolphins, and porpoises) from terrestrial quadruped to obligate marine
swimmer. They will examine the evolutionary processes and underlying causes,
with special reference to the organ systems that underwent the greatest changes
in the land to water transition. This project will test hypotheses about the
evolutionary processes that determined much of the cetacean body plan. These
systems (locomotion, balance, and sound transmission) are documented by fossils
and underlie the evolutionary success of the order Cetacea. The PIs will
integrate traditional anatomical and functional data with new insights from
developmental biology to yield new understanding of the evolutionary process.
The investigators will collect and study fossils in India.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This will be a rare opportunity for the
investigators to study the link between paleontology and development. The US and
Indian PIs are eminently well qualified; they have complementary expertise and
an established collaboration. Bajpai is the leading authority on fossil
cetaceans in India and his institution houses its most significant collections.
Beyond the scientific community, this study will enhance tools for teaching
evolution to students and for explaining scientific processes to the public. The
award will further partnerships among researchers including young scientists,
collaborative links between the institutions, and advance theoretical interests
in both countries. This project is jointly funded by the Indian Department of
Science &amp; Technology (DST) under the NSF/DST joint program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;