* 0216496
* RUI: Acquisition of FTIR Spectrometer and Microscope for Faculty-Student Collaborative Research in Geology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Phillip Ihinger, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2004
* USD 76,992.00

0216496&lt;br/&gt;Ihinger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from this Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI)grant will be used to acquire a Fourier Transform Infrared
(FTIR) spectrometer that will be housed in the Department of Geology at the
University of Wisconsin at Eau Claire (UWEC). The instrument will be equipped
with a microscope attachment that will aid in the study of the kinetics of
mineral growth and diffusion in natural geologic environments. The FTIR facility
will be the primary analytical tool for a variety of collaborative research
projects with undergraduates at UWEC. In particular, the instrument will be used
in conjunction with funds secured by the Petrology Division at the NSF (award
EAR-0126285) to investigate the nature of water-bearing impurities in
hydrothermal quartz crystals This research builds on previous contributions
resulting from collaborative research with undergraduate students, including
discerning the growth rate of natural crystals and the timing of thermal events
in metamorphic processes. The instrument will be the first of its kind available
for academic use in an educational environment in all of northern and western
Wisconsin. The University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire will provide a 30% match for
the cost of acquisition of the equipment and will further provide 100% of the
maintenance and upkeep costs of the instrument for the first five years after
purchase.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;