* 0216439
* MRI: Acquisition of an Infrared Thermal Imaging System for Applications in Ecology and Behavior
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Thomas Kunz, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2005
* USD 117,474.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Thomas Kunz at Boston University to acquire an
advanced infrared thermal (IRT) imaging system to investigate the ecology and
behavior of animals and plants. The instrumentation is prepared for rugged
fieldwork and includes a high resolution infrared camera and lenses, video-
signal electronics for real-time data acquisition, and small computer with
specialized software for operation. The system accurately measures the surface
temperature of organisms and objects without making physical contact. Detailed
observations of plants and animals can be made in total darkness and without
impinging on an organism's normal activities. The highly sensitive data enables
further inferences to be made about metabolic activity and behavior for known
organisms under investigation. Research projects involve a variety of animal and
plant species and address problems in thermoregulation and behavior, ecosystem
mass and energy exchange, and biological field assessments in difficult
environmental situations.

The IRT system will be utilized for studies that address behavior, ecology, and
physiological requirements for species of bats, lizards, migratory, ground-
nesting birds, and carnivorous plants. Thermoregulation in lizards, insects,
carnivorous plants, and several bat species will be investigated. Ground-based
thermal imaging data to assess variation in energy balance from soils,
individual leaves, and entire vegetation canopies will enable validation of
computer models and space-based thermal remote sensing of land surfaces. Census
data will be collected of migratory, ground-nesting birds and Brazilian free-
tailed bats; field surveys will be made of foliage roosting bats. Several
proposed studies involve the ecologically-important, Brazilian free-tailed bats
which roost in the Southwest U.S. These particular bats provide one of the most
impressive examples of a continental-scale, natural pest-control service in
North America through consumption of enormous quantities of agricultural pests
that could ultimately affect the Central U.S. corn belt. IRT technology will
produce reliable estimates of the size and activity of the bat colonies,
quantify aspects of insect life cycle and infestation, and ultimately link
levels of bat activity and feeding with levels of insect infestation, crop
damage, and the need for pesticides. Studies are proposed that will provide a
better understanding of the behavior and ecological impact of a variety of
animal species, provide new insight into the life processes of carnivorous
plants, and validate larger-scale, space-based, remote sensing data and computer
models for large land areas.

The broader scope of research with this instrumentation is to develop a clearer
picture of the complex processes within an ecosystem that regulate how water,
energy, and carbon are exchanged between soil and vegetation. Research projects
will also provide training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students, and postdoctoral scientists. Projects will also use the visually
striking images captured by the IRT system to communicate new discoveries to a
broad public audience via articles in popular media, textbooks, TV, and on the
world wide web.