* 0216506
* Providing Access to Scanning Electron Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Joel Martin, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2006
* USD 219,829.00

PROVIDING ACCESS TO SCANNING ELECTRON MICROSCOPY

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Angel Valdes, Brian Brown, Kirk Fitzhugh,
Gordon Hendler and Joel Martin at the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles
County (LACM) to acquire a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). The SEM is a
fundamental research tool in biological and physical sciences, offering a level
of resolution (magnifications over 300,000 times) not possible with light
microscopy, which is limited to magnifications no greater than 1,000 times. A
state-of-the-art SEM with variable pressure capability and an Energy Dispersive
Spectrometry unit (EDS) will be purchased. The variable pressure capability is
necessary to allow examination of uncoated samples, which is critical when
dealing with type material or delicate specimens. The EDS unit will be essential
for geological and archeological research. For most biological samples a sputter
coater will be required. We selected a high resolution sputter coater that
utilizes noble targets such as gold, gold/palladium and platinum. The SEM will
constitute the core of a new research unit shared by seven research departments
including Invertebrate Zoology, Vertebrate Zoology, Botany, Earth Sciences,
Invertebrate Paleontology, Vertebrate Paleontology and Anthropology. Another
important component of the SEM usage at the LACM will be the identification of
collection materials. Staff in the Marine Invertebrate Biodiversity Processing
Center, Earth Studies, and Vertebrate Paleontology departments will be using the
SEM on a regular basis for the identification of minerals, meteorites and
biological specimens. The SEM will also be used by the Education Division to
enhance public understanding of science and highlight the work of museum
scholars. Images produced using the SEM will be a component of future exhibits,
curriculum materials, and web sites produced for educational purposes. Education
staff will be able to arrange tours to the SEM facility with research staff who
will provide access to the machine and explanations of the application of the
SEM technology to natural sciences. The installation of a SEM at LACM will offer
a unique opportunity for integration of on-going research programs and education
activities as a dynamic, interactive exhibit component. The SEM facility will
also provide a tool for affiliated research associates and visitors, enhancing
cooperative research activities with regional, national and international
colleagues. The SEM will be a critical component of this training process and
will provide the LACM students with the necessary tools for their research in
situ.