* 0216580
* Instrument Acquisition to Analyze Water, Soils, and Biomass for Environmental Research, Monitoring, and Assessment
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Alexander Fernald, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2005
* USD 216,922.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr. Alexander Fernald
and co-principal&lt;br/&gt;investigators Dr. Laurie Abbott, Dr. April Ulery, and
Dr. Clint Loest at New&lt;br/&gt;Mexico State University to acquire major
research instrumentation to analyze&lt;br/&gt;water, soils, and biomass for
environmental research, monitoring and&lt;br/&gt;assessment. The awarded funds
will enable purchase of four research&lt;br/&gt;instruments: 1) a Flow Injection
Analysis System with ion chromatograph for analysis of major cations and anions
in water, soils, and biomass; 2)a Nitrogen/Carbon&lt;br/&gt;Analyzer for
determination of N and C in soils and biomass; 3)a Laser Diffraction Particle
Analyzer for measuring particle size distribution of suspended sediment and
soils; and 4) an X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrum Analyzer for analysis of metals in
liquids, soils, and biosolids. The instrumentation will support research that
has the goal of&lt;br/&gt;providing information to: 1) reduce negative
environmental effects of land use&lt;br/&gt;practices, and 2) enhance quality of
natural resources in New Mexico and the&lt;br/&gt;arid Southwest. Land use
impacts on water, soil and biomass threaten&lt;br/&gt;sustainable economic use
and ecological health of rangeland, forest,&lt;br/&gt;agriculture, and wildlife
in New Mexico. Water quality is a growing concern&lt;br/&gt;with increasing
competition for limited water supplies and decreasing&lt;br/&gt;availability of
high quality irrigation and drinking water. Rapidly growing&lt;br/&gt;dairies in
New Mexico generate large amounts of animal waste, and pollution&lt;br/&gt;from
confined animal production threatens water and soil resources.
Metal&lt;br/&gt;contamination is a problem in areas of New Mexico with naturally
high mineral&lt;br/&gt;occurrence and in areas impacted by mining, military, and
agricultural&lt;br/&gt;activities. &lt;br/&gt;As a minority-serving land grant
institution, the mission of New Mexico State&lt;br/&gt;University is to conduct
meaningful research, to educate and train scientists,&lt;br/&gt;and to extend
information to the citizens of the state. The state-of-the-
art&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation will provide a leap forward in the ability of
university&lt;br/&gt;investigators to conduct needed environmental research and
fulfill the mission&lt;br/&gt;to educate. The instrumentation will initially
support the research activities&lt;br/&gt;of four investigators, faculty in
three departments, and federal researchers. &lt;br/&gt;It will be used to train
graduate and undergraduate students in the use of the&lt;br/&gt;instruments as
part of their research. Obtaining this equipment will increase&lt;br/&gt;NMSU
competitiveness for future grant proposals. The equipment will
support&lt;br/&gt;research to provide critical information that will allow
agencies, communities,&lt;br/&gt;and individuals to participate in meaningful
and sustainable programs that&lt;br/&gt;reduce negative environmental effects of
land use practices and that enhance&lt;br/&gt;the quality of water, soil and
biomass resources.&lt;br/&gt;