* 0216576
* Center for Theoretical Biological Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2009
* Jose Onuchic, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* C.  Caldwell
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,648,900.00

Biological physics is rapidly emerging as a new major new frontier for science
in the 21st century. This field involves a cross-fertilization of ideas and
methods from biology and biochemistry on the one hand and the physics of comple
systems on the other. Its goals are to both develop the conceptual underpinnings
of a new and more quantitative biology as well as to expand our notions of
complex matter physics by learning from evolution. The center for Theoretical
Biological Physics (CTBP), located at UC San Diego and with the participation of
the San Diego Supercomputer Center, the Scripps Research Institute and the Salk
Institute of Biological Studies, will act as a focal point for this emerging
discipline. The CTBP will utilize the broad expertise of this La Jolla-based
community to pioneer new approaches to a whole variety of critical issues,
including the evolution and functioning of genetic regulatory networks, the
specificity of protein-protein interactions, the dynamic control of cell
motility and the synaptic mechanisms underlying learning. A complementary set of
activities focused on developing state-of-the-art computational methods in
support of biological physics is being funded by an ITR grant. Training at
multiple levels, from undergraduate up to senior investigator, will be
integrated directly into the CTBP's research efforts; this is particularly
necessary for biological physics, as it is inherently cross-disciplinary and
inherently requires close and continual contact between theory and experiment.
Our success will be measured both by the specific research accomplishments of
our members and visitors and by the overall effect will have in fostering the
nationwide growth and coherence of this immensely exciting field of physics
research. The CTBP is jointly funded by the Division of Physics in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.