* 0216279
* Development of an Autonomous Real-time Remote Observatory (ARRO)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* James LaBelle, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 08/31/2005
* USD 1,617,152.00

This work will develop an Autonomous Real-time Remote Observatory (ARRO), which
will be designed to accommodate an integrated suite of at least a dozen
instruments, with the goal of enabling reliable multi-instrument observations
from extremely cold polar sites, such as the Antarctic plateau and the interior
of Greenland. It will include a power system and heated space sufficient for the
experiments, as well as the capability for data acquisition, data storage, and
real time data transmission via satellite. As part of the proposed work, two
prototypes of this observatory will be built and tested for extended periods of
time in cold chambers, on Mt. Washington, and at the South Pole.&lt;br/&gt;
Significant outstanding science issues in several diverse fields drive the need
for a network of reliable autonomous observatories capable of operation in polar
regions. In solar-terrestrial physics, the geomagnetic polar cap forms a key
window on the interaction between the solar wind and the Earth's magnetosphere.
In the field of atmospheric science one vital object of study for this new
technology is the Type 1a (nitric acid trihydrate) polar stratospheric cloud,
implicated in the annual austral springtime destruction of stratospheric ozone
over Antarctica. For terrestrial seismic studies, a central goal is determining
the crustal and mantle structure from analysis of seismic signals received
following earthquakes, a methodology which requires a network of receiving
stations over the area of study. The seismic character of Antarctica is not
well-known, and furthermore, the lack of seismic stations at very high latitudes
translates into ignorance of the polar regions of the Earth's core, since
acoustic ray paths penetrating this region can only be received at extremely
high latitudes.&lt;br/&gt; While one of the immediate applications of the
proposed ARRO development is to replace the current generation of Automatic
Geophysical Observatories (AGO's) in the Antarctic interior, the ARRO design is
sufficiently agile to incorporate additional instrumentation and enable pursuit
of a broad science agenda by a large and growing group of institutions and
individual investigators.&lt;br/&gt; Finally, ARRO development includes several
different layers of research and research training. Students will be directly
involved in the development, from the initial design stages to deployment of the
units to Mt. Washington and the South Pole. The eventual establishment of a
network of observatories over the polar cap will involve a much larger number of
students in a broad scientific agenda. ARRO also includes significant
connections to industry and government units outside of the academic science
community, and their participation will sharpen the capabilities of these
companies to serve the nation in applications of technology to challenging
environments of cold weather and high altitudes.&lt;br/&gt;