* 0216876
* Collaborative Research:  How the First Emerging Market Re-Emerged After Financial Collapse
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Ann Carlos, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 232,682.00

This project seeks to expand our understanding of the years surrounding the
South Sea Bubble of 1720, the first great financial crisis of modern capitalism,
by focusing on the individuals who actually purchased shares and thus made
portfolio decisions. We examine in detail the responses of stock market
participants before, during, and especially after the financial collapse of the
South Sea Company. To do this, we exploit data we have already collected (NSF
99-11270) and continue to collect and encode on the holdings and transfers of
the major financial assets available in the London market among all individuals
who held these assets before, during, and after the crisis of 1720. We
reconstruct the transfers of stock holdings in the South Sea Company itself
after its reorganization in 1723, as well as in the Bank of England, the East
India Company (both competing with the South Sea Company for investors), the
Royal African Company (complementary to the South Sea Company), and the Hudson's
Bay Company (completely removed from the action). Combining all four sources,
then, we determine how all stockholders responded to the spectacular rise and
fall of the South Sea Company in two competing companies, a complementary
company, and a noncommittal company.&lt;br/&gt;Our examination of the changes
that took place in the distribution of these assets, especially in the period
1721 to 1730, is an intensive analysis of the reallocation of financial risk by
market participants in the first emerging market after a major financial
collapse. Especially interesting to us are contrasts in trading activity between
the pre- and post-bubble periods and the changes we observe in activity by
specialized traders as well as the role played by the increasingly diverse
consumer base. Analyzing these changes in individual behavior within the
unregulated and untaxed stock market of the time helps us understand how
financial markets recover from systemic shocks.&lt;br/&gt;