* 0216131
* MRI:  Acquisition of Equipment for Purdue Envision Center for Data Perceptualization
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Christoph Hoffmann, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2005
* USD 862,011.00

EIA-0216131 Christoph Hoffmann James Bottum; Davis S. Ebert; Ananth Grama; Ahmed
H. Sameh Purdue University

MRI: Acquisition of Equipment for Purdue Envision Center for Data
Perceptualization

This proposal, developing techniques to effectively utilize the information
capacity available to human comprehension, aims at acquiring the visualization,
sensing, and haptics infrastructure required for a new center. The center,
connected to ultra high-speed network hubs, cable broadcast and high performance
computing facilities, and on-campus technology incubators, will support
applications' needs by a spectrum of research graphics, visualization, and
systems infrastructure, as well as provide development, technology transfer,
education, and outreach. The infrastructure includes 3D and next generation
ultra-high resolution displays, and sensing and haptic devices. The project
addresses the challenges posed by the devices with respect to perceptualization
techniques, infrastructure for supporting data and processing rates for
effective use, and integration of applications into the environment. Educational
and outreach efforts include a comprehensive graphics curriculum built around
the facility, minority recruitment, and retention efforts, national
visualization fore, series of symposia and workshops, development of online
educational material, public domain software, and use of Access grid as a
vehicle for dissemination and collaboration. Moreover, the I-Light high-speed
optical fibre infrastructure (10Gb/sec) will be connected with the facility.