* 0216556
* Acquisition of Powder X-Ray Diffraction and Spectroscopy Instrumentation for Mineral and Soil Research at New Mexico Highlands University
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Michael Meyer, New Mexico Highlands University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2004
* USD 91,188.00

0216556 Lindline

The Natural Resources Management Department at New Mexico Highlands University
(NMHU) will use this Major Research Instrumentation award to acquire a powder
x-ray diffractometer and direct reading spectroscope for earth materials
research. The new instruments will serve the following functions: (1) provide
analytical capabilities for rock, mineral, sediment, and soil research; (2)
facilitate teaching and applying key concepts in geology, environmental science,
and natural resources management courses; and (3) support student training in
modern analytical methods. The powder x-ray diffractometer will permit the
identification of different crystalline phases, compositional determinations of
solid solution minerals, and the calculation of mineral structures. The
spectroscope will provide bulk chemical compositional data for rock and mineral
samples. This instrument acquisition addresses the need for modern analytical
equipment to support NMHU's mission of providing an excellent, up-to-date,
undergraduate education within the sciences. NMHU is a historically Hispanic
institution committed to programs that focus on its multiethnic student body
(76% minority students), especially the Hispanic and Native American cultures
that are distinctive of New Mexico. This equipment will facilitate student-
involved faculty research in a number of regional projects of interest to New
Mexico students including the Cenozoic volcanic history of northeastern New
Mexico, the sedimentary record of local lakes, and the effects of fires on
forest soils and native vegetation. Given the 76% minority student population
served at NMHU and the approximately 40 earth science majors, the
instrumentation will positively impact the education and training of
underrepresented groups. ***