* 0216802
* Development of a Facility for Ultrahigh Resolution Depth Profiling using Nuclear Resonances for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Torgny Gustafsson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 84,000.00

Rutgers University will build a facility for very-high resolution (&lt;1 nm)
depth profiling of light elements in thin films using narrow nuclear resonances.
This facility will be installed at an existing accelerator at the Laboratory for
Surface Modification (LSM) at Rutgers University and will complement several
existing depth profiling techniques there. It will be the first facility of its
kind in the US. The experiments will utilize several different extremely narrow
(&lt;10 eV) nuclear resonances. By scanning the incident ion energy, the dept
from the surface at which the nuclear reactions occur can be varied and
information about the depth distribution of the species under study is obtained.
Examples of the diverse applications to be pursued include studies of diffusion,
segregation and breakdown in ionic conductors, diffusion of sodium in minerals
in interplanetary space, novel materials for high performance computer chips,
and the long term stability of materials used for storage of nuclear waste.
Users outside the LSM, from Rutgers University and elsewhere, can also access
this facility, primarily through collaborations. The educational program
includes weekend hands-on work in the laboratory by high school students;
computer based experiments by undergraduates and summer workshops for senior
materials scientists. Research using ion beams is attractive to a wide range of
students because of the technical sophistication of these experiments, the
"straightforward" (classical, model independent) quantitative data analysis and
the close coupling to very real modern technical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers University will construct a novel
facility for depth profiling of light elements by ion beam analysis using narrow
nuclear resonances. This will be the first facility for nuclear resonance depth
profiling in the US. In many scientific applications, one needs to quantify the
number of atoms as a function of their distance from the surface. Examples of
such diverse applications, described in the proposal, include studies of
diffusion, segregation and breakdown in ionic conductors, diffusion of sodium in
minerals in interplanetary space, novel materials for high performance computer
chips, and the long term stability of materials used for storage of nuclear
waste. The facility will utilize several different extremely narrow nuclear
resonances. Depth profiling will be accomplished by changing the incident ion
energy, so that the depth at which nuclear reactions occur is varied
continuously. The educational program includes high school students,
undergraduates and also senior materials scientists. Research using ion beams is
attractive to a wide range of students. The technical sophistication of these
experiments, the "straightforward" (classical, model independent) quantitative
data analysis and the close coupling to very real modern technical applications
makes it possible to attract promising students to science.&lt;br/&gt;