* 0216097
* Acquistion of a Shared Microscopy Resource Center for the University of Southern Maine
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Stephen Pelsue, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2005
* USD 170,009.00

Abstract

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Vincent P. Markowski at the University of
Southern Maine to equip a shared microscopy center. A critical element in
developing a strong program of research and research training at publicly funded
universities involves the acquisition of modern equipment available to faculty
and their research trainees. The purchase of a confocal laser scanning
microscope and a Fluorescence Research photomicroscope will greatly enhance the
fluorescence microscopy capabilities of current University of Southern Maine
faculty and will also serve the needs of new faculty being recruited into the
recently formed multidisciplinary Bioscience Research Institute of Southern
Maine. The confocal laser scanning microscope with its coherent light sources
and the capability of rejecting out-of-focus interference will permit
investigators to obtain clear images of optical sections and will permit three
dimensional image analysis of specimens that would be impossible to effectively
examine using conventional epifluorescence microscopy. Advanced capabilities
such as time-lapse observation of fluorescent events will also significantly
extend currently available imaging resources. The versatile fluorescence system
will complement the confocal system. Acquisition of this instrumentation will
allow the laboratory of Dr. Vincent Markowski to identify immunohistochemical
effects from the crop fungicide vinclozolin. The laboratory of Dr. Michael
Godard will use the instrumentation to examine the contractile mechanics of
skeletal single muscle fiber samples. The laboratory of Dr. S. Monroe Dubois
will use the instrumentation to gain new insights into the biology of gamma-
herpesvirus persistence. High resolution optical sectioning of tissues will
allow studies aimed at cellular localization and molecular interactions of viral
gene products, temporal and cell type specificity of viral gene expression, and
cellular signaling in virus infected cells. The laboratory of Dr. Stephen Pelsue
will use the instrumentation to study the cellular localization and molecular
interactions of a transcription factor. Analysis of translocation and activation
of other transcription factors as well as B lymphocyte apoptosis will also be
examined with confocal microscopy. A significant goal of the University of
Southern Maine is to become one of the top-ranked, regional comprehensive
universities in the nation by 2010. In this endeavor USM is working to
significantly expand academic programs in science and technology. In keeping
with these two institutional goals, faculty are committed to prepare the next
generation of American scientists in a modern scientific setting and to stress
to our students, through active research, the importance of scientific inquiry.
The acquisition of the desired instrumentation will substantially increase
research productivity, research training and the success of external research
support and funding. Furthermore, through the use of the proposed
instrumentation, students who receive research training under the supervision of
a particular Bioscience faculty member will have the opportunity to collaborate
with undergraduates, graduate students, and faculty from other departments, thus
extending the breadth of student research training and promoting the concept of
interdisciplinary research in the next generation of scientists.