* 0216920
* Sensory Transduction of the Green Light-Induced Reversal of the Stomatal Response to Blue Light: Mechanisms and Functional Implications
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Eduardo Zeiger, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 08/31/2005
* USD 315,000.00

Regulation of stomatal apertures by guard cells controls leaf gas exchange and
modulates photosynthesis and plant water use. Guard cells sense many
environmental and hormonal signals through complex sensory transducing cascades.
Light is a major signal modulating stomatal responses. Like many other plant
cells, guard cells have a specific sensory transducing cascade that uses blue
light as an environmental signal. Recent, NSF-supported studies with guard cells
have discovered that blue light-stimulated stomatal opening can be fully
reversed by green light. The green reversal can be observed in light-pulse
studies: If a pulse of blue light is followed by a green light pulse, stomatal
opening is not observed, if the green pulse is followed by second blue light
pulse, the opening response is restored. The green reversal is also observed
under continuous blue and green illumination. In this case the reversal depends
on the green light dose, with full reversal observed under a 2:1 green to blue
light ratio. The action spectrum for blue light-stimulated opening has the
"3-finger" fine structure typical of many blue light responses in plants. The
action spectrum for the green reversal also shows a 3-finger structure, red-
shifted by about 90 nm. The carotenoid, zeaxanthin has an absorption spectrum
closely matching the action spectrum for blue light-stimulated opening, and
carotenoid isomerization in a protein environment often red-shifts the
absorption spectrum. One of the objectives of this project is to determine the
nature of the photochemical reactions mediating the blue-green reversal, the
identity of the involved chromophore(s), and the early sensory transducing
events leading to the green reversal of blue light-stimulated opening. The
photochemistry of the early sensory transducing steps will be studied by HPLC,
UV-visible, resonance Raman, and Fourier Transform Infrared Absorption
Spectroscopy (FTIR). Several photoreceptor mutants such as npq1 and phot1 phot2
will be studied in order to determine whether their genetic lesions have
impaired the blue green reversal response. Another objective is to investigate
whether the blue green reversal response in guard cells senses the blue:green
photon ratio of solar radiation reaching leaves growing in sun and shade
conditions, and transduces it into acclimation strategies. Success in these
studies will characterize a new photobiological mechanism of plant cells, which
could mediate plant acclimations and adaptations. The recently discovered
reversal of blue light-stimulated stomatal opening by green light offers a new
understanding of the ways plant cells respond to light. Detailed investigation
of the photochemical reactions mediating the blue/green reversal could open the
way for the unambiguous identification of a blue light photoreceptor in guard
cells. In addition, research on the blue/green reversal in the intact leaf could
significantly enrich our understanding of ways by which leaves acclimate to sun
and shade conditions. Success in the research project supported by this award
should significantly enrich our knowledge of plant function.