* 0216084
* Acquisition of a High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscope for Nanomaterials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Charles Winter, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2003
* USD 400,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports Wayne State
University with the acquisition of a 200 kV Transmission Electron Microscope for
interdisciplinary materials research and education at the institution. The
proposed instrument will have wide accessibility to campus researchers and will
be used as a central analytical tool for many NSF-funded nanomaterials research
projects in the departments of Chemistry, Engineering, and Physics and the
Institute for Manufacturing Research. Research areas that will be supported by
the proposed instrument include discrete nanoparticle synthesis, nanostructure
by design, and materials processing and manufacturing. The instrument will
impact areas as diverse as solid state physics, materials science, electrical
engineering, chemistry, and medical science. All of the Principal Investigators
are currently supported by NSF (and other) grants. Furthermore, this instrument
will be an important resource for the training and education of undergraduate
and graduate students, as well as postdoctoral researchers. Finally, this
instrument will be accessible to local high technology startup companies and
industry, and should play a key role in economic development and new job
creation in southeast Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major
Research Instrumentation program supports Wayne State University with the
acquisition of a transmission electron microscope for interdisciplinary
materials research and education. An electron microscope is required to allow
visualization of nanometer-sized materials that are prepared in many research
projects that are being conducted at Wayne State University. The instrument will
have wide accessibility to campus researchers and will be used as a central
analytical tool for many NSF-funded nanomaterials research projects in the
departments of Chemistry, Engineering, and Physics and the Institute for
Manufacturing Research. Furthermore, this instrument will be an important
resource for the training and education of our undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as postdoctoral researchers. Finally, this instrument will be
accessible to local high technology startup companies and industry, and should
play a key role in economic development and new job creation in southeast
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;