* 0216812
* Acquisition of Instruments for Environmental Research and Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Pauline Lindo, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2005
* USD 72,234.00

ABSTRACT: &lt;br/&gt; A grant has been awarded to Dr. Pauline Lindo at Alabama
A&amp;M University towards the purchase of an ICP-MS instrument for conducting
environmental research and training in the Dept. of Plant and Soil Science. The
Inductively Coupled Argon Plasma-Mass Spectrophotometer (ICP-MS) is extremely
useful in quantifying trace concentrations (ppb, ppt) of heavy metals in various
media and will be used to identify and quantify the various species jeopardizing
environmental quality, human and animal health, any seasonal peaks of these
species, and to issue health alerts to the general public based on models to be
developed from the research data generated. The research will include cropping
of contaminated soils to a number of hyperaccumulators, plants capable of
extracting large quantities of soil heavy metals. At specific intervals, soil
and percolating water will be sampled at 6 depths to monitor/track movement of
heavy metals to groundwater supplies. Runoff water will be sampled almost
immediately after each storm event and tested for transported heavy metals and
species - sources of contamination for surface water. Runoff samples will be
evaluated for sediment content, to determine the transport rate of heavy metals
(in adsorbed, exchangeable, or soluble state) across the soil surface. All soil,
water, and plant tissue samples will be analyzed for metals and species. Uptake
by plants will be correlated with reductions in soil concentrations, to
calculate a remediation rate for these soils by various plant species. This
project will be repeated in the fall and winter to evaluate seasonal effects on
heavy metal loadings and speciation, so that a model can be developed to predict
toxicity levels in soil, plant, and water as affected by seasonal variability.
Since sorption of metals from aqueous solution onto solid surfaces is an
important process that influences accumulation and transport in the environment,
fate and transport studies will include kinetics and mechanisms of heavy metal
retention/release on soil mineral clay surfaces as affected by inorganic anions.
The data generated from this study will assist in designing practical and
economical remediation strategies to effectively clean up toxic heavy metal-
contaminated sites. Measurement of heavy metal species is necessary to determine
adsorption/desorption mechanism(s), and the instrument will be indispensable for
this purpose. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The instrument will offer research training
and development of research skills to faculty, staff, and minority students at
the BS, MS, and PhD levels through summer programs and internships (for BS
students), and research projects (MS and PhD students). This study will offer
minority students (many of them female), the future scientists, the opportunity
to learn, grow, and develop the skills they need to launch their careers. This
instrument will also be used for teaching several curriculum courses at Alabama
A&amp;M University as an integral part of training. Collaborators from nearby
colleges will have access to this instrument primarily for faculty and graduate
student research and training.&lt;br/&gt;