* 0216008
* Acquisition of a Flow Cytometer for Rapid Isolation of Mutant Drosophila Embryos
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Stephen Crews, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2005
* USD 159,600.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Stephen Crews at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill to purchase a high speed Drosophila embryo sorter. The
Sorter allows large numbers of mutant organisms to be isolated for biochemical
and molecular experimentation. The overall goal of the research at UNC-Chapel
Hill involves using genetics and the study of mutant strains of Drosophila to
understand the molecular and cellular basis of animal development and
physiology. By comparing biochemical and cellular phenomena in mutant vs. non-
mutant Drosophila strains, it can be determined how observed differences
contribute to the biological process being studied. In this way, it is possible
to understand, in great detail, how molecules work together to generate complex
biological structures and phenomena. However, one major problem that has
hampered progress is the inability to isolate sufficient numbers of mutant
embryos for molecular and biochemical analyses. The recent development of the
embryo sorter, which combines the technologies of flow cytometry and the use of
Green Fluorescent Protein transgenic Drosophila strains, now allows the
isolation of sufficient numbers of embryos for biochemical studies. The embryo
sorter also allows high-throughput screening of mutant and transgenic embryos
for the identification of novel mutants and genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Drosophila group at UNC-Chapel Hill consists of 8 labs focused on the molecular
genetics of embryonic development and physiology. All of the labs are committed
to understanding biological processes using a comprehensive array of
technologies involving genetics, cell biology, biochemistry, and molecular
biology. Labs are interested in nervous system development, cell adhesion,
hormonal control, cell signaling, cell cycle control, RNA splicing, gene
transcription, and DNA repair. Large numbers of embryos will be run through the
COPAS Select to isolate pure populations of mutant embryos. These embryos will
be analyzed for changes in: (1) RNA populations and gene expression, and (2)
protein levels and modifications. This will provide important insight into the
biological role that the mutant gene normally plays. In addition, the COPAS
Select will be used to sort through tens of thousands of embryos looking for
those that have exceptional properties indicating the existence of novel genes,
transgenic insertions, cellular markers, and mutations. These new entities will
allow the expansion of research efforts into promising new
directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drosophila research has a number of benefits to
the public involving novel insight into basic biological processes, human
health, and agriculture. One of the most important lessons learned during the
past 20 years of biological research is that the genes carrying-out important
biological processes in humans are conserved in Drosophila. This includes many
disease genes. The same is true for insect pests. Because of the advanced
genetics of Drosophila, it is advantageous to initially study basic biological
processes in Drosophila and then continue study in other species, including
humans. There are currently a number of biotechnology companies that are
utilizing Drosophila to study problems in applied science. It should also be
emphasized that besides applied research, work on Drosophila has proven to be
one of the best experimental systems for understanding how biological organisms
function. This basic knowledge is one of the cornerstones of 20th century
science (5 Nobel prizes have been awarded to Drosophila researchers), and
promises to provide spectacular results in the 21st century. Further
significance of the funded work concerns the educational mission of the
University of North Carolina. The Drosophila labs are active training grounds
for postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, undergraduates, and high school
students. Use of sophisticated equipment, such as the COPAS Select, to solve
complex scientific problems will enhance the education and productivity of these
students.&lt;br/&gt;