* 0216323
* MRI/ECS: Development of Wide Band Gap Semiconductor Materials Testing System Based on Light Induced Transient Grating Technique
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Michael Shur, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract for proposal ECS-0216323 "Development of Wide Band Gap Semiconductor
Materials Testing System Based on Light Induced Transient Grating Technique"
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to develop a unique Wide Band Gap Semiconductor
Materials Testing System Based on Light Induced Transient Grating Technique.
This system will allow us to obtain detailed information about materials
properties of bulk substrates, epitaxial layers, and heterostructures for wide
band gap semiconductors enabling the optimization of the device design for high
power electronics, solid state lighting, and UV emitters and detector
applications for detection of hazardous biological substances. In particular, we
will evaluate substrate material and surface preparation, and buffer and
epitaxial layers for LEDs, laser diodes and transistors. The studies of non-
equilibrium recombination and transport parameters that will be made possible
with this system will allow us to optimize growth regimes and structure design
for heterostructures and quantum wells and to optimize n-type and p-type doping
regimes and conditions. This unique system allows for nondestructive
characterization technique, which could bridge the gap between optical and
electronic characterization of wide band gap semiconductors. We believe that
light-induced transient grating technique capable of performing in deep UV
spectral range is the best method to extract carrier generation, trapping,
recombination and diffusion characteristics. This system will be unique in
several respects: it will allow for sub-picosecond pulses, will have sub-
picosecond time resolution; tunability in 200-800 nm range, and automatic
operation. It will allow us to apply both external electric field and mechanical
deformation. The proposed system will perform in deep UV spectral range and will
be used for the studies of GaN, AlGaN, AlInGaN and SiC materials, AlInGaN/GaN
heterostructures and AlInGaN-based high Al content quantum well
structures&lt;br/&gt;