* 0216180
* Aquisition of Image Analysis Instrumentation for Environmental Microbiology, Cell Biology and Genetics Research and Teaching in an Undergraduate Institution
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* David Huber, West Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2005
* USD 47,027.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. David H. Huber and Dr. Mark Chatfield at West
Virginia State College for the acquisition of an Image Analysis system. The
digital image analysis applications that are required by many molecular biology
techniques that involve DNA, RNA and protein imaging. This instrument will be
used for environmental microbiology and cell biology research, as well as
molecular biology instruction in several Biology Department classes. The
environmental microbiology research involves a long-term study of microbial
diversity and microbial metabolism in model bioprocessing reactors that are used
for degrading organic matter. This research will demonstrate how the composition
of a microbial community is linked to its overall metabolism. A second area of
research will examine the molecular controls of plant cell division using model
plant cell cultures.

The goals of the environmental microbiology research are: 1) to examine the
composition of the microbial communities in thermophilic anaerobic bioprocessing
reactors, and 2) to determine the fate of antibiotic resistance genes that enter
bioprocessing reactors.

Bioprocessing reactors, also called digesters, transform organic waste into
methane, a useful combustible gas, and fertilizer. The microbial interactions
responsible for these chemical transformations in bioreactors are very complex
and not well understood. Improvements in reactor biotechnology will be a
practical benefit of this research. The plant cell division research will
improve our understanding of the molecular processes that govern plant growth.
The analyzer will also be used for molecular biology training in several classes
at West Virginia State College. The new instrument will significantly advance
student training in molecular biology, microbiology and genetics.