* 0216192
* Development of a High Performance Offset Gregorian Antenna for the Colorado State University (CSU)-CHILL National Radar Facility
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2002,09/30/2008
* Steven Rutledge, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,406,010.00

Under this MRI, the Principal Investigator will develop, acquire, install and
test a new high performance offset Gregorian antenna for the Colorado State
University (CSU)-CHILL radar facility. The CSU-CHILL radar facility has been
operated for many years by CSU as a multi-user facility available to all
qualified researchers. The facility is supported primarily through a cooperative
agreement between CSU and NSF.

The specifications for the new antenna are stringent and push the antenna design
and manufacturing technology. A substantial reduction in sidelobe levels over
the current CSU-CHILL antenna is expected. This improvement results from the
offset Gregorian design that eliminates blockages by the feedhorn and feed
support struts. The cross-polarization levels are expected to be less than -35
dB in any plane. The ratio of two dimensional integrated cross-polarized energy
to copolarized energy over all planes is expected to be reduced by around 10 dB
compared with the current antenna. These correspond to significant reductions in
expected (two-way) sidelobe clutter-to-mainlobe signal power (16-20 dB), and
significant improvement in the radiated polarization purity offered by the dual-
offset design relative to the prime-focus parabolic reflector antenna.

These high antenna performance levels are needed to accurately measure
conventional Doppler data and the full polarimetric covariance matrix in the
presence of strong spatial gradients of precipitation echo, especially in severe
storms. Currently, the relatively poorer sidelobe performance near the planes of
the feed support struts tends to cause large errors in many of the key
polarimetric measurements even in the presence of modest precipitation echo
spatial gradients. The new antenna performance is expected to nearly double the
precipitation echo spatial gradient that can be tolerated without significant
error in the polarimetric measurements. It will also greatly improve the quality
of conventional Doppler data especially in the context of data assimilation by
numerical models. The new antenna will permit cutting-edge research using the
full covariance matrix to greatly improve the quantitative remote sensing of
cloud and storm microphysics, and possibly in the future use of assimilation of
polarimetric data by numerical models. It will be the only such research weather
radar of its kind in the world at S-band operating frequency.

Remote sensing using weather radar has been the impetus for many meteorological
advances over the last few decades. Such advances have included gaining
fundamental understanding of severe weather phenomena such as thunderstorms,
flash floods, tornadoes, hurricanes and microbursts. Much of this knowledge has
led to practical societal benefits such as radar warning systems that have been
adopted by the operational weather agencies. The CSU-CHILL facility has made
substantial contributions to this knowledge base over the years. The new antenna
system will help keep what are robust, ongoing research and educational
activities at the cutting edge of radar meteorological research.