* 0216913
* Acquisition of Scanning Probe Microscopy Apparatus for Research and Education in Atomic and Molecular Manipulation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Hari Manoharan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 130,805.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will enable
groundbreaking experiments that seek to apply the "bottom-up" approach of atomic
and molecular manipulation to several focused areas in science and technology.
The primary experimental apparatus for these investigations is a custom-built
low-temperature scanning probe microscope capable of both studying and
controlling matter at atomic length scales. The tunneling mode of the apparatus
will be exploited to perform scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) within an
environment comprised of ultra-high vacuum, ultra-low temperature down to 500
mK, a high magnetic field up to 14 T, and a multiple-probe sample stage for
performing simultaneous electron transport measurements. Achieving these
challenging conditions requires the acquisition of the specialized equipment
described in this award. Undergraduate and graduate students working directly on
these projects will integrate and operate the proposed instrumentation to
perform state-of-the-art experiments. In synergy with these laboratory
components, this instrumentation will critically augment a substantial
educational and outreach program already being implemented by the PI and
Stanford University.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation
for Materials Research program will enable groundbreaking experiments that seek
to apply the "bottom-up" approach of atomic and molecular manipulation to
several focused areas in science and technology. This scientific effort is
interdisciplinary in nature, centering on physics and materials science but
involving ideas, techniques, and conundrums from other fields such as chemistry,
engineering, and information technology. The primary experimental apparatus for
these investigations is a custom-built scanning probe microscope capable of both
studying and controlling matter at atomic length scales, requiring the
acquisition of the specialized equipment described in this award. Undergraduate
and graduate students working directly on these projects will integrate and
operate the proposed instrumentation to perform state-of-the-art experiments. In
synergy with these laboratory components, this instrumentation will critically
augment a substantial educational and outreach program already being implemented
by the PI and Stanford University. Through these multifaceted contacts between
the research agenda, students, and people outside the laboratory, the proposed
instrumentation will have a broad and unique impact beyond the traditional realm
of experimental science. In recognition of the importance of this award,
Stanford University is providing cost-sharing funds amounting to 50% of the
funds provided by NSF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;