* 0216944
* Visual computation of surfaces under partial occlusion and transparency
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Manish Singh, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher T. Kello
* 08/31/2005
* USD 179,845.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Manish Singh will conduct two
years of research on visual perception-how we see a complex, changing world of
overlapping objects. The perceived world includes three dimensional objects and
surfaces. The inputs to our eyes, however, are not "objects" or "surfaces," but
fluctuations in the two-dimensional arrays of light projected onto each retina.
These retinal arrays change a great deal as we move in the world-as a couch gets
partly hidden behind a coffee table when walking across a room, or a dog is
partly seen behind thick foliage. A fundamental and unsolved problem of vision
is to understand how our brain can sort out such complex changing light arrays
into perceived surfaces and objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded research
uses computer-generated stereoscopic displays in which some objects are partly
occluded by other objects, and thus present only disjoined portions of their
boundaries to the eyes. Despite this, observers perceive complete, unitary,
objects-not disparate fragments. One aspect of the research program examines
constraints involving both surface shape and contour geometry that may determine
the continuity and shape of partly occluded objects. A second aspect of this
research concerns when an occluding object is partially transparent. In this
case, light reflected from two different surfaces (the transparent, and the
underlying opaque surface) is merged at the retinas, but we see two separate
surfaces placed at different depths along the same line of sight. This component
of the research investigates the geometric (figural) and photometric (light
intensity) constraints that the brain uses to split image luminance into two
distinct surfaces placed at different depths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will enhance understanding of a central aspect of human vision. Additionally, it
will contribute valuable knowledge that can be used to construct artificial
vision systems for recovery of surface layouts from camera images. &lt;br/&gt;