* 0216207
* MRI/RUI:  Development of aluminum nitride and aluminum boride AMS source targets
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Carey Reed, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2003
* USD 24,985.00

0216207&lt;br/&gt;Flarend&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) grant provides support for investigations of possible
alternative Aluminum compound source targets for subsequent Accelerator Mass
Spectrometry (AMS)-based analysis of sputtered Al- ions to determine the
isotopic abundance of the cosmogenic nuclide 26Al. Aluminum-26 is a rare isotope
that can be used to date exposed rocks surfaces. The capability of AMS for high
precision analysis of 26Al for surface exposure age dating has created something
of a resurgence in the field of geomorphology where scientists have long
struggled to nail down rates of erosional processes. This effort will
investigate two alternatives to the current standard Al2O3 source target for
subsequent AMS analysis of 26Al, namely, aluminum nitride (AlN) and aluminum
boride (AlB2). Preliminary work conducted at PRIME Lab by the investigator has
shown some evidence for much higher negative Al ion yield as a result of Cs+
sputtering of AlN and AlB2 targets than for standard alumina targets but
potential isobaric interferences were not fully resolved. The PI and an
undergraduate student will therefore conduct further interlaboratory AMS
analyses of AlN and AlB2 targets at the Purdue Rare Isotope Measurement facility
(PRIME Lab) and at the higher energy Livermore AMS facility, GEOCAMS to further
characterize new target materials. In addition, they will conduct preliminary
testing of storage, packing and loading of samples to assess possible sample
degradation that would effect subsequent AMS analytical precision and accuracy
and will disseminate the results.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;