* 0216334
* Development of a High-Performance Digital Video Collaboratory (DVC) for Learning Sciences Research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Roy Pea, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2005
* USD 455,684.00

With support from a NSF Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award, Dr. Roy Pea
will develop a new develop a new instrument for high-resolution digital
panoramic audio-video recording, analysis and communication. The Digital Video
Collaboratory (DVC) will provide an integrated suite of hardware technologies
and Stanford's DIVER software system (Digital Interactive Video Exploration and
Reflection) will allow researchers and educators to generate and share different
points-of-view (POV) and analytic perspectives on the same richly recorded
classroom events. Panoramic image acquisition is make possible by using a multi-
camera digital video system coupled with mirrors to capture images over 360
degrees of horizontal arc. These camera images are then stitched together by
software so that the captured scene may be displayed on a computer monitor as a
rectangle that depicts the "unwrapped" 360-degree field of
view.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop the DVC the team will integrate a state-
of-the-art digital panoramic video capture system and a room-size microphone
array in an experimental space with associated software and hardware tools for
synchronizing, storing and managing the multimedia data streams. The DRIVER
software system will be used to author and annotate POV-paths through these
"Free-D" panoramic digital video records. Using a personal computer, the DIVER
user pans and zooms a "virtual camera" window over a panoramic scene to focus on
events of interest. The user may then mark interest points and record their POV-
paths and associated textual annotations (for research or educational purposes).
An annotated DIVER file can be shared through a computer network so others may
re-experience and respond to the user's interpretive "tour" of the recorded
activities. The user of DIVER is thus able to be a "virtual videographer", after
the fact of panoramic video capture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
important because researchers in the learning sciences increasingly rely on
multimedia technologies to capture the complexities of learning environments and
to repeatedly view recordings to deepen interoperation and analyses. Digital
video and audio, integrated with other data types, promise far more complete
records of learning activities than older methods, and enable multiple
researchers to investigate common datasets, as in other disciplines. However,
current approaches to multimedia recording are often ad hoc, yielding partial
data and hindering the development of more powerful theory and practice. The
Digital Video Collaboratory and the DIVER software system have potential for
widespread use not only in learning sciences research and training and teacher
education, but also in many fields for which panoramic audio-video recording and
annotation can provide a useful function. An integral part of the project is the
use of the DVC by many faculty at Stanford and elsewhere for their research, for
graduate and undergraduate education in learning and cognitive sciences, and for
teacher education.&lt;br/&gt;