* 0216374
* MRI: Acquisition of an E-beam Lithography System for Nanoscale Science and Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Andrew Steckl, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 406,990.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
University of Cincinnati with the acquisition of an e-beam lithography system:
the Raith-150. Fifteen interdisciplinary group of faculty from departments of
physics, electrical engineering, optoelectronics, and materials science
representing the 6 major universities in Southern Ohio will make use of the
instrument. The instrument, which will provide the foundation for
nanofabrication of structures with sizes down to 10 nm, will support research in
the areas of Nanoelectronics, Photonic and Electronic Nanostructures, Nano
BioElectronics, and Novel Microscopies. Advances in each of these areas depend
crucially on the ability to carry out the nanofabrication provided by the
Raith-150 system. New fundamental understanding will result from the work on
nanoelectronics (e.g.nanotransport experiments), photonic nanostructures (e.g.
strongly coupled quantum dots systems), new and challenging advances is expected
in technologically relevant areas including nano bio-electronics (e.g. biochips
and optical integrated circuits), and new tools for researchers will be
developed (e.g. novel microscopies). A key part of the activity is the education
and training of undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral fellows in
modern methods of e-beam lithography.

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
University of Cincinnati with the acquisition of an e-beam lithography system:
the Raith-150. Fifteen interdisciplinary group of faculty from departments of
physics, electrical engineering, optoelectronics, and materials science
representing the 6 major universities in Southern Ohio will make use of the
instrument. The instrument, which will provide the foundation for
nanofabrication of structures with sizes down to 10 nm, will support research in
the areas of Nanoelectronics, Photonic and Electronic Nanostructures, Nano
BioElectronics, and Novel Microscopies. Advances in each of these areas depend
crucially on the ability to carry out the nanofabrication provided by the
Raith-150 system. New fundamental understanding will result from the work on
nanoelectronics (e.g.nanotransport experiments), photonic nanostructures (e.g.
strongly coupled quantum dots systems), new and challenging advances is expected
in technologically relevant areas including nano bio-electronics (e.g. biochips
and optical integrated circuits), and new tools for researchers will be
developed (e.g. novel microscopies). A key part of the activity is the education
and training of undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral fellows in
modern methods of e-beam lithography.