* 0216683
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement-Paleoecology of the Upper Laetolil Beds, Laetoli, Tanzania: Its Implications for Hominid Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Terry Harrison, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/2003
* USD 7,255.00

The analysis of the structure of past ecosystems, or paleoecology, is regarded
as an essential component of contemporary studies of human evolution. Through
detailed investigations of the association between ecology and evolutionary
transformation it is possible to generate hypotheses about the factors that
ultimately contributed to major events in the evolutionary history of hominids
(humans and their close extinct relatives), including speciation, adaptive
shifts, and extinctions. Previously, interpretations of the paleoecology at the
important fossil hominid site of Laetoli in Tanzania (dating to 3.5-3.8 million
year ago) have suggested that it is either an arid to semi-arid grassland with
patches of bush and woodland or a more heavily wooded habitat. The objective of
this project is to resolve this contentious issue by more thoroughly documenting
the paleoecological setting at Laetoli. This study will utilize a range of data
from the fossil faunas from Laetoli, and will apply a variety of methods and
techniques to these data, such as indicator species, ecomorphology, ecological
structure and community composition analyses. The project will also investigate,
for the first time, fine-grained ecological distinctions between individual
stratigraphic horizons and different sub-localities. The overall goal will be to
present a more detailed, more comprehensive, and more informed assessment of the
paleoecology at Laetoli. This will take into account the broad spectrum of
faunal evidence available, the geographical and temporal complexity represented
at the site, and the limitations imposed by taphonomic factors. The results of
this project will provide a better understanding of the types of habitats
exploited by early hominids, and lead to a more critical appreciation of their
habitat preferences. The project will ultimately provide an important building
block in developing broader scale macroevolutionary models that are essential
for understanding and interpreting the contexts that shaped human evolution.