* 0216077
* Acquisition of a 750 MHz NMR Spectrometer/Cryoprobe System and High Field NMR Console/Probe Upgrades for Biomolecular NMR Spectroscopy
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Blake Hill, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2005
* USD 1,178,025.00

PROJECT SUMMARY

A grant has been awarded to Dr. James T. Stivers at Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine to purchase a Varian 750 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with a
triple resonance probe, to upgrade existing 500 MHz and 600 MHz instruments with
present generation consoles, and to purchase an additional high sensitivity
triple resonance probe with a tunable X channel for the existing 500 MHz
instrument. . These spectrometers will be located at the NMR facility, and will
be used to significantly advance fundamental research into the structure,
mechanism and dynamics of biological macromolecules using multi-dimensional
heteronuclear NMR methods. This acquisition will allow the research programs of
six primary NMR investigators to take advantage of revolutionary magnet and
probe technologies that are essential for studying large biological molecules
under dilute conditions. The 750 MHz spectrometer with cryoprobe will provide a
significant increase in chemical shift dispersion and sensitivity that is
essential for studying denatured states of proteins, aliphatic proton regions of
nucleic acids, and obtaining spectral resolution of native 20-40 kDa proteins
and large protein and protein-DNA complexes that are now under study. The 750
MHz spectrometer/cryoprobe system will allow NMR data to be acquired with
sensitivity that is over 4-fold greater than the spectrometers currently being
used, and will enhance the measurement of residual dipolar couplings in
macromolecules. This technology will also allow the study of biological
molecules that are currently inaccessible due to inherent weakness of the NMR
signals, low solubility, low sample availability, or short-lived stability.

The types of NMR experiments that will be enhanced using the new NMR systems
will include the complete array of double and triple resonance heteronuclear
experiments using isotopically 13C, 15N and/or 2H labeled protein and nucleic
acid samples. In addition, the 750 MHz spectrometer will be used for homonuclear
1H experiments, such as DQF-COSY, TOCSY and NOESY on macromolecules that may be
difficult to isotope label, or in situations where resolution is critical, such
as the heavily overlapped sugar proton regions of nucleic acids, or the aromatic
regions of proteins. The NMR experiments will be used to obtain chemical shift
assignments, measure structural restraints for macromolecular samples in the
form of NOE derived distances, J-coupling derived dihedral angles, and using
residual dipolar couplings derived atomic vectors and alignment tensors.
Additionally, heteronuclear NMR experiments will be used to study both fast (ps)
and slower (ms to ms) dynamics in macromolecular systems.

These instruments will be used to facilitate NMR studies on biological
macromolecules and their complexes in efforts to probe the physical and chemical
basis for protein and nucleic acid function. We anticipate that these
fundamental discoveries will impact protein engineering efforts, protein fold
predictions, as well as our ability to target enzymes with small molecule
inhibitors and activators. The upgraded NMR facility will enhance student
training by providing a user friendly instrument, and ample user time that is
required for student researchers to become comfortable in the execution of
modern NMR experiments. The participating investigators will initiate a new
course covering the basics of executing homonuclear and heteronuclear NMR
experiments on these new instruments. This course will augment the existing
graduate curriculum, and will attract advanced undergraduate students from local
universities, including minority serving inttitutuons.