* 0216033
* Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope for Material Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Michael Williams, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2004
* USD 163,094.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports acquisition of an atomic
force microscope (AFM). This instrument will upgrade the research, education and
training in surface science and characterization within the biology, chemistry,
engineering, and physics departments. Clark Atlanta University (CAU), a
historically black college and university, has embarked on an extensive program
to increase the total enrollment of science, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
students, the annual STEM graduation rate, and the percentage of STEM students
that continue to pursue advanced degrees. To accomplish these goals CAU needs
research and instructional labs equipped with state of the art instruments, such
as the AFM, for cutting edge research and research training in areas as
nanoscience and technology. Several faculty members in biology, chemistry,
engineering and physics plan to utilize the AFM for research and research
training. Research areas of importance that will be studied with the AFM include
polymers, composites, microelectronics, photonics, nanotechnology, catalysis,
and molecular biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the AFM will
significantly enhance the faculty and student research activities in surface
science and material characterization. The AFM has wide application for the
characterization of polymers, biomaterials, thin films and coatings, ceramics
and glass, inorganics, optical storage, semiconductors, electronics, metals and
insulators. Its use will impact virtually all the STEM students at CAU and other
Atlanta University Center institutions. It will be available to an additional
100-250 STEM students from the other Atlanta University Center schools
(Morehouse, Spelman and Morris Brown Colleges). &lt;br/&gt;