* 0216755
* US-India Cooperative Research: Investigation of the Superelectron Density at the Superconductor-Insulator(SI) Transition in Two Dimensions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Allen Goldman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2008
* USD 24,300.00

0216755&lt;br/&gt;Goldman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
US-India cooperative research entitled Investigation of the Superelectron
Density at the Superconductor-Insulator (SI) Transition in Two Dimensions. US PI
Allen Goldman, Institute of Technology Distinguished Professor of Physics,
University of Minnesota will start a collaborative research program with N.
Chandrasekhar, Indian Institute of Science (IISc). Goldman's NSF supported
research focuses on properties of electrons confined to a plane (2D),
particularly superconductivity in the extreme 2D limit, where there are issues
of quantum critical behavior and the existence of a metallic state in 2D.
Chandrasekhar's efforts are concentrated on similar problems, but with specific
experimental investigations, which differ from Goldman's. They propose to join
forces to carry out investigations on a subset of their respective broader
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This research will add an international
dimension to both research programs and will greatly speed the progress of
research on measurements of the superfluid density near the SI transition. The
collaboration will enhance the training of graduate students and postdocs at
both institutions and promote interaction between the powerful groups in
condensed matter theory at the IISc, (Ramakrishnan) and at Minnesota (Larkin and
Glazman). These individuals are world-class theoreticians. Goldman's research
program is very strong in the development of young scientists. This activity is
supported by the Indian Department of Science &amp; Technology (DST) under the
NSF/DST joint program. &lt;br/&gt;