* 0216904
* IMR:  Acquisition of a Sum Frequency Generation (SFG) Spectrometer for Surface Spectroscopic Research and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Jan Miller, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 174,650.00

The award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program (IMR) will be
used to acquire a state-of-the-art Sum Frequency Generation (SFG) spectrometer
at the University of Utah. SFG is the only truly interface-specific vibrational
spectroscopic technique. The symmetry constraints on SFG prohibit nonlinear
interactions in the bulk, while at an interface, such processes are allowed due
to the local break in symmetry. As a result, the spectroscopy of molecules
residing in the interfacial region can be probed selectively without any
contributions from the molecules present in the more pervasive bulk phases.
Analysis of SFG spectra can yield information on population, structure, and
orientation of interfacial species with a nanometer in-depth resolution.
Researchers from a variety of disciplines such as materials science,
metallurgical engineering, chemistry, bioengineering, and polymer science, will
use this equipment for advanced research and education. The research will study
interfaces in polymer nanocomposites and self-assembling polymer and surfactant
materials, as well as, probe the conformation and orientation of surface
confined protein species. The investigation of adsorption phenomena and
interfacial water structure at different technologically important interfaces
will be an important new contribution. The studies will have far-reaching
implications in many fields of nanotechnology, surface chemistry, biology and
medicine and will advance our understanding of interfacial phenomena thus
enabling new technological applications. The research is likely to result in the
discovery of new interfacial structures, as well as, in deeper understanding and
explanation of novel effects at solid/liquid, solid/gas and liquid/gas
interfaces. A number of graduate students from different departments will work
with the SFG spectrometer and receive important training in the advanced fields
of laser surface and nonlinear spectroscopy. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The award
from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program (IMR) will be used to
acquire a state-of-the-art Sum Frequency Generation (SFG) spectrometer at the
University of Utah. SFG is the only truly interface-specific vibrational
spectroscopic technique.. Researchers from a variety of disciplines such as
materials science, metallurgical engineering, chemistry, bioengineering, and
polymer science, will use this equipment for advanced research and education.
The research will study interfaces in polymer nanocomposites and self-assembling
polymer and surfactant materials, as well as, probe the conformation and
orientation of surface confined protein species. The investigation of adsorption
phenomena and interfacial water structure at different technologically important
interfaces will be an important new contribution. The studies will have far-
reaching implications in many fields of nanotechnology, surface chemistry,
biology and medicine and will advance our understanding of interfacial phenomena
thus enabling new technological applications. The research is likely to result
in the discovery of new interfacial structures, as well as, in deeper
understanding and explanation of novel effects at solid/liquid, solid/gas and
liquid/gas interfaces. A number of graduate students from different departments
will work with the SFG spectrometer and receive important training in the
advanced fields of laser surface and nonlinear spectroscopy. &lt;br/&gt;