* 0216244
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Physical and Numerical Geomechanics Laboratory Equipment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Richard McNearny,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2004
* USD 480,602.00

Montana Tech has an unusual combination of academic and practical talent that
is&lt;br/&gt;uniquely suited to link the requirements of both laboratory and
field testing with the increasingly important discipline of numerical modeling.
Such a collection of individuals is rarely found in large universities, much
less an institution the size of Montana Tech. Each of the four disciplines
represented by the co-principal investigators investigate similar materials, but
each conduct his or her investigation from a different perspective that is
required by their respective disciplines. However, the equipment purchased
through this award will allow for a combination of these different perspectives
into a comprehensive program that will have a synergistic effect into how
research is conducted into geologic and related materials and designs. The
equipment will be used to form an Integrated Physical and Numerical Modeling
Geomechanics Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquired equipment will be
used to perform research into the triaxial testing of rock.&lt;br/&gt;Montana
Tech's triaxial test device will be utilized to its full potential for research
and&lt;br/&gt;instructional purposes as a result of the upgrade from this
proposed research equipment grant. The components of the upgrade are data
acquisition &amp; control, confining pressure, pore pressure, and thermal
modules. The acquired computers and numerical modeling software will be used to
perform research into the behavior of geological and composite materials. Finite
difference and discrete element software programs are thus requested for both
continuum and discontinuum numerical analyses. Numerical methods are especially
suitable for modeling materials over a wide range of scales. However, they
require exceptionally powerful computer workstations that should be networked
together so that parallel-processing techniques may more efficiently solve the
problem at hand. The research applications will range from underground mining to
micro-mechanical analysis of particulate reinforced composites to rock
drillability and rock/bit interaction. Most of the projects combine numerical
modeling with physical testing of rock that is necessary to accurately determine
material properties prior to the modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The laboratory
will serve the research needs of all the respective programs
within&lt;br/&gt;Montana Tech as well as the research needs of interested
industries and governmental research agencies. An estimated 100 students/year
will benefit from the acquired equipment, primarily via lab activities required
for in their coursework. Five undergraduate and nine graduate level courses
would use various components of the equipment. Furthermore, since Montana Tech
actively involves undergraduate and graduate students in research, both groups
will utilize the laboratory equipment and the numerical modeling facilities, in
addition to personnel from the extractive industries and other government
research agencies. Co-PI Donovan is integrally involved in the Rocky Mountain
Agile Virtual Enterprise Technical Development Center (RAVE-TDC) which is
designed to match entities like the Integrated Geomechanics Laboratory that can
provide services, with clients within Montana who need those services. Several
tribal&lt;br/&gt;organizations are participating in the RAVE-TDC. The PIs have
excellent records regarding encouraging students, particularly women, to
participate in research activities. The Integrated Geomechanics Laboratory
developed using the acquired equipment is expected to be an excellent recruiting
tool.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;