* 0216413
* SBIR Phase II:     Parallel Processing of Time-Lapse Seismic Data Via the Internet
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Stephen Cole, Fourth Wave Imaging Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2005
* USD 608,687.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project concerns the
processing and analysis of time-lapse seismic data on parallel computers, using
the Internet to control the processing flow and visualize the results. In recent
years, there has been exponential growth in time-lapse seismic project activity.
Time-lapse seismic analysis facilitates the management of oil and gas reservoirs
by imaging fluid movement in the reservoir over time. The results are used to
guide reservoir management decisions-such as where to place a new well or where
to inject water, gas, or steam to stimulate hydrocarbon movement-and help
maximize the life of both new and existing fields while minimizing recovery
costs. The computer algorithms needed to process time-lapse seismic data are
complex and require advanced computational hardware-typically multiprocessor
Unix workstations or clusters of personal computers-that many potential
customers do not have. The proposed innovation will allow customers to process
their data on a centralized PC cluster, using the Internet to control the
processing and to visualize the results remotely. The proposed innovation will
improve the links between the components of the time-lapse seismic workflow,
leading to greater understanding and more widespread commercial acceptance of
the technology.

Potential applications of the research proposed by Fourth Wave Imaging include
petroleum industry mapping of by passed oil, monitoring of costly injected
fluids, and imaging flow compartmentalization and the hydraulic properties of
faults and fractures. Non-petroleum applications include monitoring groundwater
reserves, subsurface monitoring of contaminant plumes and environmental clean-up
projects. The web-based parallel software system developed for this project
could be applied to other computer-intensive fields such as earthquake
seismology and medical and satellite imaging. Tools from this web-based software
platform such as those for modeling rock physics and seismic data may also be
useful for educational purposes.