* 0216466
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field Emission Transmission Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Edward Kramer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 700,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
University of California at Santa Barbara with the acquisition of a state-of-
the-art field emission transmission electron microscope (FE-TEM) with
capabilities for atomic resolution Z-contrast imaging and spectroscopy. The
instrument is crucial to meet needs in ongoing and future research projects in
electronic, inorganic, and structural materials, UCSB proposes the acquisition.
The needs of the research can be fulfilled with a 200 kV TEM/STEM equipped with
a field emission source, high angle annular dark field detector, a 2Kx2K CCD
detector, and state-of-the-art electron spectrometer/energy filter. Z-contrast
imaging and atomic resolution spectroscopy have been routinely demonstrated on
the instrument with a 1.4 Angstrom probe size, 20 picoAmpere beam current, and
energy resolution of ~0.7 electron Volts. The acquisition of the proposed FE-TEM
will free an existing conventional 200 kV TEM for studies of soft materials. The
acquisition of the new FE-TEM will strengthen the education of students in
advanced TEM. Graduate students and post-doctoral researchers are the primary
'hands-on' users of TEM at UCSB. Formal training in TEM is provided in a series
of courses is offered in the Materials Department. A new course in advanced TEM
that reflects the unique capabilities of a FE-TEM will be offered. The advanced
TEM course will include a lab module to provide hands-on training in high-
resolution imaging in CTEM and in STEM and in advanced analytical techniques,
such as electron energy-loss spectroscopy. Through the Outreach program of the
MRSEC, the scientists will work with high school teachers on TEM sample
preparation and imaging and thus teach and connect to a broad community of
students and teachers.

To meet needs in ongoing and future research projects in advanced electronic,
inorganic, and structural materials, UCSB will acquire a state-of-the-art field
emission transmission electron microscope (FE-TEM). Such an instrument produces
an atomic scale electron probe. This sub-nanometer probe (~2 x 10-10 meters) can
be used to image individual atoms and atomic columns with direct information on
structure, composition, and bonding. An advanced FE-TEM provides a unique
combination of atomic-scale information that is essential for the advancement of
nanoscience and nanotechnology. Graduate students and post-doctoral researchers
are the primary 'hands-on' users of TEM at UCSB. Formal training in TEM is
provided in a series of courses offered in the Materials Dept. The new FE-TEM
will strengthen the education of students in advanced TEM. A new course in
advanced TEM that reflects the unique capabilities of a FE-TEM will be offered.
The advanced TEM course will include hands-on training in high-resolution
imaging in CTEM and in STEM and in advanced analytical techniques, such as
electron energy-loss spectroscopy. Through the Outreach program of the MRSEC,
UCSB scientists will work with high school teachers on TEM sample preparation
and imaging and thus teach and connect to a broad community of students and
teachers.

