* 0216307
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Fourier Transform Raman &amp; Infrared Spectrometer for Materials Research and Education in South Carolina
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Ya-Ping Sun, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 173,500.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a BRUKER IFS 66v/S Fourier Transform (FT)
Raman and Infrared (IR) spectrometer. The optics bench of the instrument has
rapid FT Raman, FTIR (far IR to near visible) and photoluminescence measurement
capabilities. This instrument is configured for spectral analysis of micron-
sized samples with the help of the Ramanscope and IR scope attachments. The FT
Raman and IR spectrometer will assist current research activities on carbon
nanotubes, thermoelectrics, photonics and biomaterials. The instrument will be
used to enhance laboratory experience to students enrolled in spectroscopy
courses taught at Clemson University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Raman and infrared
are two forms of vibrational spectroscopy that yield complementary information
of chemical substances. Both of these are used extensively in materials,
physics, chemistry and biological sciences. The instrument brings unique
research capabilities to teaching institutions in South Carolina by providing a
well-equipped, interdisciplinary learning facility that will be used to train
undergraduate and graduate students in the use of next generation equipment for
materials research. It will facilitate joint research projects between faculty
members engaged in interdisciplinary research fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;