* 0216520
* Aquisition of Geophysical Field Equipment for Earth Science Research and Teaching at the University of Alabama
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Richard Groshong, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2004
* USD 170,000.00

0216520&lt;br/&gt;Harry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from this Major
Research Instrumentation grant, the Department of Geological Sciences at the
University of Alabama will purchase geophysical field equipment to facilitate
research and teaching activities associated with our department's emphasis on
Natural Resource Exploration, Conservation, and Remediation. Equipment to be
purchased includes a ground penetrating radar system, potential field surveying
equipment, a sediment coring system, and equipment to support high-resolution
marine seismic surveys. Combined with existing land and marine seismic surveying
systems, shallow coring facilities, and state-of-the-art Earth Imaging
Computational Facility, the requested equipment will establish a robust facility
for acquisition and analysis of geophysical data needed to support continued
growth in a wide variety of research and teaching activities at UA. The
equipment will create an environment conducive to interdisciplinary research
that is ideally suited to the faculty in the department, and should greatly
expand intra- and extramural collaborative research and teaching activities and
efforts to provide service to state and local communities. Specific plans for
use of the equipment include NSF, DOE, and privately funded research initiatives
in coastal processes, groundwater flow and contaminant transport, fossil fuel
resources, sedimentary basin analysis, and tectonics. Examples of such projects
that will make use of the equipment in the immediate future include: (1) shallow
geophysical imaging of the aquifer at the Macrodispersion Experiment (MADE) test
site in Columbus Mississippi, with the goal of developing a stratigraphic
context for hydrologic conductivity models used for contaminant transport
modeling; (2) potential field surveying of the Black Warrior Basin and adjacent
Appalachian and Ouachita Fold and Thrust belts, with the goal of determining the
relationship between basin subsidence and orogenic tectonics; and (3) integrated
geophysical and sedimentological studies of coastal systems with the goal of
constraining the timing and physical processes of environment formation.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;