* 0216092
* MRI/RUI:  Acquisition of Equipment for Characterizing Polymers and Packaging Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,10/31/2005
* Fritz Yambrach, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 10/31/2005
* USD 289,204.00

The objective of this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award is the
acquisition of equipment to evaluate and characterize plastic materials and
packaging in support of a new Integrated Plastics Science Center at the
Rochester Institute of Technology. The equipment includes a computer-controlled
Fourier Transform Infrared spectrophotometer to fingerprint polymers; a
computer-controlled Differential Scanning Calorimeter to assess thermal
characteristics such as glass transition temperatures and melting points, a
chamber for material testing of the tensile strength of plastics under different
temperatures and relative humidity; an Oxtran 2/20 to measure the oxygen
permeability of films and containers; and a Permatran 3/30 to evaluate water
vapor transmission. The equipment will be used to develop innovative applied
research projects as part of a multidisciplinary
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal benefit of this proposal is
student participation in innovative applied research that cuts across
disciplines and addresses the kinds of problems they will face in technological
careers in the plastics and packaging industries. Students will have hands on
experience with advanced equipment and gain a better understanding of the
principles of polymers and plastics in a multidisciplinary environment that
mirrors industry. This approach will generate better prepared scientists,
technologists and managers for an increasingly competitive global industry. A
second benefit is the potential the equipment offers for the creation of new
courses and the improvement of existing courses, leading to the participation of
more students in graduate and doctoral studies. The equipment also will open up
new possibilities for collaborative research with the food, pharmaceutical,
automotive, and plastic-recycling industries, improving the quality of graduates
entering the workforce and the international competitiveness of key industries.