* 0216858
* Development of a High Resolution X-Ray Analyzer for Transition Metal Oxide Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Chi-Chang Kao, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 400,000.00

Synchrotron based high resolution x-ray emission spectroscopy has developed into
a powerful approach to probe the metal site valence and spin polarized charge
density in transition metal oxide systems. In addition, it can be used to obtain
light-element x-ray absorption spectra (such as carbon) with bulk sensitivity.
However, this approach has been limited to specialists because of the lack of
dedicated systems. With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials
Research program and the Major Research Instrumentation program scientists at
New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) will develop a high resolution x-ray
analyzer which will be stationed at the National Synchrotron Light Source in
Brookhaven National Laboratory. Optimizing the instrument for thin films will
makes it, in general, useful for chemical characterization of dilute systems.
The instrument will be stationed the at the National Synchrotron Light Source
and will be available to a broad range of users in fields as diverse of
chemistry, biology, geology and physics. At all levels of the construction and
research conducted with this analyzer graduate students will be involved. The
instrument will be incorporated in graduate and undergraduate laboratory
courses. In addition, the instrument will be utilized as a chemical analysis
tool in a transition metal oxide preparation and characterization workshop for
Newark area high school students conducted at the NJIT. This will serve to
develop scientific literacy and to directly influence students from
underrepresented groups to pursue careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-
resolution x-ray emission spectroscopy based at electron storage rings at
national laboratories has developed into a powerful tool to examine the
chemistry of metal atoms. This tool can be applied to study the valence of metal
sites in protein molecules in order to understand their function. In addition,
this approach can be used to study light atom such as carbon without the need
for a high vacuum system. However, its use has been limited to specialists
because of the lack of dedicated systems. With this award from the
Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the Major Research
Instrumentation program scientists at the New Jersey Institute of Technology
(NJIT) will develop a high resolution x-ray analyzer which will be stationed at
the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS) in Brookhaven National Laboratory.
Stationing the system at the NSLS will make the system available to a broad
range of users in fields as diverse of chemistry, biology, geology and physics.
At all levels of the construction and research conducted with this analyzer
graduate students will be involved. The proposed instrument will have a broad
impact through the education of graduate and undergraduate students based on its
use in laboratory courses. In addition, the instrument will be utilized as a
chemical analysis tool in a transition metal oxide preparation and
characterization workshop for Newark area high school students conducted at the
NJIT. This will serve to develop scientific literacy and to directly influence
students from underrepresented groups to pursue careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;