* 0216494
* Acquisition of an Analytical Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and Teaching
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* James Sample, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2005
* USD 224,237.00

0216494 Behl

This NSF Major Research Instrumentation Program award to the California State
University, Long Beach (CSULB) will support the acquisition and installation of
an Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (ESEM) with microanalytical
capabilities. This instrumentation will provide fundamental and necessary
support for cross-disciplinary research and teaching programs in the natural
sciences and anthropology. Productive research programs in sedimentary
petrology, paleoceanography, structural geology, geochemistry, biochemistry, and
archaeometry will directly benefit from access to this instrument. Student
research and formal courses at all levels in the Departments of Geological
Sciences, Biological Sciences, and Anthropology/Archaeology will utilize this
instrument for imaging and compositional analysis. Intramural benefits will be
extended to the broader educational community via well-established, NSF- and
NIH-funded programmatic ties and joint research with faculty and students of
local community colleges and high schools. CSULB is designated a Non-Ph.D.
Granting and Minority-Serving Institution. CSULB and the College of Natural
Sciences and Mathematics, where the ESEM facility will be located, has a strong
record of commitment to community outreach efforts. The new ESEM facility, with
secondary and backscattered electron imaging, cathodoluminescent detection, and
quantitative elemental microanalysis and mapping capabilities, will meet current
research and pedagogic needs, and provide the flexibility to support new
developments in research, teaching, and outreach missions over the next two
decades. The Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (ESEM) will image and
analyze highly porous, delicate, moist, dirty, vacuum-sensitive or rare
geologic, biologic or archaeological specimens without carbon or gold coating
that would interfere with subsequent trace elemental or isotopic analysis. Joint
use of the ESEM facility will foster synergistic, cross-discipline collaboration
among the geology, biology, archeology and environmental science disciplines at
CSULB. ***