* 0216655
* MRI/RUI:    Acquisition of Isothermal Titration and Differential Scanning MicroCalorimeters for Chemistry and Biology Research
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Paul Greenwood, Colby College
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 07/31/2004
* USD 117,220.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Stephen
Dunham, Paul Greenwood and Dasan Thamattoor of Colby College will acquire an
isothermal titration calorimeter (ITC) and differential scanning
microcalorimeters (DSC) for chemistry and biology research. Research projects
that will exploit this equipment include a) structural studies of modified
oligonucleotides; b) metal ion binding affinities and stabilities of modified
DNA aptamers; c) binding affinities of DNA aptamers to biological targets; d)
ion binding affinities and structural characterization of proteins in
nematocysts; e) ion binding selectivity of polyoxa[n]peristylanes; f) computer
aided molecular design and guest-host chemistry of H2-antagonists; and g)
structural analysis of RNase mutants that allow self-fertilization in plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Calorimetry is an extremely useful tool in modern
analytical chemistry. Calorimetric analysis is used to measure the thermal
energy (heat) exchange that occurs during molecular interactions and reactions.
Thus it can provide a very reliable and sensitive method for determining the
thermodynamic properties of materials such as changes in heat capacity of liquid
and solid samples. Colby College is an undergraduate institution, and the
availability of these instruments will have a strong impact on undergraduate
research. In addition, commercial ITC and DSC microcalorimeters are currently
not available in the state of Maine.