* 0216096
* Demographic Change and Reproductive Skew in Cooperative Breeding Primates (resubmit)
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* James Dietz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 06/30/2006
* USD 350,001.00

Although rare relative to other social systems, cooperative breeding species
present unique opportunities to examine hypotheses explaining the evolution of
cooperation and competition in kin-based societies. Early studies focused on the
adaptive significance of alloparental care. Specifically, why did mature adults
remain in their natal groups helping to raise offspring not their own? For
various species of birds and a few mammals, substantial progress has been made
in addressing the original question of why helpers help. By staying at home,
alloparents often improve their chances of finding a breeding opportunity and
receive gains in indirect fitness. &lt;br/&gt;Early research on callitrichid
primates (marmosets, tamarins and lion tamarins) in captivity suggested that
social and genetic monogamy was the norm for the family but recent reports from
the wild and in captive settings suggested that callitrichid social organization
is highly flexible, both within populations and across taxa. This variability
provides fertile ground for testing hypotheses concerning the basis of
reproductive skew and delayed dispersal. &lt;br/&gt;Dietz, Baker and colleagues
propose a 3-year continuation of behavioral and demographic research on golden
lion tamarin monkeys in Poco das Antas Reserve, Brazil. This 17-year study is
unique in terms of its ability to address questions at the population level and
in its scope, maintaining an integrated set of databases including behavior,
demography, kinship, morphology, reproduction, use of space, group dynamics,
food habits and samples of blood, hair and feces. During the first 13 years of
this research, lion tamarin territories occupied all suitable habitat in the
reserve, most groups contained several helpers and population growth was limited
by high mortality during dispersal from natal groups. In the past three years a
novel form of predation, decimation of complete groups while in den sites,
resulted in profound changes in the social, experiential and demographic context
of individuals surviving in the study population. Population density, group size
and number of helpers decreased, and the rate of group extinction/recolonization
increased. In effect, this pulse of increased predation resulted in a unique
natural experiment. Relative to conditions before increased predation, Poco das
Antas now contains more breeding opportunities for dispersing individuals, less
competition to fill those slots and fewer alloparents to care for group
offspring.&lt;br/&gt;By comparing patterns of dispersal and reproductive sharing
before and after increased predation, and by integrating molecular genetic and
endocrine techniques with field data, these investigators propose to determine
if tamarins are assessing the availability and quality of reproductive
opportunities outside the natal group, the extent to which ecological
constraints affect dispersal and reproductive sharing, the effects of genetic
relatedness on subordinate breeding, the relative effects of inbreeding
avoidance and age on reproductive skew, and the circumstances and mechanisms by
which dominants control reproduction of subordinates.&lt;br/&gt; Finally, the
presence of this NSF-sponsored project provides resources, prestige and
incentive to the Brazilian government agency managing the reserve and serves as
a platform for training Brazilian and American biologists at all professional
levels. Results of this research form the scientific basis for management of all
four taxa of lion tamarins and were used to justify the creation of a new
biological reserve and to inform and implement local projects including
reforestation, planting of forest corridors, conservation education,
reintroduction and translocation.&lt;br/&gt;