* 0216137
* MRI:  Acquisition of Research Infrastructure for Distributed Sensor Applications in the Home of the Future
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Rahul Simha, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2005
* USD 103,870.00

EIA-0216137&lt;br/&gt;Rahul Simha&lt;br/&gt;George Washington
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI: Acquisition of Research Infrastructure for
Distributed Sensor Applications in the Home of the
Future&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal, developing an infrastructure for
applications that can exploit a network of sensors and actuators in the home
environment, extends work already in progress on future technologies aiming at
launching a long-term research program around the Home-21 theme with a broader
base of applications and a stronger research focus. Applications (with
respective examples) involve:&lt;br/&gt;1. Sensors distributed around the home
(detecting intrusion),&lt;br/&gt;2. Sensors on an occupants (helping monitor
infirm or disabled occupants), and&lt;br/&gt;3. Sensors on a service provider
(helping a fireman navigate a burning home).&lt;br/&gt;Faculty with research
interests in networking, human-computer interaction, MEMS devices, sensors and
biomedical engineering will collaborate on a single infrastructure to support
these classes of applications. Although the theme centers on the home of the
future, the infrastructure and applications apply to other living environments
including, for example, hotels, dormitories, offices, ships, and assisted-living
facilities. Special attention will be devoted to applications that will use
sensors and actuators on occupants at multiple level of granularity, coarse-
grained (location of occupant within the house) and fine-grained (movement of
limbs). Such applications involve placing sensors on the occupant that are
wireless connected to algorithms that track movement and can, in some cases,
also send location-specific feedback (via the actuators) in accordance with the
desired objective. Ancillary projects involve Safety (falls, fire, etc.),
Security (intrusion monitoring), Health Monitoring Measuring (measuring
telemedicine applications, monitoring and relaying vital signs), and RF
monitoring (controlling harm from electromagnetic radiation). The equipment,
including magnetic trackers, wireless equipment, RF analyzer and software, and
support equipment, serves as a testbed for senior design students. Hence, a key
component is its focus for undergraduate research and training. &lt;br/&gt;