* 0216172
* Acquisition of a Continuous-Wave Ring Laser for Recording Electronic Spectra of Gaseous, Metal-Containing Free Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Thomas Varberg, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 08/31/2005
* USD 211,209.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Department of Chemistry at Macalester College will acquire a continuous-wave
ring laser system. This equipment will be used to measure and analyze the
optical spectra of second- and third-row transition metal fluorides and oxides.
The PI and his undergraduate collaborators will record laser excitation spectra
at Doppler-limited resolution in order to determine the vibrational, rotational
and fine-structure constants of newly observed molecules. Further work at sub-
Doppler resolution utilizing the technique of intermodulated fluorescence will
reveal the hyperfine structure of the observed transitions, which is useful for
identifying the electronic configurations of the ground and excited states. In
addition, the instrumentation will be used as a resource in advanced courses and
laboratories in the Chemistry Department. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interest in
understanding the complex electronic structure and spectroscopy of small,
transition metal-containing molecules in the gas phase continues to grow. With
the development of high-resolution and high-power tunable laser sources,
spectroscopists can now record and assign spectra that previously were very
difficult to acquire or analyze. Such molecules are of practical interest in
fields as diverse as astronomy, catalysis, metallurgy and organometallic
chemistry. Diatomic molecules containing a transition metal display the simplest
form of metal bonding and are therefore relevant as initial models for more
complex systems. &lt;br/&gt;