* 0216704
* Development of a System for Time-resolved Studies of Film Growth and Processing and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Randall Headrick, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 139,966.00

This award supports instrument development and student training at the
University of Vermont. Faculty and students are developing a system that will
enable study of the relaxation of surfaces as they are being bombarded by
energetic particles in a set of processes known collectively as "energetic beam
deposition." Using a very intense beam of x-rays from a synchrotron source, the
atomic structure of surfaces will be investigated as these technologically
important processes are occurring. The new system under development will enable,
for the first time, microsecond time resolution during the in-situ study of
materials' surface structures while undergoing crystal growth and etching. The
system will make use of pulsed laser deposition and surface etching methods with
pulse durations of &lt;1 microsecond in order to study surface relaxation
effects on this time scale. The system will permit extensive synchrotron x-ray
access to the sample and incorporate standard characterization tools (e.g.
RHEED) to better correlate the synchrotron results with in-house studies.
Initial studies will concentrate on the fundamentals of processes that are vital
for future electronics and information storage technologies. The first is pulsed
laser deposition, which allows highly controlled growth of thin films by a
single atomic layer at a time. The second is the erosion of surfaces with
energetic ions, a process that can be used to produce nanoscale surface
patterns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic understanding gained from these
experiments could eventually lead to methods for growing new high quality
materials for optoelectronics and to materials for information storage
technologies such as magnetic and optical disk drives and quantum spin devices.
This new instrument will provide research and educational opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Vermont in the areas of
crystal growth, surface processing and surface analysis. Students will also gain
access to a synchrotron-based materials research program. &lt;br/&gt;