* 0216964
* A Novel Protein from Germinating Pollen with OxO activity; Characterization and Functional Testing
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Loverine Taylor, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve R. Rodermel
* 08/31/2004
* USD 86,800.00

Abstract 0216964 Taylor

Pollen tubes deliver sperm to the ovules via a process known as tip growth.
Large amounts of plasma membrane and cell wall precursors, synthesized in the
Golgi, are transported to the tip where they undergo the polymerization and
cross-linking reactions characteristic of tip growth. This proposal describes a
pollen-specific protein, CBP25/22, that was isolated by a functional interaction
with calmodulin (CaM), the major Ca 2+-sensing protein in cells. CBP25/22 is
located on the exterior face of an abundant class of pollen organelles and has
oxalate oxidase (OxO) activity, a reaction that generates peroxide (H2O2). Based
on these unique biochemical properties, we propose that the CBP25/22 OxO-
generated H2O2 mediates cross-linking of wall proteins and polymers in growing
pollen tubes. Moreover, given the pivotal role of tip Ca2+ gradients in pollen
tube growth, we propose that the Ca 2+-sensitive binding of CaM to CBP25/22
confines expression of the OxO activity to the growing tip. The focus of this
research is to demonstrate that the unique biochemical properties of CBP25/22
identified in vitro, are expressed within the growing pollen tube. The proposed
experimental plan will use immunological, biochemical and protein-protein
interaction techniques to localize the CBP25/22 and CaM proteins and the
enzymatic product (H2O2 ) in situ . Specifically we will demonstrate a Ca 2+
-sensitive association of CBP25/22 and CaM in vivo and show that OxO-generated
H2O2 co-localizes with the CBP25/22 protein in vivo.

This research may provide a novel way to control pollination, thus alleviating
the current concern about gene flow via pollen from transgenic crops. In
addition it may have a broader impact on basic growth mechanisms; neurons and
fungal hypha also exhibit tip growth. Significantly, CBP25/22 shares its unique
CaM-binding characteristics with neuromodulin, a protein that functions in
vesicle transport and fusion in the tip of extending neurons. This similarity
suggests that there may be a common mechanism underlying tip growth in diverse
organisms.