* 0216136
* MRI:    Acquisition of a Nanostructure Fabrication and Characterization System for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Paras Prasad, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 342,048.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program, SUNY Buffalo
will acquire a high-resolution (1.5 nm) scanning electron microscope equipped to
function as an electron beam lithography system and a wafer probe station for
nanostructure device characterization, both for research and education purposes.
This system will permit fabrication and test of metal, semiconductor, and
polymer nanostructures for nanoelectronic, nanophotonic, and spintronic and
molectronic applications, as well as for basic physics and chemistry studies.
This acquisition will enhance existing and planned research programs in the
Institute for Lasers, Photonics and Biophotonics and its affiliated materials
activity, the Center for Advanced Photonic and Electronic Materials (CAPEM), as
well as other research programs in the Departments of Chemistry, Physics and
Electrical Engineering. Research efforts in these areas are presently supported
by NSF, DARPA, ONR, AFOSR and New York State. The system will be maintained and
operated as a research facility through the Institute of Lasers, Photonics and
Biophotonics (ILPB). This is a University-supported institute that brings
together faculty from science and engineering departments, and from departments
in the School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences at the University at Buffalo,
as well as from other universities. A half-time Ph.D.-level technical support
person will be responsible for Daily operation and training of students, who
will be supervised by faculty members. A wide range of research projects will
make use of this facility: basic physics of low dimensional (nanoscale) quantum
fluids and magnets, studies (through nano-apertures) of internal transitions of
excitons in lateral fluctuation single quantum dots, fabrication and evaluation
of nanoscale thin-film transistors and nanowires, fabrication and evaluation of
molectronic device structures, and fabrication and basic studies of
nanospintronic structures. In addition, this system will also be used to educate
and train a generation of students in Electrical Engineering, Physics and
Chemistry in nanoscale lithography and device/structure fabrication and
characterization; it will also enhance in an important way a recently funded NSF
IGERT program.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program, SUNY Buffalo will acquire a high-resolution (1.5 nm)
scanning electron microscope equipped to function as an electron beam
lithography system and a wafer probe station for nanostructure device
characterization, both for research and education purposes. This system will
permit fabrication and test of metal, semiconductor, and polymer nanostructures
for nanoelectronic, nanophotonic, and spintronic and molectronic applications,
as well as for basic physics and chemistry studies. The system will be
maintained and operated as a research facility through the Institute of Lasers,
Photonics and Biophotonics (ILPB). This is a University-supported institute that
brings together faculty from science and engineering departments, and from
departments in the School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences at the University
at Buffalo, as well as from other universities. A half-time Ph.D.-level
technical support person will be responsible for Daily operation and training of
students, who will be supervised by faculty members. A wide range of research
projects will make use of this facility. In addition, this system will also be
used to educate and train a generation of students in Electrical Engineering,
Physics and Chemistry in nanoscale lithography and device/structure fabrication
and characterization; it will also enhance in an important way a recently funded
NSF IGERT program.&lt;br/&gt;