* 0216152
* An Ion-Chromatography Based Continuous Flow Analyzer for Soluble Chemical Species in Ice Cores
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Jihong Cole-Dai, South Dakota State University
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 02/28/2005
* USD 150,855.00

Chemical analysis of polar ice cores is one of the most useful tools for
obtaining valuable information on paleoclimate history and atmospheric
chemistry. Measurements of major soluble chemical impurities are a necessary and
integral part of almost all ice core research programs and projects. Ion
chromatography (IC) is the most effective analytical technique for measuring all
major and some minor ionic chemical species in polar snow and ice samples.
Recently, melter-based continuous flow analysis (CFA) systems have been
developed to increase chemical analysis speeds in order to meet the high demand
for accurate, high-resolution ice core chemistry data. Current CFA systems
cannot measure all of the major anions and cations in meltwater because of the
limitations of the spectrometric (UV-visible spectrophotometry and
spectrofluorometry) detection techniques. Important species in polar snow that
cannot be detected by spectrometry include sulfate, methanesulfonate, magnesium
and potassium. This award supports a project to acquire several high-quality,
commercial IC instruments to interface with a new ice core melting system to
perform continuous, on-line ice core analysis for all major ionic species,
including sulfate and methanesulfonate. The project will develop an integrated
ice core chemical analysis system based on continuous melting and on-line IC
detection and determination. Project plans are: (1) to build a new ice core
melter system, (2) to acquire the ion chromatographs, (3) to interface the ion
chromatographs with the melter, and (4) to develop accessories, procedures and
protocols for the integrated melter-IC system that can be used in routine lab
analysis of ice cores and potentially in large field ice core
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;