* 0216365
* MRI/RUI:   Acquisition of a Digital Particle Image Velocimetry System for the Study of Turbulent Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Patrick Tebbe, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Cyrus K. Aidun
* 07/31/2003
* USD 93,290.00

The engineering department at The College of New Jersey seeks to build a
foundation for research and learning through the acquisition of state-of-the-art
technologies. Addition of a Digital Particle Image Velocimetry system will
greatly diversify and enhance the current infrastructure of resources available
to faculty and students. Digital Particle Image Velocimetry has become a
standard in flow diagnostic techniques in industry and research sectors. The
primary attractiveness of this technique lies in the ability to quantify planar
or three-dimensional velocity fields with incredible accuracy, resolution, and
speed. The heart of the system consists of a dual head pulsed Nd:YAG laser, high
resolution CCD digital acquisition package, and a software interface that
controls all acquisition and data processing functions. Two main activities will
be generated at the College upon acquisition of the DPIV system: development of
a research program capable of addressing issues faced by industry and society
related to turbulence-driven phenomena and an educational improvement plan
consisting of the enhancement of undergraduate laboratories and fluid mechanics
courses and increased involvement of undergraduates in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific thrust areas to be targeted by the
research program will initially focus on noise generation due to turbulent flow
and the quantification of turbulent multiphase flows. Issues addressed by the
multiphase flow studies will include bubble interactions with turbulence and
particle dispersion problems of interest to industry. Using DPIV, individual
terms of the governing turbulent transport equations can be directly calculated
so that the dominant source terms can be identified. In addition, particle
motions and distributions can be directly observed. These capabilities can
ultimately lead to validation of complex numerical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Incorporation of a DPIV system into undergraduate
laboratories and fluid mechanics courses will allow students to gain deeper
physical insight into a host of fluid phenomena. Integration of theory and
design is one of the cornerstones of the well- balanced engineering education
received by students at the College. The quality of several student senior
design projects will be greatly enhanced through access to a flow diagnostic
tool such as DPIV for evaluating prototypes and testing innovative
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;