* 0216836
* Vision on the Run: Resolving Moving Natural Images with Arthropod Eyes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Cole Gilbert, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 07/31/2005
* USD 204,931.00

This comparative project addresses how information from the natural world is
encoded by an animal's visual system to enable it to respond appropriately to
resources, such as prey or mates, or stress sources, such as predators. The
specific objective is to develop a rigorous quantitative understanding of the
consequences of variation in photoreceptor performance in the eyes of two
arthropods, a beetle and a crab, that live in relatively similar flat habitats,
but which vary in their behavior, eye movements and types of objects to which
they respond. As these animals move about their environment, the visual image
will be blurred because the photoreceptors are too slow or too coarsely spaced.
However, the blur may not be uniform throughout the image - photoreceptors that
view regions of the world into which the animal is traveling or which are more
likely to contain objects of interest may have been selected to perform better,
whereas more blur in other areas of the visual field may be tolerable. We will
combine anatomical and physiological data about photoreceptors over the eye with
laboratory behavioral experiments and field recordings of natural scenes to
learn how visual performance limits or enhances specific types of movement in
the animal's natural world. The proposed research is the most comprehensive
attempt to date to explore the transfer of information from natural scenes
through an animal's photoreceptors during its normal behavior and will provide
training in physiology, behavior, and scene analysis for young scientists and
several undergraduate students, including underrepresented minorities who have
worked in the lab in the past. The results will allow, for other species,
important insight into the degree to which behavior-driven degradation of visual
information may adversely affect adaptive behaviors. In addition to their basic
application for sensory ecology, the results of this project will have a strong
bearing on machine vision and will be valuable to robotics engineers attempting
to design visual sensors that allow optimal robot performance. A postdoctoral
scholar and undergraduate students will be involved in the research, and an
interactive web site about the research will be created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;