* 0216892
* Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Etching System for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Wu Lu, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2007
* USD 292,370.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports the
acquisition of an inductively coupled reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE) system at
The Ohio State University. This facility will immediately generate new materials
and materials-allied research programs at Ohio State with substantial teaming
amongst interdisciplinary partners. It will have enormous impact on a very wide
range of existing electronic materials - based research programs in several
academic departments, many of which are currently supported by NSF. The
equipment is engineered for research level and pilot line plasma processing
using corrosive processing gases such as Cl2, BCl3 or SiCl4. It has an automatic
switch dual power range RF generator, which makes etching possible under very
low ion energies. The formation of this facility will allow the coalescence of
inter-university research programs across the state, that span fundamental
studies on the effects of ICP-RIE processing on the properties of semiconductors
to the development of novel device structures, heterostructures and
nanostructures. The equipment chosen for this purpose is explicitly designed for
such flexible utilization, so that the breadth of activities and wide ranging
impact expected will be achieved. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;With this award from
the Instrumentation for Materials Research program The Ohio State University
will establish a state-of-the-art facility for the plasma processing of a wide
range of electronic and photonics materials, with the acquisition of an
inductively coupled reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE) system. This facility will
immediately generate new materials and materials-allied research programs at
Ohio State with substantial teaming amongst interdisciplinary partners. Once in
place, the ICP-RIE will rapidly attract local and statewide industrial joint
projects ranging from sensor technologies to photonics and energy conversion
technologies. To ensure open access to multiple users, the ICP-RIE system will
be placed into our well-established Semiconductor Processing Clean room
structure to be employed in the research and education of dozens of
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral associates from both inside
and outside Ohio State. Finally, the ICP-RIE system will allow us the ability to
process a wide range of materials, a core capability that we are currently
lacking. This system will complement existing facilities in the clean room, and
thus its impact will be greatly enhanced by the leveraging obtained via almost
all projects using the clean room facilities.&lt;br/&gt;