* 0216719
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for Research and Student Training in Imaging Fast Dynamics in Macroscopic Disordered Media
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Donald Candela, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 78,215.00

This IMR grant will enable the purchase of an ultrafast, high-resolution, video-
imaging system for advanced imaging of fast motions in soft-condensed matter
systems from a scale of microns to several centimetres. The physical systems
worked on by the group of PIs include gels, colloids, crumpled membranes,
granular materials, and multiphase flow in porous media. The unifying theme in
this work is the study of non-equilibrium systems in which the elementary units
are large compared to molecular scales. The underlying theoretical framework to
deal with such non-thermal statistical systems is still in its infancy, however,
with the appropriate instrumentation it is possible to perform detailed imaging
of the dynamics of the individual macroscopic "atoms and molecules" of these
systems in a way that is not possible in conventional materials. The video-
imaging system will enhance the frame rate, spatial resolution and the length of
data streams we are able to acquire. The increased frame rate will allow
capturing fast dynamics, such as ballistic motions in highly excited granular
media; the improved resolution will help resolve small motions such as thermal
motions in caged systems and longer data streams will enable a search for rare
but important dynamical events such as intermittent crack jumps and buckling
events in stressed materials. The imaging system will also be available to other
local users by scheduling time via a webpage. The users will be aided by
graduate students, thus broadening their exposure to a broad spectrum of
scientific problems. Many of the projects involve considerable involvement by
undergraduate students and the new capabilities will afford them exposure to
advanced techniques in a very visual branch of materials physics.



This IMR grant will enable the purchase of an ultrafast, high-resolution, video-
imaging system for advanced imaging of fast motions in soft-condensed matter
systems from a scale of microns to several centimetres. The physical systems
worked on by the group of investigators include gels, colloids, crumpled
membranes, granular materials, and multiphase flow in porous media. These are
all systems of immense industrial importance, however, they also present new
basic scientific challenges in that they are statistically-sized systems with
elementary units that are very large compared to molecular scales. The
underlying theoretical framework to deal with such non-thermal systems is still
in its infancy, however, with the appropriate instrumentation it is possible to
perform detailed imaging of the dynamics of the individual macroscopic "atoms
and molecules" of these systems in a way that is not possible in conventional
materials. The video-imaging system will enhance the frame rate, spatial
resolution and the length of data streams making it possible to study new
phenomena. Apart from projects scheduled by the investigators themselves, the
imaging system will be available to other local users by scheduling time via a
webpage. The users will be aided by graduate students, thus broadening their
exposure to a broad spectrum of scientific problems. Many of the projects
involve considerable involvement by undergraduate students and the new
capabilities will afford them exposure to advanced techniques in a very visual
branch of materials physics.