* 0216154
* BE/IDEA:  Development of a Instrument for in situ Measurement of Microbial Enzyme Activities in Aquatic Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* James Ammerman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,311,855.00

Microbial cell-surface enzymes (ectoenzymes) are important agents of polymer
hydrolysis in aquatic environments and indicators of the state of microbial
carbon, nitrogen, or phosphorus nutrition. However, like most other microbial
metabolic rate measurements in aquatic environments, ectoenzyme activity
measurements have usually been limited to manual assays with discrete water
samples. An instrument for continuous underway measurements of microbial enzyme
activities using high-sensitivity fluorescent substrates has recently been
developed. This instrument has been used aboard ship to map the ectoenzyme
activities alkaline phosphatase and leucine aminopeptidase in the surface waters
of the Mississippi River plume. With this instrument these enzyme activities can
be mapped in much the same way that temperature, salinity, phytoplankton
fluorescence, and other parameters are mapped from a research ship while
underway. However, this system is limited to horizontal mapping of water samples
continuously pumped from the surface and requires frequent operator
intervention. This Biocomplexity Instrumentation Development for Environmental
Activities (IDEA) project will take the next much larger step. The research and
education team includes a microbial ecologist (Dr. J. Ammerman) and a geochemist
(Dr. G. Klinkhammer), both of whom have interests and expertise in sensor
development, a coastal physical oceanographer and modeler (Dr. R. Chant), and a
non-faculty education specialist (Mr. E. Simms). The goal of this project is to
develop a remotely operated instrument for measurement of microbial enzyme
activities and to deploy it at the Rutgers University Long-term Ecosystem
Observatory at 15 meters depth, called LEO-15, for periods of weeks to months.
This instrument is called the Multiple Enzyme Analyzer (MEA), and should be
capable of the simultaneous measurement of up to four different enzyme
activities. A simple mooring with biological, chemical, and physical sensors
will be deployed near the enzyme analyzer to help provide a context for the
microbial rate measurements (along with additional data from LEO-15). The enzyme
and related data will be analyzed with time-series methods, spectral analysis
techniques, statistical modeling, and other techniques to gain insight into
microbial processes in the coastal zone. A second deployment of the MEA will
take place at the new Martha's Vineyard Coastal Observatory (Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution), along with an automated flow cytometer and image
analyzer used for plankton cell counting and sorting. This instrument is under
development by Dr. R. Olson and colleagues with Biocomplexity IDEA support. This
enzyme analyzer will provide continuous real time microbial metabolic rate
measurements on time scales that are currently unavailable. Such measurements
will add an important biological component to the extensive chemical and
physical measurements that can be made at ocean observatories. In addition,
education efforts in aquatic microbiology will include training workshops for
primary and secondary school teachers followed by lesson development and
implementation, as well as university undergraduate and graduate student
research and education