* 0216875
* Acquisition of  a Multilayer Monochromator for a Synchrotron X-ray Microtomography Station and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Richard Kurtz, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 130,000.00

This grant is for the acquisition of a multilayer monochromator for the
synchrotron microtomography station at the Louisiana State University Center for
Advance Microstructures and Devices (CAMD). A SXM station has recently been
assembled at the synchrotron facility by a multidisciplinary group of
physicists, chemists, and engineers. The SXM station has been installed on a
CAMD bending magnet with a maximum energy of about 15 keV. It is anticipated
that in 2002, the station will be placed on a 7.3T wiggler beamline, which will
provide usable photons to &gt;50 keV. While the early results have been highly
successful, analysis of the data has highlighted the need for the monochromatic
beam. As a polychromatic x-ray beam traverses a sample, the shape of the energy
spectrum changes with the lower end of the incident energy spectrum absorbed
more than the higher end. This property is known as beam hardening. For the
lower Z elements found in environmental and biological samples, a monochromatic
beam will aid in optimizing the contrast and thus minimizing the image artifacts
from beam hardening effects. In addition, a monochromatic beam will also aid in
chemical identification through contrast arising from a judicious choice of
energies above and below core-excitation thresholds. The CAMD SXM beamline
appears to be the only SXM beamline in the world currently without a
monochromator. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synchrotron x-ray microtomography (SXM) is
playing an increasingly important role in research in materials, biology,
physics, geology, and environmental sciences. Many applications use tomographic
imaging techniques to produce a three-dimensional representation of a sample.
Since October 2000, the SXM station at LSU has been used to acquire images from
such disciplines as chemistry, physics, biology, oceanography, material science,
and engineering. Because of CAMD's close association with the state of Louisiana
and LSU, education and outreach are strongly emphasized. Participants in the SXM
research program include local high school students, undergraduate research
assistants (through several NSF-sponsored REU programs), graduate students,
post-doctoral associates, and both LSU and Southern University faculty and
staff. &lt;br/&gt;