* 0216604
* MRI/RUI:   Acquisition of a 500-MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer at Western Washington University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Mark Wicholas, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 07/31/2006
* USD 454,101.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Department of Chemistry at Western Washington University will acquire a 500 MHz
NMR Spectrometer. This equipment will enable researchers to carry out studies on
a) the total synthesis of allelopathic natural products and the preparation of
medium ring ethers via phenol-epoxide cyclization reactions; b) synthesis and
characterization of novel diamagnetic d10 metal isoindoline complexes; c)
structural characterization of mutant proteins implicated in early-onset
familial Alzheimer's disease; d) molecular recognition studies of neurosteroids
important in a number of neurodegenerative diseases; e) structural
characterization of circular permuteins of myoglobin to understand the folding-
function relationship in oxygen transport proteins; and f) structural
elucidation of novel sesquiterpenoid natural products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is the most
powerful tool available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of
molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific
arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
interactions between molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in a number of areas
including molecular biology and medicinal chemistry.