* 0216880
* Development of a New Approach to Contactless Transport Measurements at Cryogenic Temperatures
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2002,09/30/2008
* Thomas Gramila, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Guebre X. Tessema
* 09/30/2008
* USD 288,612.00

Advances both in the development of new materials and in fundamental
understanding of new physics are often coupled to advances in experimental
technology. This work extends such technology via an instrument permitting
conventional transport style measurements to be made without the use of ohmic
contacts. The approach is based on the use of capacitive coupling to samples.
Such a system, while involving significant experimental challenges, offers
considerable promise for the investigation of physical phenomena where
conventional ohmic contacts can either not be used, or are unreliable to use.
Examples of such areas of investigation include 2-D electron systems with
extremely low electron densities, for which the relative importance of electron
interaction are greatly enhanced, and low density samples at very high magnetic
fields, where ohmic contacts can be notoriously difficult. Another area is the
study of the metal insulator transition, where the combined effects of low
densities, disorder, and magnetic field effects can combine to make ohmic
contacts unreliable. These measurement capabilities will also benefit the
investigation of new materials, since transport measurements can be used as a
diagnostic tool without the considerable effort often necessary to develop ohmic
contacts. The unique requirements of a capacitively-based measurement approach
requires the development of new electronic and cryogenic techniques and
instrumentation. Combined with the prospect for exploration of important topics
in physics, its development will provide valuable training and experience for
graduate students.

Experience has demonstrated that pushing at extremes of temperature, magnetic
field, or other measurement parameters, has exposed inadequacies in our
knowledge of materials. Exploring such areas has often led to new and
fundamental advances in our understanding of materials and their physics, and
even to the development of new materials. This work will extend experimental
capabilities by the creation of an instrument for making contact-less electrical
measurements of electronic materials in cryogenic environments. The measurement
system will provide experimental access to a number of areas, areas for which
the difficulty of making conventional electrical contacts effectively prevents
investigation. The instrument itself represents a technical challenge, involving
low-noise measurements and complex sample environments, and its use will involve
technologically important materials. It provides a valuable arena for the
training of graduate students in both advanced technology and fundamental
physics, whose training is a cornerstone of our technological infrastructure.

