* 0216469
* Acquisition of Proteomics Equipment for Researchers at HSPH
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Dieter Wolf, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 05/31/2005
* USD 267,245.00

A grant has been awarded to the Harvard School of Public Health (HSPH) under the
direction of Dr. Dieter Wolf to purchase instrumentation which will open new
opportunities in the emerging field of system-wide analysis of protein
expression and function ("proteomics"). A detailed understanding of the
information contained within the many sequenced genomes available in public
databases today requires state-of-the-art means of analyzing quantitative and
qualitative differences in protein expression and function in a high-throughput
format. Peptide mass spectrometry is a relatively new technology that is ideal
for these applications and is widely expected to remain the most important core
technology of proteomics research for many years to come.&lt;br/&gt;There are
two major areas of proteomics research that are addressed with this equipment:
1. protein expression profiling, and 2. identification of protein assemblies
purified from complex samples. The research activities enabled by this NSF grant
make extensive use of these applications in order to answer major questions in
basic biology. The projects use samples derived from organisms across the
evolutionary ladder. The scope of research activities is wide-ranging, and
includes large scale analysis of the ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis system,
analyzing determinants of cellular responses to radicals and oxidative stress,
determining factors controlling membrane transport of metals and peptide growth
factors, analyzing signaling and transcriptional activation pathways in cell
lineage determination, determining protein interactions involved in establishing
cell polarity, and many others.&lt;br/&gt;The grant awarded by NSF provides
funds for the acquisition of a combined liquid chromatography tandem mass
spectrometer system (LC/MS/MS). This instrument adds an essential component of
modern proteomics technology to preexisting tools HSPH has committed to this
initiative by enabling rapid and highly accurate protein identification from
diverse biological samples. The mass spectrometer is integrated with a high
performance liquid chromatography system required for sample fractionation.
Sophisticated software assists in protein identification and database
searching.&lt;br/&gt;Apart from major scientific advances through proteomics
technology, the main impact of this grant lies with the enhancement of the
training environment at HSPH. The new research instrumentation provides students
and postgraduates with hands-on experience in cutting edge proteomics
technology, thereby optimally preparing them for the demanding mission of
prevailing in the rapidly changing landscape of the post-genomic era. Through
the Minority Internship Program administered by the Division of Biological
Sciences at HSPH underrepresented groups will be actively recruited to the
burgeoning filed of proteomics
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;