* 0216344
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Research in Genetic Programming, Quantum Computation, and Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Lee Spector, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2006
* USD 99,751.00

EIA-0216344&lt;br/&gt;Lee Spector&lt;br/&gt;Hampshire
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for
Research in Genetic Programming, Quantum Computation, and Distributed
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal from a RUI institution, enabling work
in genetic programming, quantum computation, and distributed systems, proposes
acquiring a 16-node Linux NetworX Evolocity system for use in student and
faculty research. The instrumentation will enable advance in multi-type genetic
programming by allowing the user to specify a diverse set of primitives and
related data types while simultaneously specifying little in the way of
parameters. (Early genetic programming systems forced users to restrict all
operation to a single data type to ensure the semantic validity of programs
undergoing recombination and mutation. "Strongly typed" genetic programming
systems allow the generation of programs that are able to manipulate diverse
types.) For the quantum computation area, genetic and other automatic
programming will be used to explore the space of possible quantum algorithms and
their speed-ups relative to classical algorithms. Since quantum computer
hardware is not yet available, the usual hindrance in so doing involves the time
required for simulating the quantum algorithms; fitness must be tested using a
quantum computer simulator that runs on conventional hardware. Preliminary
promising results on problems with unresolved complexity will be employed to
seek scaling algorithms for which asymptotic complexity results can be proved.
Distributed systems, a primary focus of student's independent work at Hampshire
College, will enable students to pursue the development of innovative software
and programming techniques for networked, multi-CPU
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;