* 0216171
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Scanning Tunneling Microscope for Development and Analysis of Nanostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Diana Huffaker, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 196,000.00

0216171&lt;br/&gt;Huffaker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose the addition of
an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) scanning tunneling microscope (STM) to the materials
growth and characterization facility located at the University of New Mexico
(UNM) Center for High Technology Materials (CHTM). The STM is capable of
unprecedented resolution in probing nanometer scale atomic organizations and
their local electronic structures. The high level of stability and positioning
accuracy also makes the STM a capable nano-scale surface patterning tool. The
UNM has a strong infrastructure for advanced materials research, including
extensive growth and analysis facilities described below. The microscope will
complement the PIs existing capabilities by allowing them to quantify materials
structures and surface dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced materials for
nanotechnology is one of their key interest areas at UNM. Very broad support for
purchasing the STM capability is indicated by the level of cost-sharing from
their Vice-Provost for Research, the Office of the Dean for the School of
Engineering and the Director of CHTM. The UHV-STM facility will be physically
located at CHTM, where they have excellent, permanent staff for system
calibration and maintenance. Any UNM faculty will have access to increase
participation of students and faculty in the emerging field of nanotechnology
and advanced materials. To ensure the University-wide impact, the STM will be a
multi-user facility for several departments (e.g., Electrical &amp; Computer
Engineering, Chemical &amp; Nuclear Engineering, Physics &amp; Astronomy, and
Chemistry) and research centers (e.g., Center for High Technology Materials and
Center for Micro-Engineered Materials). The new surface science capability will
increase the PIs participation in nanotechnology and broaden their basis for
attracting subsequent grants and collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed instrumentation will be the 1st UHV-STM at UNM with expansion ports to
accommodate vacuum diagnostics and growth/deposition chambers. The
instrumentation will facilitate research efforts at UNM that range from crystal
growth to inorganic synthesis. The proposal highlights several applications of
the variable-temperature UHV-STM at UNM such as selective growth of SiGe on
nanometer size silicon structures, cross-sectional and atom-tracking STM,
incorporation of magnetic atoms into QDs and nano-scale positioning of QDs. One
of the immediate areas of impact is strain-driven, self-assembly of quantum dots
(QDs) using both molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and metalorganic chemical vapor
deposition (MOCVD).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed acquisition of the UHV-STM
contributes to the School of Engineering initiative to launch a degree program
in nanomaterials science and engineering (NSE). The School recognizes that this
emerging field bodes rapid growth and increased demand for trained labor.
Education in NSE will foreseeably translate to students' increased career
potential. Within the scope of the School initiative, the proposed
instrumentation will produce a knowledge base for course development and an
attraction to recruit underrepresented students. The research education provides
a direct vehicle to prepare undergraduate and graduate students for a career in
NSE.&lt;br/&gt;