* 0216155
* MRI: Development of Integrated Tunable Picosecond Optical Microscopy System with Multichannel Heterodyning Detector Array
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Holger Schmidt, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Parveen F. Wahid
* 03/31/2004
* USD 205,862.00

0216155 Schmidt

Continuous progress in microscopy and ultrafast optics has allowed researchers
to investigate phenomena on ever smaller length and shorter time scales, leading
to a multitude of novel applications. Here, the PIs propose to build a
measurement system that combines both ultrahigh spatial and temporal resolution.
This system will enable access to a whole new class of experiments for which
both characteristics are required and will significantly enhance the research
facilities at UC Santa Cruz. They propose to develop a system that integrates
the temporal resolution of a tunable ultrafast Ti:Sapphire laser with the
spatial resolution of an atomic force microscope with NSOM capabilities and a
high-resolution photodetector array. The ultrashort optical pulses emanating
from the Ti:Sapphire laser are fed into the fiber of the near-field microscope
or focused directly on a sample using far-field optics. A subwavelength aperture
at the output of the NSOM is used to emit or collect the light pulses, and
creates a unique optical probe for investigating a wide variety of samples and
substrates. The tunability of the Ti:Sapphire allows for a large accessible
spectrum in the near-infrared while leaving options for future upgrades. The
complete system will simultaneously have a time resolution of about 200fs and a
spatial resolution of 100 nm.

If funded, research projects and student training in nanoscale electronics will
be carried out: One example for the ensuing research activities is the study of
the dynamics of magnetization switching in single-domain metallic nanomagnets
for high-density magnetic storage. Only the combination of both high spatial and
temporal resolution will allow studying the dynamics of individual magnets.
Knowledge of the magnetization reversal time is critical for assessing the
intrinsic limitations for write-operations using such nanomagnets. Magneto-optic
Kerr spectroscopy is capable of capturing reversal dynamics, but so far not with
the required capabilities for single-domain magnets. The second project is
spatially resolved picosecond ultrasonics. Here, the goal is to analyze
interfaces below a metal-covered semiconductor surface, a situation typical for
integrated circuits. By heating the metal with a short optical pulse, an
acoustic wave is created that propagates inside the semiconductor and is
partially reflected at interfaces. The depth of the interface can be determined
from the return time of the reflection signal. In combination with the high
spatial resolution of a near-field scanning microscope and a unique multichannel
heterodyning detection method using a photodetector array, non-destructive high-
resolution imaging of the wafer can be obtained.

These examples clearly demonstrate the wide range of experiments that will
become accessible. The main components (Ti-sapphire laser, AFM/NSOM) are each
widely used state-of-the-art instruments and their combination which require
significant development for pulse broadening compensation, polarization control
and also multi-channel detector array will create unique capability for many
more fields in nanotechnology, such as time-resolved spectroscopy of
semiconductor quantum dots. Exciting collaborations across campus departments
and with other universities are anticipated. The system will have broad impact
on research and education in nanoscience. It will provide excellent training for
students in several key areas of current interest such as nanoscopy, laser
optics, and time-resolved spectroscopy. In addition, it will be integrated in a
laboratory experiment for a nano-optics class that the P.I. is developing at
UCSC as part of an NSF CAREER program.