* 0216491
* Molecular Aspects of Flow Effects on Crystallization in iPP
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Julia Kornfield, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2005
* USD 360,000.00

The microstructure of a semicrystalline polymer depends strongly on processing
history. Imposing flow fields on a crystallizing polymer melt can accelerate the
rate of crystallization and result in the formation of oriented crystallites. In
spite of intensive research over the past three decades, the fundamental basis
of the effects of processing on structure development remains elusive. This
research probes the underlying molecular-level processes: the interplay of the
relaxation dynamics of the molten chains, the distortion of segmental
orientation created by flow, the kinetics and anisotropy of nucleation from a
distorted melt, and their effects on the subsequent kinetics and morphology of
crystallization. Under current DMR support, surprising discoveries have reshaped
current thinking. The rate limiting factor in the formation of the oriented
precursors that template the row-nucleated morphology is the rate of molecular
motion in the subcooled melt, which is unanticipated by any existing model of
flow-induced crystallization. The role of macromolecular dynamics, particularly
the distribution of relaxation times, was demonstrated using relatively narrow
distribution materials and their binary blends. Small amounts of long chains
(with known molar mass and stereoregularity) added to a base resin of much
shorter chains (approximately one-fifth as long), greatly enhanced the flow-
induced formation of oriented precursors. The concentration dependence of the
effect of long chains indicates that long-chain/long-chain overlap plays a
central role. In view of the profound effect of low concentrations of long
chains, proposed research for the next three years focuses on the dependence of
the long-chain effect on their relative relaxation time and stereoregularity
compared to the bulk, searching for mechanistic clues. To clarify the interplay
between the earliest stages of flow-induced structure formation (the creation of
point-like precursors) and the subsequent formation of threadlike precursors,
homogeneous and heterogeneously nucleated model polymers will be compared. The
kinetics of disappearance of the threadlike precursors when held at elevated
temperature will be used to test our current hypotheses regarding their
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diverse and ubiquitous application of
polymers is largely due to "semicrystalline polymers," which account for two-
thirds of the annual production of synthetic polymers. Over 100 billion pounds a
year are made of polyethylene and polypropylene alone! Their properties can be
tuned over an enormous range by controlling the extent and form of
crystallization. For example, the development of highly oriented crystallites
during spinning gives certain polyethylene fibers a modulus approaching that of
steel. However, fundamental understanding needed to achieve intended properties
by design remains elusive because of the complex effects of molecular structure
and processing history on material properties. New methods to observe the
earliest events during crystallization are revealing surprising truths. Contrary
to existing models, oriented nucleation induced by flow occurs as fast as the
motion of the chain-like molecules permits-the usual activation barrier
vanishes. And the polymer chains that matter most in this process are the
longest ones, needing to be at least four times longer than average. Such
advances in molecular-level understanding guide the design of semicrystalline
polymers to optimize their processing characteristics and ultimate material
properties, with benefits to the automotive, electronics, food and health care
industries.&lt;br/&gt;