* 0216030
* Acquisition of a stable isotope mass spectrometer
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Philip Kyle, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2004
* USD 175,000.00

0216030&lt;br/&gt;Campbell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) grant supports the acquisition of a state-of-the-art
stable isotope ratio mass spectrometer (SIRMS) with on-line sample preparation
systems for continuous flow analysis of stable isotopes of Carbon, Oxygen and
Hydrogen in natural waters and carbonates at the New Mexico Institute of Mining
and Technology. A new Finnigan Delta Plus SIRMS will replace a 14 years old
machine (a Finnigan Delta E) that is no longer supported by the manufacturer and
is having increasing periods of down time due to electronics and vacuum system
failures. The enhanced capabilities of a new SIRMS with on-line sample
preparation systems for continuous flow (CF) analysis will allow for the
analysis of very small samples with high throughput. Indeed, the newer
generation of CF-SIRMS systems allow for orders of magnitude smaller samples to
be analyzed with improved precision. This capability is important for study of
micro-spatial isotopic variability in authigenic carbonates, sedimentary cements
and pegmatite minerals, as a result of which we are now learning of the great
degree of heterogeneity and potential historic information recorded at this
scale which was previously homogenized and analyzed in bulk to interpret
geologic history. &lt;br/&gt;The new SIRMS will support research ranging from
studies of the sources of volatiles in volcanic emissions to hydrological and
ecological studies of the pathways groundwater transport and processes of
evaporation and transpiration in the semi-arid to arid Southwestern U.S. to
studies of the genesis of hydrothermal ore deposits. Further, this facility will
be an attractive addition to New Mexico Tech's analytical arsenal in
facilitating the recruitment of minority students to the geosciences through its
relationship with a local Native American College (Dine College) and through its
association with the NSF-supported New Mexico Alliance for Graduate Education
and the Professoriate (NM-AGEP), which seeks to assist underrepresented groups
in preparation for careers in science academia.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;