* 0216507
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of Integrated Fluid/Solid/Bio-Kinetic Simulation Software for the Characterization of Microsphere-based Bio-analytic Systems
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Shivshankar Sundaram, CFD RESEARCH CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 09/30/2004
* USD 523,948.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and
customize advanced simulation software for the design and optimization of
microsphere and cell-based assays. Current assay design by trial and error is
slow, unreliable, expensive, and a bottleneck for multiplexed, high-throughput
analysis. Prior Phase I research has successfully established a first-ever,
truly integrated (buffer flow, resolved microsphere motion and surface
biochemistry) assay design and analysis tool. The objective of the Phase II
effort is to further develop the initial models demonstrated in the Phase I
effort into a comprehensive, generalized design environment. A suite of bead-
surface biochemistry models (enzyme kinetics, multi-step reactions) and
including user specifiable surface reaction mechanisms will be developed and
fully integrated. In seeking to expand the application to cell-based assays,
models for the motion and capture of deformable cells will be created, and
detailed flow visualization experiments tracking bead and cell motion as well as
assay endpoints in microfluidic channels will be conducted to guide and validate
these models. The value of the developed simulation tool will be demonstrated in
the proof-of-concept design of a novel microfluidic, cell-based H-filter assay
for red-blood cell based aminothiols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial
applications of this project will be in the biotechnology and bioassay design
markets. Miniaturized, multiplexed, high-throughput, fast, efficient and
sensitive assays are a pre-requisite to translating the wealth of data from the
human genome and combinatorial libraries into effective therapeutics. The
developed software product will enable rational, computer-based design of these
bioassays.