* 0216500
* MRI:  Acquisition of High-Performance Distributed Computing and Storage Infrastructure at UTA
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Sajal Das, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2006
* USD 950,000.00

EIA-0216500&lt;br/&gt;Sharma Chakravarthy&lt;br/&gt;Yuksel A. Aslandogan; Sajal
K. Das; Lawrence B. Holder; Jachoon Yu&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas
Arlington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI: Acquisition of High Performance Distributed
Computing and Storage Infrastructure at UTA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal,
acquiring high-performance computing and storage infrastructure, aims to satisfy
the research needs of several groups that require distributed and parallel
computing resources. Involving collaboration from the departments of Computer
Science and Engineering (CSE) and Physics at UTA, and Dermatology at UT
Southwestern Medical School, the research efforts include:&lt;br/&gt;a. Database
and Data Mining (e.g., visualization of search),&lt;br/&gt;b. Software
Engineering (e.g., formal methods),&lt;br/&gt;c. Physics (e.g., high energy
physics -HEP- experiments),&lt;br/&gt;d. Dermatology (e.g., image
database/analysis of skin lesion), &lt;br/&gt;e. Distributed Computing (e.g.,
scheduling, load balancing on Information Power Grid), and&lt;br/&gt;f.
Networking (e.g., wireless, optical; simulations).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
characteristics involve:&lt;br/&gt;a. Multi-disciplinary use of common equipment
and infrastructure,&lt;br/&gt;b. Multi-institutional sharing of
equipment,&lt;br/&gt;c. Enhancing current-research efforts and creating new
synergy leading to new research ideas,&lt;br/&gt;d. Combining the high-bandwith
of Internet 2 with high-performance computing and storage infrastructure to
facilitate large image databases and video streaming research, and access to
vast amounts of experimental data from outside the
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational impact is expected by enhancing the
experiences of at least 40 CS and 10 physics students and 15 faculty using the
resource in an interdisciplinary mode. Joint activities should lead to high
quality of inter-disciplinary research fostered by the collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;