* 0216618
* MRI/RUI: Instrumentation for Sequencing and Genomic Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Merrill Peterson, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2005
* USD 170,330.00

Project Summary

A grant has been awarded to Western Washington University under the supervision
of Drs. Peterson, Moyer and Young of the Biology Department to support the
acquisition of core instrumentation and software required for DNA sequencing,
genotyping, and analysis. The ease with which DNA can now be sequenced, coupled
with advances in molecular biology and computer science has revolutionized the
biological sciences. This technology is now central to basic research in many
disciplines, as well as integral to the training of future researchers and
science educators.

Funding from this proposal will facilitate primary research in eleven different
labs with current and pending funding. A broad array of fields will be supported
by this instrumentation, including Conservation Biology, Microbial Diversity,
Evolutionary Biology, Plant Functional Genomics, Developmental Genetics, and
Protein Biochemistry. State of the art instrumentation will further enable grant
procurement and renewal by allowing us to perform rigorous research using modern
techniques. This core instrumentation will also enhance our ability to attract
and retain capable professors/researchers.

In addition to establishing and maintaining externally-funded research programs,
we are dedicated to the integration of research and training through the
mentoring of undergraduates in faculty research labs. This training will allow
our students to continue to be recognized regionally and nationally with jobs in
the biotechnology industry, admission to graduate and professional schools, and
pre-doctoral awards. Furthermore, we are revising our core biology curriculum
with a primary focus on the integration of molecular biology approaches at all
class levels. In all, over 500 undergraduate students per year will directly
benefit from this instrumentation through instruction in the Biology Department.
Through WWU's Integrated Laboratory Network the equipment supported by this
grant will be accessible to affiliated programs in the College of Arts and
Sciences and the Huxley College of Environmental Studies, as well as to future
K-12 science educators enrolled in the Woodring College of Education. In all, a
broad spectrum of people, ranging from faculty and undergraduates to K-12
science students will benefit. Access to automated DNA sequencing and genotyping
technologies will enhance student education and professional opportunities while
furthering fundamental science research.

