* 0216150
* Acquisition of a Confocal  Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Mark Running, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2005
* USD 335,853.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A grant has been awarded to Dr. Howard
Berg at the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, to acquire a
confocal microscope. An essential component of molecular biology research at the
Danforth Center is to analyze the function of protein molecules within the
context of the living cell. The microscope to be funded by this grant, a Zeiss
LSM 510 NLO Meta, is a powerful instrument for imaging proteins and their
function in living cells. The confocal microscope produces images of much higher
contrast and improved resolution, critical for the analysis of cellular biology.
Another indispensable feature of the confocal microscope is its ability to
acquire "stacks" of optical sections through a living cell, which then can be
used to reconstruct three dimensional images, allowing the study of proteins in
three dimensional space of the cell. The Zeiss LSM 510 also does spectral
imaging, giving the added dimension of analyzing the kind o f light emitted from
molecules. This is a sophisticated tool for simultaneously tracking the behavior
of many spectrally similar fluorescent proteins and dyes simultaneously, and for
quantitatively measuring the interaction of proteins and also physiological
processes in cells. The equipment will be housed in the Danforth Center's
Integrated Microscopy Facility, a leader in applying new microscopy technology
to the study of plant cells. &lt;br/&gt; The Danforth Center is a non-profit
plant science research institute home to several hundred plant scientists and
from these there will be undergraduates, graduate students, post-docs, and
senior personnel bringing projects that will use the instrumentation. The
current projects from Danforth personnel that will use this equipment include:
investigation of the cell and molecular biology of plant pathogenic viruses
(tobamoviruses and geminiviruses) during infection of plant cells; investigation
of Rab protein-mediated membrane trafficking in plant cells; analysis of
proteins involved in regulating plant development in the shoot apex; membrane
biology of giant cells induced by nematodes; study of the development of soybean
allergen in soybean tissue; investigation of the binding sites of plant
pathogenic viruses in their aphid vectors; investigation of enzyme complexes
involved in nucleic acid metabolism; and study of antigens produced by plant
vaccines to investigate their targeting in mammalian tissue. Scientists from
regional institutes studying plant biology, including Washington University,
Missouri Botanical Gardens, and the University of Missouri-Columbia, will make
use of the instrument. &lt;br/&gt; The Danforth Center is a leader in using
modern tools of molecular science to improve agriculture and human health and
nutrition. The confocal microscope funded by this grant will be critical in our
goal to understand the molecular biology of plant cells.&lt;br/&gt;