* 0216574
* SBIR Phase II:   A High Frequency Beam Steered Electromagnetic Impulse Radar to Locate Human Targets Through Opaque Media
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Scott Thompson, REALTRONICS CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2004
* USD 487,361.00

This SBIR Phase II project will develop a through material imaging system that
will locate&lt;br/&gt;human targets through opaque media. The technology will
also provide wide area subsurface sensing for ground probing applications. The
phase I results demonstrated that the system has the capability of detecting
human targets on the opposite of building walls and through walls of granite
over 10m thick. The thrust of the phase II research lies in software development
to classify targets in the downrange profile, track targets, and count targets;
and hardware development to eliminate the need for an external off the shelf
receiver. The latter effort will also require software development to process
data for the classification algorithms. The unique innovation of this project is
that it can conduct full area investigations and locate stationary targets from
a fixed location.&lt;br/&gt; There are two primary applications for this
technology, situational awareness and subsurface investigation. The former,
which is the most attractive for early market entry, comprises homeland
security, police/fire/search and rescue, and military actions where the location
of human subjects on the opposite side of walls, vegetation, snow, fire, or
other opaque media is sought. The latter includes geophysical exploration, ore
body investigation, utility detection and location, road-bed and bridge
subsurface scans&lt;br/&gt;for cracks and voids, and unattended ground sensing
from a fixed point to assess subsurface changes that can be used to predict
earth or structural failure.&lt;br/&gt;