* 0216120
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for an Undergraduate Research Program in Environmental Microbiology
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Min-Ken Liao, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2005
* USD 98,133.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Min-Ken Liao at Furman University to acquire
instrumentation for an undergraduate research program in environmental
microbiology. The requested funds are for the purchase of (1) a Biolog
MicroStation System to monitor the microbial community, (2) a Variable Angle
System to perform pulsed-field electrophoretic analysis on microbial genomes,
(3) a Dual Light Workstation to document electrophoretic results for further
image analysis, (4) Basic Software to estimate the microbial diversity and its
phylogenetic relatedness, and (5) an Opticon System to quantitatively analyze
PCR products from different organisms. These five instruments form a complete
package necessary for the study of the microbial community. The immediate goal
of this project is to address the following question. What&lt;br/&gt;is the
impact of urban expansion on the biogeochemical processes that occur within the
Enoree and Saluda River basins in South Carolina? Several approaches will be
taken. First, the impact of urbanization will be studied by comparing the
microbial community compositions of streams associated with different land
covers along an urban-to-rural gradient. Second, the impact of nutrient loading
on rivers will be studied by comparing the diversity of the microbial
communities above and below two adjacent sewage treatment plants. Third, the
molecular approach will be undertaken to study the diversity and the relatedness
of bacterial isolates including antibiotic-resistant
ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary research project attempts to
reach two long-term goals: (1) to answer fundamental questions about
microbially-mediated biogeochemical processes associated with cycles of
nitrogen, phosphorus, and carbon occurring in watersheds; and (2) to describe
the extent of human impact on river systems in the Lower Broad River basin in
the Piedmont of South Carolina. The research team believes that the study of the
microbial communities holds the keys to the assessment of the human impact on
water&lt;br/&gt;quality and the microbial impact on biogeochemical
processes.&lt;br/&gt;