* 0216558
* Development of a Suite of Balloon-borne Aerosol Instruments to Provide Size Resolved Concentration Measurements Between 0.03 and 30 Micrometers
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2008
* Terry Deshler, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 03/31/2008
* USD 497,750.00

A suite of new balloon-borne aerosol instruments capable of making size
distribution measurements spanning the range from 0.03 - 30 micrometers in
radius will be developed. This capability will require the development of two
new instruments, and improvements to a third. The present capability consists of
instruments to measure condensation nuclei and optically detectable aerosols
from the surface to 30 km. These instruments have been developed at the
University of Wyoming, and have a long history of successful measurements in the
mid latitudes and polar regions. The expanded measurements will include one new
instrument with size resolution for small particles, and a second new instrument
with sensitivity to particles at the large end of the
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will improve present capability to
perform balloon-borne measurements of stratospheric aerosol concentrations
during volcanically quiescent, or background, periods, to capture the effects of
major volcanic eruptions, and to continue investigations into the
characteristics of polar stratospheric clouds. Aerosol surfaces play a
fundamental role in determining stratospheric ozone through their influence on
the nitrogen cycle. Extending present measurement capability to lower sizes will
provide more accurate estimates of stratospheric aerosol surface area during
periods of low aerosol loading. Under those conditions, the particles are
primarily below the size detection capabilities of present balloon-borne
instruments and well below the sensitivity of satellite instruments. The new
capability will help resolve currently existing discrepancies between in situ
and satellite measurements, provide new information on the source and evolution
of both background stratospheric aerosol and free tropospheric aerosol, and the
sizes of cloud condensation nuclei.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expanded size
coverage at the large, low concentration, end of the aerosol spectrum will be
directly applicable to answer questions related to the removal of nitrogen
oxides from the polar stratosphere. This process of denitrification plays a
critical role in determining the longevity of the ozone loss which occurs in the
winter polar regions. The role of large particles at low concentrations in
denitrification was discovered in 2000 in the Arctic and there are only a few
such measurements. It is not known how prevalent this process is, how large the
particles can become, or what their size distributions are.