* 0216989
* Conference: 'Self-Assembly' - The Future
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2002,07/31/2003
* T. Alan Hatton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2003
* USD 15,000.00

This special meeting of experts in the field of molecular self-assembly is to
promote intensive discussions on, and to identify future prospects and needs
for, fundamental research on and implementation of these concepts in emerging
technologies. It is anticipated that these discussions will catalyze cross-
disciplinary and international collaborations to advance the state of knowledge
and application of this important field.

Molecular self-assembly lies at the heart of advanced applications in areas as
diverse as medicine, information technology, bio-engineering and green
chemistry, and is poised to play a significant role in fueling the growth of the
rapidly-emerging field of nanotechnology. To realize the potential offered by
these technologies, there is a need to advance the understanding of self-
assembled systems, from both experimental and theoretical perspectives, and to
develop a vision as to the most promising areas for applications and technology
development of these phenomena. The purpose of this meeting is to bring together
a group of eminent scientists spanning a range of appropriate disciplines
(chemistry, physics, chemical engineering, materials science and biochemical
physics) to stimulate identification of the prospects and needs for advancing
our understanding of self-assembly phenomena in the context of advanced
applications in a wide range of areas, and to promote inter-disciplinary and
international collaborations. The organizers will provide an exciting and
inspirational atmosphere for the conference. As well as describing recent
advances, the speakers will be asked to look forward and raise significant
issues that should be addressed in the short and intermediate term for the most
effective way for furthering this area. In this way we intend to catalyze new
collaborations, which will provide the foundation for future research programs
in the area.

A wide range of topics fit under the general heading of self-assembly, both in
bulk solution and at interfaces, and these will be addressed at the meeting.
Some specific topics, which will be discussed are not only the mechanistic
aspects of self-assembly in surfactant systems, the role of binding energy
concepts, and the nature of weak and long-range forces, but also how a deeper
understanding of these principles can accelerate the development of new
functional materials based on self-assembly principles, and of new applications
of these materials. Many of the details of interactions at the molecular level
such as lipid-protein interactions in biological membranes and
phospholipid/surfactant interactions are still not well understood. A related
topic of current interest is the spatial and temporal control of the interfacial
and bulk properties of both liquids and solids, which is of crucial importance
in microfluidic applications, for instance, and which will require a better
understanding of the dynamic aspects of self-assembly and development of methods
to accomplish these goals. New interrogative techniques are key to facilitating
advances in all these areas of colloid and interfacial science, and will be
another focal point of this conference.

