* 0216830
* Acquisition of a Comprehensive Multi-Wavelength Laser Raman System for Materials Education and Research
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Vikram Dalal, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2003
* USD 150,400.00

This grant supports acquisition of a research grade multi-wavelength laser Raman
spectrometer. The laser Raman spectrometer has two main features: (1) multiple
laser wavelengths (400 to 800 nm, visible range) to complement the 1064 nm line
of the FT-Raman spectrometer, and (2) microsampling. The multiple laser
wavelengths is accomplished through a standard 633 nm Ne He laser. Notch filters
will be used to get within 50-cm. exp. (-1) of the 413, 568, and 647 laser
lines. To minimize the cost, the standard operating mode of spectrometer will be
the microsampling microscope. For bulk samples, this provides the ability to
spatially resolve the spectra to look for texture and variation in the sample.
For microsamples, this provides the micron level resolution required. The
microscope is equipped with an auto-focusing and xy-scan microscope stage that
enables efficient collection of the spectra combined with the ability to perform
automated xy-scanning of the surfaces of samples, greatly extending the power
and flexibility of the spectrometer. Finally, a heating and freezing stage
allows temperature dependent studies to be conducted from -196 to 600 degrees C.
This enables examination of thermal stability of samples as well as the effect
of temperature on the material structure. This laser Raman spectrometer will be
heavily used in undergraduate and graduate teaching, as a core component in
materials characterization courses that cover thermal and spectroscopic
techniques of characterizing materials. In this way nearly every student in the
MSE department will use these new instrument systems The new spectrometer will
also be used for a summer NSF-REU site, where 12 undergraduate students from all
over the country come to ISU to learn about semi-conducting materials and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Raman spectroscopy combined with microsampling
capability has been shown by many researchers to be a critical analytical tool
in the study of bulk, surface, and micro samples. Its power, flexibility, and
non-destructive nature lend itself to wide spread use for nearly all classes of
materials. Recent advances in the development of highly efficient, tunable,
reliable, compact, and cost effective lasers combined with high resolution and
rugged grating monochromators and solid state CCD detectors has moved the use of
laser Raman spectroscopy from the realm of highly skilled spectroscopists into
routine use by practicing materials scientists and engineers. Raman spectroscopy
is particularly well suited for use in materials research due to minimal sample
preparation, wide flexibility of sampling conditions (low and high temperatures,
low and high pressure, low and high magnetic field, etc.), generally very sharp
well resolved lines for solid state samples, and its non-destructive nature.
Combined with a microsampling Raman microscope, Raman spectroscopy can be used
extremely effectively in the careful study of surface chemistry, structure,
morphology, texture, and even stress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;