* 0216560
* BE/CNH: Agrarian Landscapes in Transition: A Cross-Scale Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2008
* Ann Kinzig, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,792,440.00

Agrarian transformations represent the most pervasive alteration of the Earth's
terrestrial environment during the past 10,000 years. Many current
conceptualizations of these transformations assume a simple linear model,
however, positing that change is driven by present-day economic, demographic,
and technological conditions. This interdisciplinary research project will trace
the effects of the introduction, spread, and abandonment of agriculture at six
sites in the U.S., with comparisons also made with comparable sites in Mexico
and France. The U.S. sites are members of the Long-Term Ecological Research
(LTER) network. This project incorporates an integrated, long-term cycle that
includes land-use change affecting landscapes, altered landscapes affecting
ecological processes, and both influencing the ways in which humans monitor and
respond to their surroundings, which engender further cycles of change. The
central objective of this research is to identify and quantify the ways in which
these integrated cycles differ across cultures, across biogeographic regions,
and across time. A suite of quantitative and narrative analyses will be used to
identify the prime determinants of long-term dynamics, present-day patterns, and
reservoirs of ecological and social resilience in these systems. Analytical
approaches will include structural-equation modeling, analysis of spatial and
causal effects, and cross-site comparisons of case studies. As a practical test
of the project's results, approaches and insights that includes an emphasis on
eco-regional planning and scenario building will be examined in the context of
conservation planning at The Nature Conservancy (TNC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will contribute to both science and society in many ways. It will
demonstrate the importance of social science information and approaches in
ecosystem investigations, expanding the results of the LTER network and
breaching the divide between social and natural science. The data protocols
developed will also benefit other communities of social and natural scientists
through the involvement of the Inter-University Consortium for Political and
Social Research (ICPSR), a major national repository of social science data.
This project will help to develop general theories on how socio-ecological
legacies, as well as lags in the recognition of and response to change, vary
across space and time. Through detailed case histories and quantitative
analyses, the project expects to provide convincing evidence that humans act not
only to disturb ecosystems but also monitor ecosystem values and respond to
maintain stability and minimize crises. Project results will provide information
of direct use to policy makers, TNC, and land managers by using an approach that
explicitly relates socio-ecological processes to varying levels of political
organization. The cross-scale data collection and analyses are expected to
demonstrate that some patterns of human-ecological interactions are surprisingly
long term, vary across space and time, and are non-linear. The project's most
significant long-term contribution may prove to be through education; as this
project will train new interdisciplinary scientists at all levels of the
educational spectrum, inform public officials, and contribute to more effective
land-management practices. This project is an award resulting from the FY 2002
special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics
of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;