* 0216654
* Acquisition of a Proteomics System
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Wolfgang Fischer, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2005
* USD 526,437.00

A grant has been awarded to The Salk Institute to acquire a proteomics
system.&lt;br/&gt;Proteomics, the rapid identification of large numbers of
proteins in a short time frame, has been made possible by recent developments in
mass spectroscopy equipment and by the development of powerful data
interpretation software. The new Salk proteomics system consists of devices that
allow the isolation and identification of small amounts of proteins involved in
normal and abnormal events inside cells. The proteins are separated by two-
dimensional gel electrophoresis. Fragments of the proteins are then identified
by analysis in a mass spectrometer. The system includes robotic workstations
that allow automated analysis of several hundred proteins per
week.&lt;br/&gt;Numerous projects at The Salk Institute rely heavily on the
ability to identify small&lt;br/&gt;amounts of proteins involved in cell growth
and development. Changes in the level of specific proteins are associated with
diseases such as cancer and nerve cell damage. Protein complexes regulate embryo
development and gene activity throughout life. These complexes, often consisting
of more than 50 proteins, can be analyzed in days with the new proteomics
technology rather than years with previous methods. Plant development and
plants' responses to parasites are also regulated by changes in the level of a
variety of proteins. Understanding these events in plants not only has
implication for agriculture but can also lead to discoveries about human
biology.&lt;br/&gt;The Salk Institute has been at the forefront of biological
research for more than three&lt;br/&gt;decades and the proteomics system will
allow investigators to expand the scope of their investigation to pursue new
avenues of research. The Salk Institute employs a highly diverse staff of
scientists and support personnel. Students, both undergraduate and postgraduate,
from many ethnic backgrounds are trained in its laboratories. The Salk Institute
has an on-going outreach program designed to attract minority students and staff
members. The addition of a proteomics facility will expand the research
possibilities and attract new investigators to the Institute.&lt;br/&gt;