* 0217921
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  The Cenomanian-Turonian Paleoecology of Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Gerta Keller, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 28,000.00

0217921&lt;br/&gt;Keller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description:&lt;br/&gt;This award
is for support of a joint research project by Dr. Gerta Keller, Department of
Geosciences, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, Dr. Ahmed Kassab,
Geology Department at Assiut University, Assiut, Egypt and Dr. Abdel Aziz
Tantawy, Geology Department at South Valley University, Aswan, Egypt. They plan
to study the Cenomanian-Turonian (C-T) anoxic event across different bathymetric
settings along the Gulf of Suez and Sinai in Egypt. The investigators plan to
investigate these different bathymetric settings in Egypt and the Sinai based on
a high-resolution study of the organic carbon-rich facies in a series of
sections along the Gulf of Suez and in the Sinai. The study will be based on an
integrated multidisciplinary approach that includes sedimentology, mineralogy,
geochemistry, stable carbon and oxygen isotopes and microfossil and macrofossil
biostratigraphies. The results are expected to yield critical information on the
nature of organic carbon accumulation in variable settings, the biotic response
of marine plankton to this crisis, and the climatic and sea level history of the
region. The investigators expect to develop high-resolution biostratigraphic
records that permit evaluation of the timing of the anoxic event and comparison
and correlation with black shale deposition elsewhere in the
Tethys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:&lt;br/&gt;The C-T transition marks a major
greenhouse warming accompanied by global ocean anoxia that was detrimental to
marine benthic and planktic organisms. The resulting organic-rich facies are
widespread globally and occur in a wide range of bathymetric settings with the
thickest deposits with greatest source rock potential generally occur in outer-
shelf environments of the low latitude Atlantic and Mediterranean Tethys. The
eastern Tethys, and Egypt in particular, provides an ideal area for the study of
the C-T anoxic event across different bathymetric settings from shallow shelf to
deep basins, as observed in a series of dysoxic basins along the Gulf of Suez
and Sinai in Egypt. This project will bring together an international team of
experts in sedimentology, mineralogy, stratigraphy, stable isotopes,
geochemistry and biology. At the same time the project will involve U.S. and
Egyptian graduate and undergraduate students in the field and laboratory
investigations and thereby introduce them to various Earth Science disciplines
and expose them to working within a larger investigative team and in a foreign
country. The project is funded by the Office of International Science and
Engineering and the Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;