* 0217910
* Fundamental Understanding of Anisotropic Conductive Film (ACF)  for Flip Chip Packaging
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* C. Wong, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 07/31/2006
* USD 240,000.00

The goal of this research is to advance the fundamental understanding of the
behavior of anisotropic conductive adhesives that could replace lead-containing
solders in electronic packaging. Of particular interest is the capability of
creating a thin film (ACF) of this material that is stable, with a high current
density capacity. Replacing lead-containing solder with alternative interconnect
material would significantly impact the manufacturing processes of
microelectronic packaging systems, such as flip-chip, ball grid array (BGA),
chip scale package (CSP), and surface mount technology (SMT). ACFs are one of
the candidates to replace lead-containing solder as interconnect material.
Currently, the reliability and performance of these ACF materials are not
competitive, and improvements require a better understanding of the interfacial
behavior developed in electronics packaging processes.

In this project, chemical and physical properties of ACA materials will be
studied, and the interfaces in ACF joint will be investigated. Then, the
interfaces will be modified to maintain the electrical properties in extreme
environment by using corrosion inhibitors and or sacrificial alloys. To improve
the current density of ACA, the interfaces will be modified with self-assembling
molecular (SAM) wires. The mechanically bonded interface between ACA and chip
pad/substrate pad will be modified by SAM, which has been known to be able to
deliver high current density. A computational modeling of the processing -
property relationship will be developed. During the period of award, the PI will
continue to address the integration of research and education with specific
activities focused on high school teachers and students from underrepresented
groups in local high schools.

