* 0217533
* LTER:  Comparative Study of a Suite of Lakes in Wisconsin
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2011
* Monica Turner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 10/31/2011
* USD 7,337,865.00

ABSTRACT (NTL Renewal)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lakes are conspicuous, ecologically
important, and socially valued components of landscapes. Lakes collect water,
energy, solutes and pollutants from the land and atmosphere, provide habitats
and resources for organisms, and interact with diverse human activities. The
North Temperate Lakes (NTL) Long-Term Ecological Research program aims to
understand the ecology of lakes in relation to relevant atmospheric,
geochemical, landscape and human processes. The overarching research question is
how do biophysical setting, climate, and changing land use and cover interact to
shape lake characteristics and dynamics over time (past, present, future)? NTL
will address this question through five inter-related goals: (1) perceive long-
term changes in the physical, chemical, and biological properties, of lake
districts, (2) understand the drivers of temporal variability in lakes and lake
districts, (3) understand the interaction of spatial processes with long-term
change, (4) understand the causes and predictability of rapid extensive change
in ecosystems, and (5) build a capacity to forecast the future ecology of lake
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Patterns, processes, and interactions of lakes,
landscapes and people will be examined at four spatial scales: individual lakes,
small drainage systems with several lakes, entire lake districts, and the
western Great Lakes region of North America. Temporally, scales from a fraction
of a day to decades will be considered. NTL will use multiple approaches of
long-term observation, comparison across ecosystems, experimental manipulations,
and process modeling. In this proposal, decadal forecasts of ecosystem change
are specifically addressed, which become the hypotheses for future long-term
research. The interdisciplinary research group includes ecologists,
hydrologists, climatologists, chemists, demographers, an economist, rural
sociologists, and specialists in remote sensing and information management. The
research should produce new conceptualizations of lake district dynamics,
including new insights on the dynamics and impacts of invasive species,
understanding of the role of spatial location of lakes in landscape dynamics,
the reflexive interactions of human and ecological processes, and the
interactive effects of geomorphic setting, climate and human activity on long-
term change in lake districts. The understanding of integrated landscape-lake-
social systems developed through the NTL program will be useful for decision
making by individuals and institutions concerned with the future of the western
Great Lakes region and the welfare of its residents. &lt;br/&gt;