* 0217191
* Regulatory Mechanisms of Metabolic Signaling in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Jen Sheen, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2007
* USD 780,000.00

Sugars are evolutionarily conserved signaling molecules that control many vital
developmental processes and physiological responses from bacteria, yeasts,
mammals, to plants. Extensive cellular and transgenic studies have provided
compelling evidence that plant hexokinase (HXK), a sugar-binding enzyme, acts as
a sugar sensor with both signaling and metabolic functions. To further elucidate
the molecular mechanisms underlying the plant sugar-signaling network, a genetic
approach has been taken to isolate sugar response mutants using Arabidopsis as a
plant model. Based on a phenotypic assay in which a high level of glucose blocks
the switch of post-germination development in Arabidopsis, both glucose
insensitive (gin) and glucose over-sensitive (glo) mutants have been isolated.
Genetic, phenotypic and molecular characterizations of these glucose-signaling
mutants (gin1, gin2, gin4, gin5 &amp; gin6) and their corresponding genes have
provided many surprising new insights into the regulatory mechanisms connecting
nutrient status to plant hormone biosynthesis and signaling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the most important sugar response mutant that
is directly linked to glucose sensing and signaling is gin2 with HXK1
deficiency. The study of other HXK and HXK-like (HKL) genes, the
characterization of gin2 suppressor mutants, the analysis of HXK1-mediated
global gene expression using functional genomic tools, and the understanding of
interactions between glucose and hormone signaling pathways will advance our
knowledge on the molecular mechanisms underlying the regulatory roles of sugar
signals in plant growth and development. Since sugar production and consumption
constitutes the most fundamental activities of plant life in growth,
reproduction and storage, and is tightly linked to environmental conditions and
factors, understanding the molecular basis of sugar signaling network may help
design new strategies for improvements in agriculture. The study of metabolic
signaling mechanisms also offers excellent training opportunities for
researchers, postdoctoral associates and graduate and undergraduate students
especially from underrepresented groups in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future
research plans have four objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1) Functional analysis of HXK and
HXK-like (HKL) genes&lt;br/&gt;2) Genetic, phenotypic and molecular analysis of
gin2 suppressor mutants &lt;br/&gt;3) Global gene expression and functional
analyses of HXK-regulated genes &lt;br/&gt;4) Elucidation of the molecular
mechanisms underlying the interactions between glucose and hormone
signaling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the broad effects of sugars on plant
growth and development have been known for decades, the molecular mechanisms of
sugar signaling network have only been recently discovered. The sugar regulatory
pathways are directly and extensively connected to multiple hormonal, metabolic,
and stress signaling pathways and are modulate by environmental factors that
determine the output of adaptive and flexible growth and development in plants.
The discoveries have generated significant impact on basic and applied
scientific research and have altered traditional concepts on metabolic
regulation in plants. The intellectual contribution to our understanding of
fundamental control of plant life will have practical applications from the
improved production of plant fiber, food, medicine and alternative and renewable
energy resources to the manipulation of environmental and ecological systems
including the modulation of global CO2 sinks.&lt;br/&gt;