* 0217688
* US-Nigeria Cooperative Research: Transition States for Thiophosphoryl Transfer from Phosphinothioates and Related Compounds
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Alvan Hengge, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 07/31/2006
* USD 30,000.00

0217688&lt;br/&gt;Hengge&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-year
collaborative research project between Professor Alvan Hengge, with the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Utah State University, and Professor
Ikenna Onyido, with the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Agriculture, in Makurdi, Nigeria. They will study the reaction mechanisms of
phosphonothioates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phosphoryl group transfer from a
variety of phosphorylated compounds is involved in energy transport and control
mechanisms in biological systems, and is critical to genetic engineering
techniques. For a complete understanding of enzymatic catalysis of phosphoryl
transfer, it is necessary to know the characterization of the transition state
for the reaction. The investigators will measure linear free energy
relationships and heavy-atom kinetic isotope effects in order to delineate the
hydrolysis mechanisms of a family of thiophosphonic esters, of the general
formula compounds Me2P(S)-OAr, MePhP(S)-OAr, and Ph2P(S)-OAr. The results are
expected to reveal how the hydrolytic mechanism depends upon the basicity of the
leaving group, as well as the comparative behavior of a group of substrates that
function as, or are structurally related to, pesticides and neurotoxins. This
project is at the interface of chemistry and biology, and the results are
expected to advance the current knowledge about biological phosphoryl transfer
at the molecular level. It combines Professor Hengge's knowledge of enzymatic
and nonenzymatic phosphoryl transfer mechanisms, and Professor Onyido's
expertise in the areas of mechanistic analysis and linear free energy
relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of International Science and
Engineering and the Division of Chemistry are jointly providing support for this
project.&lt;br/&gt;