* 0217265
* A New Decomposition Approach for a Class of NP-hard Graph Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Wilbert Wilhelm, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 08/31/2005
* USD 201,910.00

The research undertakes a preliminary investigation of a new decomposition
approach that offers the potential for solving large-scale instances of an
important class of graph problems effectively. This class, comprising such
difficult problems as maximum weight independent subset, maximum clique, maximal
planar sub-graph, and graph coloring, has significant economic impact in
numerous applications, including plant layout, automatic graph drawing,
computational geometry and circuit design. The purpose of the research is to
demonstrate the possibilities for this technology, focusing on a typical problem
from the class with the goal of optimizing large-scale instances within
reasonable average-case run times. Research objectives are: (1) theoretical
basis for the decomposition, (2) effective implementation techniques, and (3)
computational evaluation of efficacy. Graphs in this class may be decomposed
into disjoint sub-graphs and a problem of the same type as the original problem
may be solved on each sub-graph. The method of approach applies existing
algorithms to solve small sub-problems within reasonable average-case times,
generating solutions that will be used in both branch-and-price and branch-and-
cut methods. A master problem coordinates sub-problem solutions to optimize the
original, large-scale problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit is based
on six research questions. Answers will achieve all three objectives and entail
both basic research and engineering contributions. Basic research includes
extending the Co-PI's recent research on branch decompositions and the facet
generation procedure. Engineering contributions include designing effective
implementation techniques and computational evaluation. The research will have
broad impact. It will advance discovery and understanding through basic
research, contributing to the knowledge base. It will seek to recruit students
from under-represented groups and promote teaching and training by engaging them
in the field of optimization, contributing to the infrastructure for research
and education. The plan for dissemination will contribute to training analysts,
engineers, and managers. Research results will be incorporated in courses taught
by the Co-PIs and by their colleagues at other universities. Benefits to society
at large will accrue from laying the foundation for this new approach. Future
research can extend this foundation, specializing the decomposition to other
problems in this class and generalizing it to other classes of
problems.&lt;br/&gt;