* 0217605
* Colonial Botany:  Gender, Politics, and Commerce between Europe and the West Indies in the Eighteenth Century
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2002,09/30/2004
* Londa Schiebinger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Seely
* 09/30/2004
* USD 94,085.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal 0217605&lt;br/&gt;Colonial Botany: Gender,
Politics, and Commerce between Europe and the West Indies in the Eighteenth
Century&lt;br/&gt;Londa Schiebinger, Penn State&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last
several years have witnessed renewed interest in the history of botany, the "big
science" of early modern Europe. This book-length project explores the movement,
triumph, suppression, and extinction of different botanical knowledges in 18th
century encounters between Europeans and the inhabitants of the Caribbean. The
project has several purposes. First, it asks scholarly audiences to consider the
cultural politics of plants. Plants rarely appear in undergraduate or graduate
courses on European, American, World History or History of Science, and are
rarely part of our grand narratives of war, peace, or even everyday life. But
they are important cultural artifacts, often at the center of political and
economic struggles. In the eighteenth-century, plants played a role in political
struggles surrounding slavery (slave women, for example, employed abortifacients
to resist producing more field hands for plantation owners). Plants also figured
in battles between trading companies, states, and local bio-pirates for
monopolies on profitable colonial commodities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, this
project seeks to examine the linkage between colonial botany and gender
relations. While gender has received some attention in the history of
eighteenth-century anthropology and travel literature and in the history of
slavery, it has received relatively little in the history of colonial botany. In
this project, the PI explores how European gender relations guided naturalists
as they explored other lands, peoples, and their knowledges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Third, this project contributes to rethinking the history
of botany. A long-standing narrative has presented modern botany as the rise of
taxonomy, nomenclature, and "pure" systems of classification. This approach does
not capture the realities of botany in the eighteenth century as a matter of
state. Emerging nation-states that vied for land and resources saw botanists who
collected rare and beautiful plants for study and global exchange as crucial for
European colonizing efforts in tropical climates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fourth,
this project seeks to develop further and apply a new methodological tool that
Robert Proctor has called "agnatology"--the study of culturally-induced
ignorances. Agnatology refocuses questions about "how we know" to include
questions about what we do not know and why not. While much of the literature on
colonial science has focused on how knowledge is made and transferred between
continents, the PI explores the non-transfer of important bodies of knowledge
from the New World to Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will work in archives
and libraries in Europe and the Caribbean to prepare a book, for a broad
scholarly audience including those working in STS as well as botanists and
naturalists. &lt;br/&gt;