* 0217716
* US-Egypt Workshop:  Explaining the Worldviews of the Islamic Publics:  Theoretical and Methodological Issues, Cairo, Egypt, December 2002
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Mansoor Moaddel, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/2005
* USD 30,000.00

0217716&lt;br/&gt;Moaddel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a US-Egypt Workshop on Explaining the Worldviews of the Islamic Publics:
Theoretical and Methodological Issues, to be held in Cairo, Egypt, December
2002. The organizer is Dr. Mansoor Moaddel, Professor, Department of Sociology,
Anthropology and Criminology, Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan.
The co-organizer is Dr. Abdel-Hamid Abdel-Latif, Professor of Sociology, Ain
Shams University, Cairo, Egypt. This meeting will bring together the social
scientists from the United States and Islamic countries who were involved in
carrying out national surveys of the attitudes and value orientations of the
Islamic publics in Algeria, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran, Jordan, Morocco, and
Pakistan. This is the first time that comprehensive comparative surveys have
been carried out in several major Islamic countries, generating a sociologically
important data set. The questionnaire used in these surveys was based on key
batteries of the World Values Survey questionnaire, as well as a series of items
that were specifically designed for Islamic countries. To advance the
fundamental knowledge of Islamic societies, the participants will address in a
collective fashion several methodological and theoretical concerns. These
include comparison of different translations of the questionnaire, an assessment
of the final sampling frame used in the study, and an analysis of the findings
within varying cultural and political contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
This meeting expands the basis of social science understanding of Islamic
societies by strengthening the network among social scientists that the
comparative survey has generated. It deals with a topic that is of current
importance in the United States and in the Islamic countries. The project is
funded jointly by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the
Division of Social and Economic Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;