* 0217395
* Design of Experiments (DOE) Based Automatic Process Control (APC):  A Methodology for Process Variation Reduction Beyond Robust Parameter Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* C. F. Jeff Wu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2007
* USD 289,768.00

This project focuses on the development of automatic process control (APC)
methodologies based on Design of Experiments (DOE) regression models and real-
time measurement or estimation of noise factors. The central idea of the
proposed research is to develop a methodology to achieve automatic process
control by integrating the disciplines of DOE, SPC, and control and estimation
theory. Various fundamental issues will be studied, which include: (1) a new
classification of controllable factors and noise factors applicable to serve as
feedback information for APC; (2) test design and analysis of DOE for process
modeling with consideration of system identifiability for the control purpose;
(3) cautious control strategy with consideration of uncertainties in DOE
regression models and noise factor estimation; and (4) on-line DOE model
updating and adaptive control with supervision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success
of the research will lead to a new scientific basis and practical tools for
designing and implementing APC in complex manufacturing processes. The research
expands the existing theory in each of the three well-developed disciplines of
DOE, SPC, and APC to form a new "DOE-based APC" methodology. This new
methodology, in conjunction with robust design and SPC, will provide more
effective techniques for a broad range of manufacturing processes. Examples of
such processes include stamping, forging, semiconductor, and composite material
manufacturing processes. &lt;br/&gt;