* 0217869
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Ronald Herring, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2005
* USD 12,000.00



This Doctoral Dissertation investigates whether trade unions help or hinder
economic development. Because unions affect development by creating or
disrupting social stability, it is crucial to know what protest strategies
unions in South Asia pursue and why they pursue them. Instead of conducting
research along these lines, many scholars have relied on arguments supported by
the experience of advanced industrial states. This practice has led to a lack of
evidence on the subject and a paucity of theory appropriate to the South Asian
context. The Principal Investigator will work to overcome this problem through
an examination of the political economy of labor protest in six cities in South
Asia (Calcutta, Cochin, Colombo, Madras, Bombay, and Delhi) during the period
1991-2000.

This study advances the understanding of union behavior in South Asia on both
theoretical and empirical fronts. First, it employs a network-based theory of
union behavior, which holds that union strategies differ based on a union's
degree of formalized connections to employers and institutions of the state.
Unions with more ties protest less, and use routine strategies of protest.
Unions without ties protest more, utilizing one of two alternatives: extreme
acts of violence or Scottian "weapons of the weak." This higher volume of
alternative protest strategies disrupts economic development.

Evidence to test the theory will come from a) hundreds of interviews with union
leaders, government officials, and managers, b) descriptions of thousands of
protest events as reported in the Indian and Sri Lankan press and c) two surveys
of employers and investors. The relationship between the network ties of unions
and the strike tactics they pursue will be tested with Ordinary Least Squares
cross-sectional regression models. In these models, measures of strategies and
volume of strike protest will be the dependent variables and measures of ties to
parties and unions will be the primary independent variables of interest. The
impact of protest strategies on economic performance will be assessed through a
variety of methods. These will include: 1) a survey of representatives of
private sector firms in India; 2) a survey of foreign investors in India; 3)
interviews with employers in India; and 4) firm-level statistical models of
absenteeism and productivity.

