* 0217453
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Semi-Analytical Treatments of Nonlinear Stochastic Dynamical Systems with Application to Control Problems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Jian-Qiao Sun, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 34,400.00

0217453&lt;br/&gt;Sun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: &lt;br/&gt;This award is
for support of a joint research project by Dr. Jian-Qiao Sun, Department of
Mechanical Engineering at the University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware and Dr.
Ghazanfer Unal, Engineering Science Department at Istanbul Technical University,
Istanbul, Turkey. The goal of this project is to develop analytical and
numerical methods to study the stochastic dynamical systems. The investigators
plan to extend Lie's theory for deterministic differential equations to
nonlinear stochastic dynamical systems. Specifically, they will extend their
previous results on the approximate symmetries to stochastic dynamical systems
in a manner which will remain consistent with the normal form theory of
stochastic systems. An immediate use of the approximate symmetries of the
stochastic dynamical systems would be to obtain their approximate conserved
quantities. Furthermore, they will extend the results to the Fokker-Planck
equation in order to obtain analytical approximate solutions. The analytical
solutions to be obtained in the project by Professor Unal will be integrated
with the cell mapping method studied by Dr. Sun. The approximate symmetries and
the related conservation laws can help identify a sub-space in which the cell
mapping method can be applied. This is expected to substantially reduce the
computational effort for analysis and control of nonlinear stochastic systems by
using the cell mapping method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:&lt;br/&gt;Success in
determining approximate symmetries and the related conservation laws would make
it possible to identify a subspace in which cell mapping can be applied with
much less resources than currently possible. The two scientists have
complementary strengths, as Dr. Sun's expertise is in cell mapping, while Dr.
Unal's expertise is in Lie's theory and in symmetries and approximate symmetries
of dynamical systems. Research results will be integrated with graduate programs
at both universities, and an exchange program of graduate students between the
two universities may also result. Dr. Unal will travel to the United States in
the first and third years while Prof. Sun will travel to Turkey in the second
year. The project will lead to long-term collaboration between them since they
will tackle difficult problems that require new insights, as well as advanced
computational tools.&lt;br/&gt;