* 0217463
* LTREB: The Evolution of Alternative Strategies
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2008
* Elaina Tuttle, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 02/29/2008
* USD 203,497.00

The goal of this proposal is to help determine why individual variation (e.g.
alternative strategies) is maintained in natural populations. In order to be
maintained over the long-term, alternative strategies must have the same long-
term success. If one strategy is better than the other, it will become fixed in
the population and the poorer strategy will be lost over time. Both temporal and
spatial factors can contribute to the success or failure of a particular
strategy. Dr. Tuttle proposes to examine the maintenance of alternative
strategies in the North American songbird, the white-throated sparrow
(Zonotrichia albicollis). This species is unique because males and females can
have either tan or white crown stripes. White birds behave differently than tan
birds; they are more aggressive, sing more often, and are more promiscuous than
tan birds. Tan birds are less aggressive, guard their females more, and spend
more time caring for their young than white birds. Tan birds almost always mate
with white birds and this unusual mating system ensures that both types always
occur in the population.

Dr. Tuttle proposes to test two hypotheses. One, that these two alternative
strategies (white and tan) may be affected by different environmental and social
"demands", and two, that each strategy does best under a different set of
environmental conditions that might occur in space and time. For example during
a year of limited resources and high predation, the more parental tan strategy
may be more successful. However, during good years, the promiscuous white males
may be more successful. Although these two strategies may have different success
rates in the short term, long-term cycles may cause each strategy to have equal
success over time thereby maintaining stability in the system. Long-term trends
in previously collected data (13 years) and data to be collected over the next 5
years will allow testing for the effects of differential selection and
environmental cycling. While pursuing the goals of this proposal, Dr. Tuttle
will incorporate new technologies such as relational databases, GIS, and GPS. In
addition, Dr. Tuttle proposes to develop web-based instructional materials based
on the long-term data that will be obtained.

Since empirical evidence is often lacking, factors maintaining variation in
natural populations have long been debated. The white-throated sparrow system
may prove to be a classic vertebrate example of how individual variation is
maintained in nature. Study of this species will provide insight into similar
mechanisms affecting diversity in other species, as well as how evolution
proceeds in general.