* 0217294
* Affect and processing ease
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Piotr Winkielman, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 09/30/2004
* USD 175,760.00

A program of research investigates the hypothesis that affective responses
reflect the ease of mental operations involved in stimulus processing. This
hypothesis promises to integrate a variety of apparently unrelated preference
phenomena under a common theoretical framework. It is proposed that a single
process -- enhancement of processing fluency -- underlies the following
phenomena: (i) the mere-exposure effect (repetition increases liking for
objects), (ii) beauty-in-averages effect (prototypical objects are liked more
then nonprototypical ones), (iii) preferences for objects presented with higher
clarity or higher figure-ground contrast, (iv) preference for objects presented
at longer durations, and (v) preference for objects when mental processing of
their attributes has been facilitated with perceptual or semantic primes.

This research offers a systematic analysis of the relation between processing
fluency, affective responses, and evaluative judgments. The studies employ a
variety of preference tasks (liking for pictures, persons, words, categories of
objects, abstract shapes) and a variety of manipulations (semantic priming,
visual priming, repetition, clarity). Specific psychological mechanisms
underlying the fluency-affect-judgment connection are explored and the nature of
the underlying affective reactions are examined with psychophysiological
measures.

This research project will advance our understanding of the relation between
affect and cognition. Specifically, it will: (i) identify a new source of
affective reactions (processing dynamics), (ii) provide an account of classic
phenomena, such as the mere-exposure effect and beauty-in-averages effect, (iii)
predict new preference phenomena, such as the influence of priming on affective
responses that are not mediated by the semantic interpretation of the target,
and (iv) identify potential biases that may result from differential fluency
during social perception tasks.