* 0217571
* North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation - Phase III
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2002,12/31/2009
* Marcia Williams, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 12/31/2009
* USD 5,908,047.00

North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation - Phase
III&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (NC-LSAMP) requests&lt;br/&gt;support for continuingits efforts
during Phase III. The LS-NCAMP Alliance includes eight&lt;br/&gt;partner
institutions - North Carolina A&amp;T State University (lead institution),
Fayetteville&lt;br/&gt;State University, North Carolina Central University,
North Carolina State University,&lt;br/&gt;University of North Carolina - Chapel
Hill, University of North Carolina Charlotte, &lt;br/&gt;University of North
Carolina - Pembroke, and Winston Salem State University. The&lt;br/&gt;Provost
and Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs at North Carolina A&amp;T State
University&lt;br/&gt;will lead the project with assistance from key
administrators at all Alliance institutions. &lt;br/&gt;This will ensure the
effective institutionalization of the strategies proposed here. The
&lt;br/&gt;work proposed caps a decade long series of activities aimed primarily
at increasing &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate degree production in Science,
Mathematics, Engineering and Technology &lt;br/&gt;(SMET).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Underrepresented minorities comprise 30 percent of the
college-age population &lt;br/&gt;but they represent only 11 percent of the
baccalaureate engineering graduates resulting &lt;br/&gt;in a "parity gap" of 19
percent. The parity gap is even more pronounced at the master's&lt;br/&gt;and
doctoral level. Clearly, more needs to be done to reduce this parity gap, more
out of&lt;br/&gt;economic necessity and to meet global competitive pressures
than any other reason. &lt;br/&gt;The efforts outlined in this proposal are
aimed at meeting this challenge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities proposed
in this proposal are driven by the need to increase substantially &lt;br/&gt;the
number of underrepresented minorities who will contribute significantly in
science,&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, engineering and technology areas. While the
baccalaureate degree programs &lt;br/&gt;will receive continued attention,
special emphasis will be placed on amplifying the flow &lt;br/&gt;of minority
students in the graduate and research pipeline. The primary goals of
the&lt;br/&gt;proposal are (i) to increase the pool of competent
underrepresented SMET graduates &lt;br/&gt;with bachelor's degrees (specific
objectives include increasing the number of SMET &lt;br/&gt;graduates from
bachelor's degree programs by 10% from allAlliance partner schools
by&lt;br/&gt;2007 and increasing the quality of SMET bachelors degree graduates
from all alliance&lt;br/&gt;partner schools based on their performance in
college courses and national examinations&lt;br/&gt;by 50% by 2007) and (ii) to
increase the number of students who matriculate into SMET &lt;br/&gt;graduate
schools (specific objectives include increasing the number of SMET
students&lt;br/&gt;who express an interest in graduate studies by 100% by 2007,
increasing by 100%, the&lt;br/&gt;number of SMET graduates who are academically
qualified for admission to graduate &lt;br/&gt;programs by 2007, increasing the
number of SMET graduates from alliance partner&lt;br/&gt;institutions who are
enrolled in graduate SMET programs by 100% by 2007, and increasing
&lt;br/&gt;the retention rate by 10% of underrepresented students in graduate
SMET programs). &lt;br/&gt;An additional goal of the project is to identify
significant factors that promote &lt;br/&gt;baccalaureatedegree attainment,
retention in academic programs and entry into graduate &lt;br/&gt;school in SMET
areas (specific objectives are to identify significant factors that promote
&lt;br/&gt;and hinder retention of minority students enrolled in
SMETbaccalaureate degree programs, &lt;br/&gt;and to identify significant
factors that promote and hinder entry of minority&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
students into graduate SMET degree programs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strategies
for accomplishing project goals are based on published techniques that have
&lt;br/&gt;proven successful in smaller samples. Specifically, the approaches to
be employed include&lt;br/&gt;focused recruitment from school; bridge programs
to manage the school-college transition;&lt;br/&gt;supplemental instruction,
cohort scheduling and workshops for undergraduate students &lt;br/&gt;during the
first year to enhance retention and preparation for upper-class coursework;
&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate research and professional development workshops aimed
at motivating and&lt;br/&gt;preparing students for graduate study; and the
development of networking and mentoring &lt;br/&gt;systems to improve retention
in the first year in graduate school. A key emphasis during&lt;br/&gt;Phase III
will be Alliance-wide institutionalization of proven strategies that have
been&lt;br/&gt;known to improve the success rates of students in
SMET.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alliance partners together awarded over a
thousand degrees and currently enroll over &lt;br/&gt;six thousand undergraduate
minority students in SMET programs. In addition to students &lt;br/&gt;in the
Alliance, dissemination activities under this proposal have the potential to
impact&lt;br/&gt; several thousand students each year.&lt;br/&gt;