* 0217664
* Modeling and Optimization Studies in Reactive In-Mold Coating -  The Enviromentally Friendly Alternative to Painting for Plastic Parts
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Jose Castro, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 07/31/2006
* USD 296,262.00

This project will model the complex interactions that occur during the in-mold
coating of thermoplastic and composite parts. The goals of this processing model
will be to predict mold and molding machine deflection during filling and
coating, as well as optimal injection parameters for the process. Plans to
experimentally validate the use of this model for coatings for injection molded
thermoplastic parts where issues such as substrate compressibility play a key
role in the filling stage and subsequent coating performance In-mold coating has
the potential to greatly reduce the need for spray painting and coating of
plastic parts, a major environmental hazard in contemporary manufacturing.

In-mold coating compounds have been used for many years to improve the surface
properties of parts made from sheet molding compounds. To date, the process has
not been applied to injection-molded thermoplastic parts, although the potential
environmental benefits and cost savings resulting from elimination of painting
are enormous. The major stumbling blocks have been the difficulty of predicting
the behavior of the thermoplastic substrate during the coating process, and
associated problems in mold design. Another potential application of large
environmental benefit is as a substitute of gel coats for boat manufacturing.
This work will have an immediate impact on the automotive and consumer products
industries, and will be directly applied to manufacturing courses in polymer
processing and mold design at Ohio State University. The potential for
alleviating a major environmental hazard is clearly very large. Another major
potential application of large environmental benefit is as a substitute of gel
coats for boat manufacturing. The Director of the Women in Engineering Program
will actively engage a diverse student participation.

