* 0217471
* Collaborative Research: The Molecular Identification and Action of Bursicon, the Insect Cuticle Sclerotizing Hormone
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Karen Mesce, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 30,125.00

An insect hormone called bursicon is essential for hardening of the new skin
(cuticle) after the insect has shed its old one during molting (ecdysis). The
timed release and actions of bursicon are critically important for the survival
of all insects and, most likely, all arthropods. Although bursicon was
discovered in 1935 and is known to be a peptide, its molecular structure has not
been established, and remains a major unsolved problem in insect
neuroendocrinology. The Honegger lab has purified the hormone and obtained
partial amino acid sequences for bursicon from some insects. Recently they were
able to use these sequences to identify a particular gene sequence, CG13419, in
the genome of the fruitfly Drosophila. The primary aim of this collaborative
project is to determine whether the CG13419 gene product is the functional
bursicon hormone, as an important step to understanding the actions of bursicon.
Molecular techniques for gene expression in eukaryotic cells and overexpression
in Drosophila will be combined with the 'ligated fly' bioassay using the related
blowfly (Sarcophaga) to test for bursicon activity. If bioactive bursicon is
shown, the sequence will be used for cDNA screening in the moth Manduca, a well-
studied insect system in which the complex hormonal interactions regulating
ecdysis have been illuminated. From the recombinant proteins and synthesized
peptides from conserved sequence stretches, new antibodies will be produced to
identify neurosecretory cells in the brain, and to clarify the temporal and
spatial activation of bursicon release in Manduca.&lt;br/&gt; Results from this
work will provide a potential breakthrough for understanding how the brain and
endocrine systems together orchestrate multiple biochemical events leading to
periodic cuticular hardening. Knowledge about this key hormone may provide novel
strategies for agriculture in developing insect pest controls, and in managing
crustacean aquaculture. In addition, this collaboration between two institutions
includes multi-disciplinary postdoctoral training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;