* 0217109
* The Case of Missing Human Potential
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Judith Brenneke, WVIZ/PBS
* Standard Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 02/29/2004
* USD 111,196.00

This project will produce a one-hour general audience television program for
Ohio and&lt;br/&gt;the surrounding region designed to raise the awareness of the
viewing audience to the &lt;br/&gt;problemof gender inequity in our sciences,
mathematics, engineering and technology &lt;br/&gt;workforce. Wewill engage our
audience by tracking the root cause of this inequity back &lt;br/&gt;into our
schools by examining the research done by NSF on women in SMET and
exploring&lt;br/&gt;the ways that teaching methods can be either a window of
opportunity to young women &lt;br/&gt;or a closed door.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
maintain the attention of this general TV audience, the problem will be
presented as a&lt;br/&gt;fast-paced mystery, why are we missing all this human
potential in SMET? A top-selling&lt;br/&gt;mystery writer, Les Roberts, will
host our audience in this investigation and he will be &lt;br/&gt;assistedby a
young woman of high school age. His special guide in this quest will be
&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kathryn Sullivan, the first woman to walk in space. The program
will examine&lt;br/&gt;NSF-identified researchthat will introduce and examine
the problem. We will then &lt;br/&gt;explore a variety of efforts by school,
community, and businesses to correct this&lt;br/&gt;inequity. The program will
conclude with suggestions on what the viewing audience -&lt;br/&gt;- parents,
community members, business, and educators -- can do to channel the future
&lt;br/&gt;potential of girls into SMET. Once it has been broadcast in this
region, The Case of&lt;br/&gt;Missing Human Potential will be offered to the
national PBS network for
national&lt;br/&gt;distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An interactive Web site
designed to provide further information, suggestions for&lt;br/&gt;improving the
situation, and links to existing summer camps and programs will
be&lt;br/&gt;promoted during the show. All participating stations will be
encouraged to set up &lt;br/&gt;"call-in" sites staffed by local SMET teachers
and researchers to address questions&lt;br/&gt;from the viewing audience. This
special effort will be addressed during pauses in the&lt;br/&gt;broadcast and
will be designed to help the audience take action as a result of
the&lt;br/&gt;interest stirred up by this broadcast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
draw new viewers we will publicize the show on all the PBS stations in Ohio;
use&lt;br/&gt;the state designated TIMSS Consortia of schools (representing
about 500,000 Ohio &lt;br/&gt;students) to advertise the importance of this
problem to parents and community &lt;br/&gt;members and to invite their
involvement; highlight the upcoming show through &lt;br/&gt;OhioDL one of the
primary communications means for schools using distance &lt;br/&gt;learning in
Ohio; and advertise the problem of gender inequity and the need for
&lt;br/&gt;family and community action revealed in this TV program via the
communication &lt;br/&gt;networks of the Ohio Mathematics and Science Coalition.