* 0217829
* US-Nigeria Cooperative Research:  Power Flow Control and Stability Improvement in Longitudinal Power Systems Using Power Flow Controllers
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Joseph Ojo, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 12/31/2005
* USD 9,000.00

0217829&lt;br/&gt;Ojo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-year
collaborative research project between Professor Joseph O. Ojo, with the
Department of Electrical Engineering at Tennessee Technological University, and
Professor Michael O. Omoigui, with the Department of Electronic and Electrical
Engineering at Obafemi Awolowo University in Nigeria. The investigators will
study power flow control and stability improvement in longitudinal power systems
using power flow controllers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electric power systems in
many developing countries are usually small and radial/longitudinal with little
connectivity, making them operate like isolated systems. They are susceptible to
lengthy time interruptions, fluctuations in voltage currents, and poor voltage
regulation, and as a result the transmission and distribution systems are
generally overloaded. Nigeria is moving away from the more traditional
mechanical power systems towards a more electronic system that will use
converter-based devices, which can then offer greater flexibility and improved
operation. The investigators will develop models for the power systems, and use
them to analyze the power systems' performance using a unified power flow
controller under varying conditions. As part of the project, they will study the
use of multi-terminal, converter-based power flow controller topologies to
improve power flow capability and enhance the voltage system stability of weak
and longitudinal power systems, especially in a deregulated environment. This
project combines Dr. Ojo's expertise in power electronics with Dr. Omoigui's
knowledge of power system analysis and control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently
in the United States little study is being done on the unique problems of small
and longitudinal power systems, but they will become increasingly important as
more US power systems become deregulated. It is anticipated that the results of
this project will provide viable and efficient solutions to perennial power
system disturbances that are common in longitudinal power systems. Both
investigators have a strong record in graduate education, and they also expect
that a significant amount of knowledge transfer will occur among their students
as a result of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of International
Science and Engineering and the Division of Electrical and Communications
Systems are jointly supporting this project.&lt;br/&gt;