* 0217600
* ITR:  Visual Deictic Reference in a Collaborative Virtual Environment for Visual Search Training
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Joel Greenstein, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2005
* USD 325,361.00

This research will study the interpersonal activity between trainer/trainee in a
collaborative visual inspection Virtual Environment and will involve a new
Collaborative Virtual Environment (CVE) capable of real-time capture and
visualization of eye movements of one of the participants in the CVE. Of
particular importance is the recording and real-time depiction of visual deictic
references made with the eyes by either instructor or student in the
environment. Deictic references are associated with pointing and verbal
expressions (such as "look at this" or "see that?"). Collection of explicit
visual deictic references, as made by the eyes, will facilitate task-based
analysis and modeling of visual attention during human-human interaction in
Virtual and Physical Reality.

The main objective of this project is to develop a new interactive 3D visual
inspection system in Virtual Reality, based on an existing single-person virtual
aircraft inspection environment. To allow the measurement of visual deictic
reference, it will extend the current single-person Virtual Environment (VE) to
a Collaborative Virtual Environment (CVE) which will allow the simultaneous
participation of two individuals. The main technological innovations are
extensions to available eye tracking techniques to allow real-time capture and
visualization of eye movements of one of the participants during simultaneous
participation in the CVE. The fundamental exploration of visual deictic
reference will be addressed during evaluation of visual inspection of the
environment by the instructor (expert) and the trainee (novice).

Existing approaches have failed to yield significant improvements in inspection
performance. The successful completion of this research will provide a better
understanding of the issues related to human-human interaction and training.
Results from this research are expected to advance our understanding of complex
multi-party environments where gaze-based communication is employed. The CVE
will allow visualization and analysis of human attentional factors in shared-
space environments. The study of visual deictic reference will lead to novel
insights into human learning and behavior, notably learned improvement of visual
search strategies. The research effort involves a multidisciplinary team of
researchers with expertise in virtual reality systems, vision based research,
human/machine systems design, inspection systems design, and training and
computer supported collaborative work.

Educational activities involving the curriculum and laboratory training will be
closely integrated with the research, involving both undergraduate and graduate
students. Although primarily focused on aircraft inspection, the anticipated
results have the potential to impact a wide range of tasks in the maintenance
and service industries, such as inspection of products in a manufacturing
environment, flight crew systems training and training of air traffic control
personnel, real-time military target acquisition, process control monitoring,
and baggage inspection (aviation security).