* 0217033
* Explanatoids:  Gender-Sensitive Signage to Seed Science Talk in  Public Places
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Janet Stocks, Family Communications, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2005
* USD 904,492.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Children can develop a wealth of knowledge about science
and technology from their&lt;br/&gt;everyday experience. When visiting museums,
watching educational TV, surfing the Web, &lt;br/&gt;or reading science-oriented
books, children are actively developing proto-scientific &lt;br/&gt;reasoning
skills, nascent theories for scientific domains, knowledge of interesting
science&lt;br/&gt;facts, knowledge about famous scientific narratives, and early
ideas about what different&lt;br/&gt;kinds of scientists do in their
professional work. When children encounter science &lt;br/&gt;instruction in
elementary and middle school, when they dream about what they might do
&lt;br/&gt;when they grow up, and when they make choices about the courses they
want to take in &lt;br/&gt;high school and beyond, those with experience and
interest practicing scientific and&lt;br/&gt;technical thinking are more likely
to seek it out and to succeed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtually all children and
their parents come equipped with the tools needed to cultivate&lt;br/&gt;early
math or scientific literacy, but these conversations and activities need to
start &lt;br/&gt;from a seed a simple observation, an unexpected outcome, a
question. For families with &lt;br/&gt;high levels of scientific literacy and
interest, these seeds can be sown from personal&lt;br/&gt;experience. Indeed,
more than three quarters of scientists in a recent National&lt;br/&gt;Science
Foundation survey reported developing their passion for science in
early,&lt;br/&gt;out-of-school activities such as nature walks with their
parents, family visits to &lt;br/&gt;museums, or taking apart radios or
launching rockets at home. We have no doubt that&lt;br/&gt;museum-based and
media-based informal science infrastructure will have a positive
&lt;br/&gt;effect on scientific literacy and science achievement, but the
biggest effects will be for&lt;br/&gt;those who already are most likely to enter
the educational and professional pipe-line &lt;br/&gt;for science and technology
--the children of families that go to museums, watch &lt;br/&gt;educational
programming, and visit educational web
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interestingly, boys more than girls are most likely
to reap these benefits within highly&lt;br/&gt;motivated families. There is
evidence to suggest that parents are less likely to bring &lt;br/&gt;their
daughters to science museums than their sons, and that even among museum-
going&lt;br/&gt;families, parents were more than three times more likely to
explain the science of an &lt;br/&gt;exhibit to boys than to girls (true even
when the boys and girls were as young as&lt;br/&gt;one to three-years old).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What of families who may not be as comfortable with or as
interested in pursuing &lt;br/&gt;science? These parents, already less likely to
visit science museums for family&lt;br/&gt;recreation, may also not be aware of
how many "teachable moments" exist in everyday &lt;br/&gt;life to prompt
conversations with their children about math, science and technology,
and&lt;br/&gt;especially so if they're parents of
girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on a successful pilot project we propose to
seed the development of scientific&lt;br/&gt;and technical literacy by
developing, placing, and maintaining engaging gender-
sensitive&lt;br/&gt;science-oriented signage in the places where the broadest
cross-section of Pittsburgh's &lt;br/&gt;children and families gather. We call
these signs "explanatoids." While science museums &lt;br/&gt;and science-
oriented media are important forces for informal science education,
children&lt;br/&gt;and their families must seek them out over other forms of
leisure activity. In contrast, &lt;br/&gt;our explanatoids bring science to the
people, in a way that includes girls fully in that
&lt;br/&gt;outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are asking for support for three
years to develop our pilot work into a full-scale&lt;br/&gt;regional project
that can be replicated elsewhere as a gender-sensitive model
for&lt;br/&gt;enhancing math/science literacy within a community. The project
will include the&lt;br/&gt;development and installation of gender-sensitive
signage as well as the production &lt;br/&gt;of associated support materials for
parents and teachers throughout the Southwest&lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania region. The
project will leverage unique partnerships already built between&lt;br/&gt;Family
Communications, Inc. (producers of Mister Rogers Neighborhood), local
foundations,&lt;br/&gt;Carnegie Mellon University, the University of
Pittsburgh's Learning Research &amp;&lt;br/&gt;Development Center, Kennywood
Amusement Park, The Pittsburgh Teachers Institute,&lt;br/&gt;The Pittsburgh
Children's Museum, and The Pittsburgh Parks Conservancy. Formative
&lt;br/&gt;and summative evaluation will provide quantitative and qualitative
measures of the ways&lt;br/&gt;that the project (1) counters negative
stereotypes about girls and women in math, &lt;br/&gt;science and technology;
(2) enhances girls' interests and successful participation in &lt;br/&gt;those
arenas in schooling and career aspirations; and (3) advances the recognition
that&lt;br/&gt;math, science and technology are integral to the regions future
economic well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;