* 0217110
* 4 Schools for WIE
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2006
* Paula Leventman, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 11/30/2006
* USD 899,768.00

4 Schools for WIE is a consortium of four engineering colleges in Massachusetts
(MA) united in&lt;br/&gt;commitment to gender equity in STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics). Each&lt;br/&gt;partner institution
Northeastern University (NU), Boston University (BU), Tufts University (Tufts)
and&lt;br/&gt;Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) has a strong record of K-12
outreach and program delivery, K-12&lt;br/&gt;teacher training and programming
for girls and women in STEM related areas. Each partner
institutions&lt;br/&gt;brings varied strengths and successes to the
collaboration. By joining forces will be developed model&lt;br/&gt;to
demonstrate how engineering concepts become part of the middle school curriculum
in ways that&lt;br/&gt;encourage girls as well as boys to continue along the
engineering pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an important step toward achieving
this mission, a unique intervention system centered around highly-trained STEM
Teams consisting of all-female engineering faculty, students, teachers and
practitioners will be developed and implementated. STEM Teams including middle
school teachers will be trained together and then utilize their unique strengths
to best implement the curriculum in eight different public school districts in
the greater-Boston area. The STEM Teams will educate middle school teachers
about engineering and gender-inclusive practices in addition to serving as role
models in the middle school classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present
situation in MA is opportune for developing this beneficial intervention system
since the MA&lt;br/&gt;Department of Education recently adopted the Science and
Technology/Engineering Curriculum&lt;br/&gt;Frameworks. Beginning in September
2001, MA became the first state in the nation to introduce&lt;br/&gt;engineering
as part of mandated PreK-12 education frameworks. These frameworks reflect
achievable&lt;br/&gt;and age appropriate learning standards that will provide
strong background knowledge for students. In the&lt;br/&gt;middle schools,
questions testing the engineering frameworks will be incorporated into the
compulsory&lt;br/&gt;Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS) in
2002.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM Teams will help middle schools implement the new
engineering strand of the Massachusetts&lt;br/&gt;Frameworks. STEM Teams will
help middle school teachers prepare students for the engineering
strand&lt;br/&gt;MCAS exams. Simultaneously, STEM Teams will serve to build the
conviction among the middle school&lt;br/&gt;students that engineering is an
appropriate career choice for females.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important feature
of the STEM Team concept is that each team will be composed of women only,
yet&lt;br/&gt;this attribute will not be announced to the students prior the
team's arrival. The participation of STEM&lt;br/&gt;Teams of engineering savvy
women at participating middle schools, where team members will serve
as&lt;br/&gt;coaches, mentors, and role models for middle school teachers and
their students, will have a profound&lt;br/&gt;impact on gender attitudes toward
engineering as a career. Simply put, STEM Teams composed solely
of&lt;br/&gt;females will demonstrate to girls and boys that women do
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some anticipated project outcomes are: * Girls
and boys in implementation classrooms will think&lt;br/&gt;differently about
engineering and will understand that engineering is not just for
boys.&lt;br/&gt;* They will score higher on the engineering strand items in the
MCAS, than children in the same school&lt;br/&gt;before the implementation of
STEM Team support. * Participating teachers will feel comfortable
with&lt;br/&gt;these materials and will look forward to working with
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the three-year program, the intervention systems
will be finely tuned for national dissemination. The&lt;br/&gt;STEM Teams
approach is highly replicable at low cost. However, members need to be educated
about&lt;br/&gt;national science standards, age-appropriate and gender-inclusive
curriculum activities, serving as positive&lt;br/&gt;role models, and other
issues pertaining to encouraging middle school girls in the STEM fields.
This&lt;br/&gt;training will be available through a hard copy manual, the web,
and because so many middle schools do&lt;br/&gt;not have convenient access to
the Internet, on videotape. STEM Teams nationwide has the potential
for&lt;br/&gt;significantly increasing the number of girls who continue interest
in STEM areas during the middle&lt;br/&gt;school period as well as into STEM
careers.