* 0217051
* Macroeconomic Implications of Child-Labor Laws: A Theoretical Framework
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Matthias Doepke, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2006
* USD 191,492.00

This project studies the determination and effects of child labor laws using a
dynamic general-equilibrium framework. In the first countries to industrialize,
child labor was widespread up to the early stages of the industrial revolution.
Today, child labor and compulsory schooling laws are in place in all
industrialized countries, and child labor has mostly disappeared. In many
developing countries, child labor is still common today, and there is a lively
debate as to whether more restrictions should be introduced. There are a number
of authors who have studied the welfare implications of child-labor laws. There
are no investigations, however, which develop political-economy models that can
account for the evolution and effects of these laws in their historical context.
This proposal describes a dynamic general-equilibrium model with heterogeneous
agents who determine child-labor restrictions (CLR) in a voting process. The
research, which is joint with Fabrizio Zilibotti of the University of Stockholm,
results in a positive theory of the adoption of CLR, and allows a detailed
analysis of the effects of CLR on the economy and different groups in the
population.

The key mechanism in the model is an interaction between parental decisions on
the number of children and their preferences for CLR. In particular, parents
with few children have little to gain from child labor, and are therefore likely
to favor the introduction of restrictions. Parents with many working children,
on the other hand, would be expected to oppose CLR. A second factor influencing
preferences over CLR are (human or physical) capital assets: agents who own
factors which are complementary to child labor will be more likely to oppose the
introduction of CLR. A key result is that if voting is allowed, the model can
exhibit multiple steady states with different child-labor policies. The reason
is a feedback in which policies encourage behavior, which in turn leads to
political support for the same policies. The possibility of multiple steady
states can account for the fact that there are large cross-country variations in
CLR and the incidence of child labor, even across countries at the same stage of
development. In addition, since CLR build their own constituency, the model
explains why CLR generally tend to get more restrictive over time. The model can
generate a transition from no regulation to CLR if technological change raises
the skill premium over time. This change induces parents to choose smaller
families and invest in human capital, which over time creates a majority in
favor of introducing CLR. This account of the transition to CLR is consistent
with the observation that in a number of industrialized countries CLR were
introduced after a period of rising wage inequality, and coincided with a period
of rapidly declining fertility and rising education levels.

The project entails a detailed documentation of child-labor reforms and the
preceding political debate in a number of countries, and simulations of a
calibrated, quantitative version of the model to assess how well the model can
reproduce the actual timing of reforms, as well as the ensuing consequences of
the legislation. The basic analysis is extended to introduce additional
policies, especially compulsory schooling laws and schooling subsidies.
Preliminary results indicate that CLR are more likely to be successful if they
are accompanied by education reforms, as they were in many industrialized
countries. Another extension is to allow dynamic voting in a framework where
voters foresee future policies. Here an anticipated future introduction of CLR
can result in a decline in child labor even before the restrictions come into
force. This mechanism can account for the fact that some empirical studies find
only relatively small effects of CLR on child labor supply after they are
introduced.