* 0217267
* SGER: Investigation of a Combinatorial Mechanical Alloying-Activated Sintering (MA-AS) Technique for the Synthesis of Age-Hardenable, Self-lubricating Bearings by Powder Metallurgy
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2004
* Deepak Bhat, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 06/30/2004
* USD 55,950.00

This SGER award supports an investigation of combinatorial materials processing
techniques for the synthesis of age-hardenable aluminum alloys by powder
metallurgy, which can also be simultaneously strengthened by a dispersion of a
finely divided oxide phase. It is well known that the sintering of aluminum
powder is hampered by the presence of a tenacious oxide film on the surface,
which interferes with pressing and sintering of the powder compacts. Beneficial
effects of a dispersion of refractory oxide particles in an alloy matrix for
enhanced hardness and strength are well known; however, the technical
difficulties are not easily overcome without the use of complex methods.
Mechanical alloying techniques have been known to provide a significant benefit
for inducing solid-state diffusion and alloying of materials. Sintering
processes, enhanced by methods of plasma activation and similar techniques, have
been used in combination with mechanical alloying to synthesize refractory
metals, intermetallics, metallic glasses and other difficult
materials.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal deals with the study of a novel combination
of mechanical alloying and chemically activated sintering of Al-Cu age-
hardenable alloys. In this work, powders of aluminum will be mechanically
alloyed with nanocrystalline powders of copper of platelet or flake morphology,
and subjected to chemical activation by exposure to selected dilute organic
acids, to provide suitable metal-organic surface films on the treated powders.
The decomposition of these films at low temperatures will provide a highly
activated surface for rapid sintering and densification of the alloyed powders.
The sintered compacts will be heat treated to provide the age-hardening effect.
At the same time, the dispersion of the aluminum oxide particles during
mechanical alloying will provide the possibility of dispersion-strengthening of
the sintered alloy.&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide unique and excellent
opportunities to enterprising young engineering students to pursue cutting edge
research in advanced materials and manufacturing techniques, and to learn about
the potential benefits of nanostructured and engineered materials. The
establishment of this research program will provide a unique opportunity for the
PI to develop new and exciting classroom and laboratory instructional materials
and courses to augment the research effort. The PI is participating in the
George Washington Carver Project administered by the University of Arkansas,
which provides promising and talented young undergraduate students from the
historically black colleges and universities (HBCU) in the State of Arkansas an
opportunity to experience the excitement and benefits of a science or
engineering career. Under this program, selected youngsters will spend several
weeks on campus, working with a faculty member and assisting in an on-going or
specially developed research project. The PI will be supporting one
undergraduate student under the Carver Project during the upcoming summer
session. The student will work on this SGER project, assisting a graduate
student in Mechanical Engineering, to set up and use the laboratory P/M
processing equipment and conduct laboratory experiments. The student will learn
research methods, laboratory procedures and safety issues, research
documentation and analysis of experimental data, and acquire hands-on experience
in the application of scientific and engineering principles in the development
of advanced materials and manufacturing techniques.