* 0217629
* Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TLSAMP)
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2008
* Melvin Johnson, Tennessee State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2008
* USD 3,601,992.00

Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(TLSAMP)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If America is to prosper in the new millennium, we
must build a domestic science,&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, engineering, and
technology (SMET) workforce that uses the talent of all&lt;br/&gt;segments of
our population. America's prosperity is fueled by the nation's
technical&lt;br/&gt;enterprise. As evidenced by the tragic episode of September
11, our country must build&lt;br/&gt;on the diversity within this country so
that an increasingly large share of the work force&lt;br/&gt;will consist of
women and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many national
programs have been identified to enhance the quantity and quality
of&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented minorities in science and engineering. This
proposal describes a&lt;br/&gt;program designed to improve the quantity and
quality of underrepresented scientists and&lt;br/&gt;engineers graduating each
year with a bachelor's degree. The partners in the proposed&lt;br/&gt;alliance
are all from the state of Tennessee. The existing knowledge base relative
to&lt;br/&gt;minority participation in science and engineering will be the
foundation of our efforts.&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to build on this foundation and
to expand the available options to enrich&lt;br/&gt;programs at partner
institutions and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tennessee State University,
LeMoyne-Owen College, Middle Tennessee State&lt;br/&gt;University, University of
Memphis, University of Tennessee at Knoxville, and
Vanderbilt&lt;br/&gt;University will partner to form the Tennessee Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority&lt;br/&gt;Participation (TLSAMP). The ultimate success of
this collaboration rests in the fact that&lt;br/&gt;if there is any student's
need, there is an institution within the alliance with
the&lt;br/&gt;characteristics, experience, and/or resources to meet the needs of
the student. The&lt;br/&gt;alliance can draw on the strengths and experiences of
each of the individual members.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the TLSAMP is to increase
the number of the underrepresented SMET&lt;br/&gt;students by at least 75% at
the end of the five-year period. The objectives to support the&lt;br/&gt;goal of
the alliance are: 1) to recruit underrepresented students to pursue science
or&lt;br/&gt;engineering as a career, 2) to improve the quality of the learning
environment for&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented science and engineering students at
all schools, and 3) to ensure that a&lt;br/&gt;larger number of undergraduate
students are prepared to enter graduate programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Alliance will emphasize collaborative learning approaches, mentoring activities
via&lt;br/&gt;faculty, staff, and upper level students, and hands-on research
and internship experiences.&lt;br/&gt;Using this approach, three project areas
have been chosen as critical focal points for&lt;br/&gt;achieving the
qualitative and quantitative goals of the project. These project areas
utilize&lt;br/&gt;strategies with demonstrable effectiveness in the retention of
underrepresented students in&lt;br/&gt;science and engineering. All project
areas will involve faculty, staff, or students during&lt;br/&gt;the design phase
as well as the continuous quality improvement phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, assessment will be built into each project area as a result of
the&lt;br/&gt;formulation of specific, measurable quantitative and qualitative
objectives. These&lt;br/&gt;objectives will be reviewed and revised on an
ongoing basis. An Advisory Committee&lt;br/&gt;composed of the Vice Presidents
and Deans from the six schools will oversee all aspects&lt;br/&gt;of the grant
project.&lt;br/&gt;