* 0217325
* Multi-Axial Full-scale Sub-Structuring Testing & Simulation Facility
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,11/30/2004
* Amr Elnashai, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 11/30/2004
* USD 3,232,011.00

CMS-0217325 Elnashai The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering
Simulation (NEES) is a project funded under the NSF Major Research Equipment and
Facilities Construction account. This cooperative agreement establishes a NEES
Multi-Axial Full-Scale Sub-Structured Testing and Simulation (MUST-SIM) Facility
at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). UIUC will design,
purchase, construct, install, commission, and operate new equipment and
additions to the Newmark Laboratories to enable the testing of full-scale
structures or part of structures, including their foundations and soil mass,
while simulating the remaining parts. The MUST-SIM facility will be operational
by September 2004 and will be managed as a national shared-use NEES equipment
site, with teleobservation and teleoperation capabilities, to provide new
earthquake engineering research testing capabilities through 2014. This NEES
equipment site will be connected to the NEES network system through a high
performance network. Shared-use access and training will be coordinated through
the NEES Consortium. This award is the outcome of peer review of this proposal
submitted to program solicitation NSF-01-164, "NEES Earthquake Engineering
Research Equipment, Phase 2." The primary objective of the proposed effort will
be to create a facility in which a full-scale subassembly can be subjected to
complex loading and imposed deformation states at multiple connection points on
the subassembly, including the connection between the structure and its
foundation. The proposed MUST-SIM facility has the following components: (i)
6-DOF load and position control at three connection points, (ii) system
modularity to allow for easy expansion and low-cost maintenance/operation, (iii)
multiple dense arrays of non-contact measurement devices, (iv) T-section strong
wall creating two testing compartments each providing support in three loading
planes and (v) advanced visualization and data mining capabilities for
integrated teleoperation and teleobservation. The proposed MUST-SIM facility
realizes the first two features through the development of modular six-DOF
"Loading and Boundary Condition Boxes" (LBCB) that allow for precise application
of complex load and boundary conditions. The LBCBs, which are 3.5 m x 1.5 m x
1.5 m and house six actuators each, will be able to impose motions on the test
structures that are determined from the results of concurrently running
numerical models of the test specimen and the surrounding
structure/foundation/soil system employing pseudo-dynamic testing methods. Dense
arrays of state-of-the-art, non-contact instrumentation, will allow near real-
time model updating for the model-based simulation. The three systems envisaged
are (a) the Krypton Rodyum coordinate measuring system, (b) Stress Photonics
digital photo-elasticity and (c) close range digital photogrammetry.
Additionally, this facility and its telepresence/teleoperation capabilities will
be enhanced by development of multi-function data visualization and knowledge
interpretation tools in cooperation with the Automated Learning Group of NCSA.
This is likely to be based on the D2K (data-to-knowledge) framework developed at
NCSA, with state-of-the-art visualization and control facilities. The proposed
reaction wall is a T-section structure of length 25 meters and height 9 meters.
The T-section web is at mid-length and is 15 meters wide. The MUST-SIM facility
will be deployed in testing complete soil-foundation-structure systems to meet
the new and major earthquake engineering challenges, not only in research and
development towards seismic risk reduction, but also towards education and
training of engineers through integration into curricula at the University and
through the NSF-funded Mid-America Earthquake Center's Education and Outreach
program.