* 0217789
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  A New High Resolution AFM Technique for Biological Imaging
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Peter Hoffmann, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 24,200.00

0217789&lt;br/&gt;Hoffmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a joint research project between Dr. Peter Hoffmann, Department of
Physics and Astronomy, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan and Dr. Ahmet
Oral, Physics Department, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey. They plan to study
the development of a new high-resolution Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) technique
for biological imaging. Commonly used AFM techniques face fundamental limits to
further improvement. These limitations are due to fundamental operating
principles of common AFM techniques, which cannot be changed by simple
adjustments of parameters. The PIs plan to design and build a prototype of an
AFM technique that avoids these limitations and, in principle, should be able to
provide non-contact atomic resolution imaging and direct quantitative point-by-
point measurements of interactions in situ in liquids. This AFM technique relies
on a sub-resonance, ultra-small (&lt; 1A) oscillation of the AFM cantilever.
This linearizes the measurement and makes data interpretation straightforward.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Scope: This award will allow a US scientist to
collaborate with a Turkish scientist in a research project of high scientific
potential. The nanomechanics of biomolecules and the direct imaging of
biological structures are of great interest in biochemistry, bioengineering and
medicine. The two scientists were directly involved in the development of an
ultra-high vacuum (UHV) and a preliminary liquid-based version of the above
described AFM technique which proved to be successful in UHV and in liquid.
However, the liquid based AFM was very difficult to use and had some fundamental
design issues, which will be addressed in this collaboration. The ultimate goal
would be the construction of a user-friendly new AFM technique based on a novel
operational principle, and the imaging and measurement of actual biological
structures. The development of this instrument would enhance current work by the
PI, at his university's medical school, on the mechanical behavior of tissues
and antibiotic action of native antibiotic agents on certain bacteria, since it
would allow for much higher resolution imaging and quantitative measurements of
nanomechanical properties. Both investigators are junior scientists, and the
project will also support two graduate students from each
institution.&lt;br/&gt;