* 0217974
* A Game Theoretic Approach to the Design of Multi-Agent Process Planning Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Beth Allen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Christiaan Paredis
* 07/31/2007
* USD 326,786.00

The objective of this research project is to suggest how manufacturing process
planning systems should be designed. In automated manufacturing, process
planning is the intermediate step that transforms a design into an ordered list
of instructions for fabrication. For instance, in machining, a block of
homogeneous metal (the stock or initial workpiece) must be transformed by
removing material appropriately. For each step, the position of the workpiece,
how it is held in place (fixturing), the specific tool to be used, the tool
access direction, and the precise tool path must be specified. A computer aided
process planning system takes a computer file defining the design in a standard
format---the output of a computer aided design system---and finds computerized
instructions for computer assisted manufacturing equipment to make the desired
artifact. Increasingly, such process planning systems contain multiple
artificially intelligent agents (or distributed decision makers). Process
planners (and multi-agent systems in general) define particular games. The
examination of such games helps one to understand how process planners and
multi-agent systems work, why they can fail, and how they can be improved. Game-
theoretic mechanism design analyzes how games can be designed so that the
desired outcomes arise as equilibria in the games. The proposed research will
first use existing results in game theory and mechanism design to study process
planners and multi-agent systems. Then new results will be derived for network
and distributed games and the potential disaggregation of agents will be
analyzed. The goal is to establish rigorous theoretical principles, based on
strategic optimization behavior, to guide the design of multi-agent process
planning systems and multi-agent systems in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this research project will provide principles to improve the design
of process planning systems. Process planning can be time-consuming and
expensive; when it fails, it can lead to further costs and delays due to
redesign. Moreover, process planning is a crucial step in a manufacturing
industry (machining) that typically represents about five percent of gross
domestic product in developed economies. Hence, it is important to design
process planning systems well, so that they successfully find feasible---and,
ideally, good, where "good'' means relatively inexpensive to manufacture to
tolerance specifications---process plans quickly on average when the design is
manufacturable (and don't waste excessive amounts of time and resources if the
design is not manufacturable). Broader impacts include involvement of students
(including those from underrepresented groups) in this research and the
initiation of a new course at the University of Minnesota on game theory for
engineers. Moreover, the project is inherently interdisciplinary and involves
novel applications of game theory in manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;