* 0217981
* Support for GeoCAMS: An Accelerator Mass Spectrometry Facility for Earth Science Research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Robert Finkel, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2006
* USD 184,019.00

0217981&lt;br/&gt;Finkel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will provides two years
partial support for the operation of GeoCAMS, the Earth Science component of the
FN tandem van de Graaff accelerator at the Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory Center for Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (CAMS) as a facility for
isotopic studies in the Earth Sciences. In ten years of successful operation,
GeoCAMS has developed and demonstrated capabilities to measure 3H, 7,10Be, 26Al,
36Cl, and 129I at levels found in terrestrial samples and 41Ca at levels found
in meteorites. GeoCAMS has measured 15,000 10Be targets, 9400 26Al targets, 9800
36Cl targets, 300 41Ca targets and a lesser number of 3H, 7Be and 129I targets.
GeoCAMS, built with DOE and UC funds, has served numerous NSF PIs, including
more than twenty during the past year, and has, de facto, come to serve NSF
Earth Sciences as a facility for AMS measurements. During this time GeoCAMS has
played a key role in education. Twenty-seven Ph.D. students and seven master's
students have been trained at GeoCAMS. The large majority of the new surface
exposure dating labs set up at U.S. universities during the past few years have
been started by young faculty trained at GeoCAMS. In parallel to the facility
capability supported by this grant, a wide range of Earth science research in
paleoclimate, ice core research, Earth surface processes and atmospheric mixing
is carried out by GeoCAMS staff. The goal of this proposal is to make the
GeoCAMS facility, which is rated at or near the top of such facilities
worldwide, available to the NSF Earth Science community while at the same time
continuing to improve the existing performance and to add capabilities for new
nuclides, such as in-situ 14C and 53Mn. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;