* 0217666
* Collaborative Research: Worker Cross-Training and Assignment Considering Learning/Forgetting Effects
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,06/30/2004
* David Nembhard, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2004
* USD 188,850.00

This proposal models the effects of job rotation, in terms of learning and
forgetting, on the overall productivity of a group of workers. This reveals the
cross-training tradeoff between worker flexibility versus potentially reduced
efficiency. The research combines experimental psychology (leaning and
forgetting curves) with robust mathematical programming and optimization methods
to develop tools that could be of significant use to managers. The three
research questions will be answered with the aid of computer simulation and
validated in the field. The broad impact is the potential for enhancing
productivity and improvements in the work environment that will benefit the
economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern manufacturing practices, which often use
cellular designs and just-in-time operations, may disrupt the continuous
learning process. While in the past managers relied on specialization over long
production runs to improve productivity, today they often make use of cross
training in an attempt to manage rapidly changing technology and uncertain
demand. However, at present, no concrete guidelines exist to aid managers in
deciding levels of cross training, task rotation, and the sequencing of jobs.
The objective of this research is to improve productivity in organizations with
job rotation through assignment and scheduling of workers to tasks and to
examine preferred assignment and cross training levels in this environment.
Based on individual learning and forgetting characteristics, workers are
assigned and scheduled to tasks in ways designed to maximize productivity. An
important contribution of the project is understanding the tradeoffs between
lost productivity due to reduced specialization and the flexibility benefits due
to cross training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will address the following
research questions: 1. Within a work group, to which of m tasks should each of n
workers be assigned for three objectives a.) Maximize throughput given n
workers, b.) Minimize the number of workers needed for a given production
requirement, c.) Minimize the time required for n workers to meet a given
production requirement. 2. What degree of cross training should be allowed or
required, including: a.) How many tasks in addition to the initial assignment
should the n workers be responsible for? b.) How often and in what pattern
should workers shift between these cross trained tasks (i.e., what is the
schedule)? 3. What are the effects of environmental factors including, Workplace
design implications (i.e., pattern of work and/or information flow), Adjacent
vs. non-adjacent worker-task assignments (i.e., tour travel time costs), Single
vs. multiple products, and Batch size. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, the
investigators will develop math programming based decision models for assigning
and scheduling workers to tasks. The models will incorporate the effects of
individual worker learning and forgetting. Second, the investigators will
develop a measurement model for quantifying worker learning and forgetting for
use in the math programming models. Third, the investigators will examine the
research questions described above based on empirical distributions of
individual workers' learning and forgetting patterns, through simulation first
and then subsequently applying the results in real work settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this research is potentially broad,
affecting directly the many service and manufacturing organizations that make
use of cross training. Further, the proposed research will quantify the costs
from learning and forgetting effects that are associated with cross training
programs. While there are good reasons for cross training workers, many related
to increased flexibility, when these workers are learning new tasks they are
subject to forgetting others and productivity may suffer significantly. Thus,
the research will provide both descriptive and prescriptive capabilities for
organizations to quantify and plan cross training programs in manufacturing and
service settings.&lt;br/&gt;