* 0217838
* Regulation of Axonal Neurofilament Dynamics by Phosphorylation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Thomas Shea, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 01/31/2007
* USD 340,000.00

Neurons, the cells of the brain that allow us to think, feel and move, have a
very unique shape, which is referred to as "polarized." Extending from one side
of the neuron are many fingerlike extensions ("dendrites") that receive
information from other neurons, and extending from the other side is a longer
extension (the "axon") that transmits the sum of this information to the next
neuron. How neurons assume this unique polarized form, and then maintain it for
the lifetime of an individual, is not entirely clear. However, it is dependent
at least in part upon a fibrous network of proteins referred to as the
"cytoskeleton." This network forms a sort of skeleton for the neuron, which
helps it maintain its shape. Unlike bones, however, the parts of the
cytoskeleton are constantly replaced. This poses a difficult situation for
neurons, since all proteins are synthesized in the cell body, and then must be
assembled and transported into and along axons by a process called "axonal
transport." This process must be highly regulated, or the proteins will assemble
incorrectly, or clump up within the beginning of the axon, and the neuron may
die. In some neurons, axonal transport must be carried out over long distances.
For example, the sciatic nerve, which runs all the way down our leg, receives
all of its cytoskeletal proteins from a small cell body near the
spine.&lt;br/&gt;Our studies examine how the neuron regulates axonal transport
of one set of cytoskeletal proteins called neurofilaments. The neuron has a set
of modifying enzymes, called "kinases," that reversibly modify the
neurofilaments. One simple analogy for such modifications is to put a cap on a
pen. When the pen is capped, its writing function is altered. When the cap is
removed, its function is restored. Rather than having to synthesize a new pen
every time we need to write, we instead cap the pen until it is needed again.
Kinases similarly turn various protein functions on and off. Our ongoing studies
indicate that these modifications regulate how neurofilaments assemble, undergo
axonal transport, and provide structural support to axons, and that certain
modifications switch the neurofilaments from transporting along axons to instead
interacting with other neurofilaments to form a strong bundle that supports the
axon. Using genetically-engineered kinases and neurofilament proteins, we will
monitor these changes. These studies will provide important information about
axonal transport and
stabilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;