* 0217131
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Construction of the Sellmeir Equations and Calculation of the Angles of Synchronism for Pure and Doped GaSe
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Nils Fernelius, AFRL Materials & Manufacturing Directorate
* Interagency Agreement
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/2005
* USD 7,000.00

0217131 Fernelius

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project between Dr. Nils
Fernelius, Physicist, Dr. David Zelmon, Electrical Engineer, both in the
Materials and Manufacturing Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) at
Wright Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio and Dr. Kerim Allahverdi, Senior
Scientist, Materials and Chemical Technologies Institute, the Turkish Scientific
and Technical Research Council (TUBITAK), Marmara Research Center (MRC), Gebze-
Kocaeli, Turkey. The investigators plan to make precise measurements of the
ordinary and extraordinary refractive indices at various infrared wavelengths
for pure and doped Galium Selenide (GaSe), so that reliable Sellmeier equations
can be constructed. These equations are used in the design of various optical
devices such as second harmonic generators and optical parametric oscillators.

Scope: The U.S team has unique capabilities to measure the refractive indices.
The Turkish team has expert capability in sample growing and polishing. Both of
these capabilities are needed to achieve the research goals. In this cooperative
research the staff of the MRC will manufacture GaSe samples as specified by the
AFRL staff. These samples will be used by the latter in making precision
measurements of the index refraction and to construct the Sellmeier equations.
The process will be repeated to narrow the differences between the measured and
calculated indices. One of the two U.S. PIs will visit MRC to compare the
results of the Sellemeier equations from the obtained data.