* 0217782
* Development of Continuous-Wave Terahertz Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Qing Hu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 240,000.00

The proposed research seeks to develop continuous-wave (CW) solid-state THz
lasers based on intersubband transition in multiple quantum-well (MQW)
structures. If carried out successfully, this project will have a major impact
on the science and technology of the THz (1-10 THz) or far-infrared spectrum,
where currently no coherent and intense solid-sate sources operating in the CW
mode are available. Towards this goal, extensive studies have already been
performed on the radiation properties of intersubband transition, scattering,
and magneto-tunneling spectroscopy; the simulation-aided design of suitable
MQWs; and spectrally resolved measurements of THz spontaneous emissions from
MQWs. Detailed analysis indicates that electrically pumped lasing can be
achieved at a reasonable population inversion density of 2'109/cm2. A three-year
project is proposed to start on August 1, 2002. The first year will focus on two
parallel tasks: improvement of the yield rate in fabrication of a novel metal
waveguide structure for THz mode confinement, and investigation of several
promising MQW structures. The metal waveguide structure will be very useful in
achieving CW laser operation in two important ways, reducing the lasing
threshold and thus the power dissipation and improving heat removal. The
fabrication process involves wafer bonding and selective etching, and it has
already been developed in the principal investigator's group. The promising MQW
structures include a structure using electron-LO-phonon scattering for
depopulation of the lower lasing level, a structure using electron-electron
scattering for depopulation, and a chirped superlattice structure in which the
radiative transition is to take place between two minibands. The design of these
MQW structures will be aided by sophisticated computer simulations, including
Monte Carlo simulation for transport analysis. Based on the results from this
investigation, the second and third years will focus on the most promising
structure and on the improvement of robustness of population inversion, in order
to achieve CW lasing operations. Efforts will also be made to develop single-
mode and frequency-stabilized THz lasers for local-oscillator applications in
THz heterodyne receivers.