* 0217675
* Florida Georgia Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Program (Phase III)
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2002,08/31/2009
* Ralph Turner, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2009
* USD 5,830,495.00

Florida Georgia Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
Program (Phase III)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Florida A&amp;M University in coalition
with Albany State University, Bethune-Cookman&lt;br/&gt;College, Florida State
University, University of Florida, University of South
Florida,&lt;br/&gt;University of Central Florida, Florida International
University, Florida Memorial&lt;br/&gt;College, University of Miami, Tallahassee
Community College, Miami Dade Community&lt;br/&gt;College, and Florida Community
College at Jacksonville has developed a program to&lt;br/&gt;significantly
increase the quality and quantity of minority students
successfully&lt;br/&gt;completing science, engineering and mathematics (SEM)
B.S. degree programs as well as&lt;br/&gt;significantly increase the number
interested in and qualified for matriculation into Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;SEM programs
of study. Subsumed under these goals are the following
measurable&lt;br/&gt;objectives: at least quadruple the annual entry of minority
B.S. graduates into Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;SEM programs from 100 (year 2001 baseline)
to 500 over the next five years; (2)&lt;br/&gt;increase by ten percent (baseline
2320), the number of B.S. degrees awarded to&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented
minorities in SEM disciplines by the year 2007; and (3)
institutionalize&lt;br/&gt;the FGLSAMP Project at each participating institution
by 2006 to insure FGLSAMP&lt;br/&gt;permanence after NSF funding
ceases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alliance proposes to utilize a holistic model
to transition SEM scholars from high&lt;br/&gt;school to college, positively
influence their retention in college, enhance their B.S.&lt;br/&gt;graduation
rates from college and entry into Ph.D. degree SEM programs of
study.&lt;br/&gt;Project activities to realize these goals and objectives
include developing structured&lt;br/&gt;relationships with school systems and
community colleges to attract students to SEM&lt;br/&gt;majors; establishing
workshops to increase student academic performance; implementing&lt;br/&gt;a
pre-matriculation institute; and implementing a pre-junior graduate school
orientation&lt;br/&gt;program and pre-senior research apprenticeship to
stimulate student competence and&lt;br/&gt;interest in graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FGLSAMP Project will form partnerships with
AGEP Projects, Ph.D. degree&lt;br/&gt;granting institutions, other appropriate
NSF agencies, national/governmental laboratories,&lt;br/&gt;private foundations
and private industry to assist in providing funds for research
stipends&lt;br/&gt;and graduate fellowships for student
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Florida Legislature provides $640,000 in
matching funds annually to support&lt;br/&gt;participating Florida institutions
in the FGLSAMP Project. The results from this project&lt;br/&gt;will be shared
with other institutions and scientists via reports, newsletters,
FGLSAMP&lt;br/&gt;EXPOs and published articles.&lt;br/&gt;