* 0217282
* LTER:   PALMER, ANTARCTICA LTER:    Climate Change,  Ecosystem Migration and Teleconnections  in an Ice-Dominated Environment
* GEO,OPP
* 10/15/2002,09/30/2009
* Hugh Ducklow, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 09/30/2009
* USD 4,697,975.00

The Palmer, Antarctica, Long-Term Ecological Research Project (PAL) seeks to
understand the structure and function of the Western Antarctic Peninsula's
marine and terrestrial ecosystems in the context of seasonal-to-interannual
atmospheric and sea ice dynamics, as well as long-term climate change. The PAL
measurement system (or grid) is designed to study marine and terrestrial food
webs consisting principally of diatom primary producers, the dominant herbivore
Antarctic krill, and the apex predator Adelie penguin. An attenuated microbial
food web is also a focus. PAL studies these ecosystems annually over a regional
scale grid of oceanographic stations and seasonally at Palmer Station. Sea ice
extent and variability affects ecosystem changes at all trophic levels. In
recent years, sea ice extent has diminished in response to a general warming in
the region. Long-term population trends of ice-dependent Adelie penguins in the
region provide a clear example of impact of the climate warming trend in the in
the region. Adelie populations at the five major colonies studied near Palmer
Station have all shown a gradual decrease in numbers over thirty years. The
Peninsula runs perpendicular to a strong climatic gradient between the cold, dry
continental regime to the south, characteristic of the Antarctic interior, and
the warm, moist, maritime regime to the north. North-south shifts in the
gradient give rise to large environmental variability to climate change.
Currently more maritime conditions appear to be replacing the original polar
ecosystem in the northern part of the peninsula as the climatic gradient shifts
southward. To date, this shift appears matched by an ecosystem shift along the
peninsula, as evidenced by declines in Adelie populations that require longer
snow-cover seasons for successful recruitment. The main hypothesis is that
ecosystem migration is most clearly manifested by changes in upper level
predators (penguins) and certain polar fishes in predator foraging environments.
This is because these longer lived species integrate recent climate trends and
because individual species are more sensitive indicators than aggregated
functional groups. Analogous modifications are expected to be manifested at
lower trophic levels in the marine parts of the system in the years ahead.
However, these lower level changes are likely to be observed only through long-
term observations consistent with the concept of expansion and contraction of
ecosystem boundaries along the Peninsula. The PAL-LTER will continue to
investigate ecosystem changes at lower trophic levels along the Peninsula, in
response to the continued, dramatic climate warming and pole ward shifts in the
climatic gradient. In addition to the long-term research activities, graduate
student training, the involvement of K-12 teachers and web-based education are
an integral part of the PAL-LTER.