* 0217493
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Integrated Seismological Studies of Crust and Upper Mantle Structure in Western Anatolia
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Lupei Zhu, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 34,500.00

0217493&lt;br/&gt;Mitchell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description:&lt;br/&gt;This
award is for support of a joint research project by Dr. Brian Mitchell, Dr.
Lupei Zhu, both at the Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences at Saint
Louis University, Saint Louis, Missouri and Dr. Nihal Akyol, Department of
Geophysical Engineering at Dokuz Eylul University, Izmir, Turkey. They plan to
conduct a seismological study of the western part of Turkey using groups of both
high-frequency (2 Hz) and broadband seismographs. They plan to use data from the
high-frequency linear array to obtain a two-dimensional structural model of the
grabens and underlying rock by using teleseismsic receiver functions and
employing a stacking procedure recently developed by Dr. Zhu. They will use both
the linear array and regional array recordings of local earthquakes to perform a
combined inversion for precise event location and a tomographic velocity model
of the region, and will use data from the broadband instruments for several
additional studies. Objectives of this project are to obtain models for velocity
structure, including possible anisotropy, for the region, to ascertain the
degree of agreement or disagreement among crust/upper mantle models of
anisotropy obtained in different locations and by different methods, to infer
from those models the directions and consistency of mantle flow and orientation
of the crustal stress fields, and to determine the best methods for obtaining
information on anisotropic structure in a region of complex structure and
tectonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:&lt;br/&gt;The selected sites of this
study are particularly suitable for the proposed research. Western Turkey is one
of the most seismically active continental regions in the world, and much of it
is undergoing extensive north-south extensional deformation. Because the region
experiences a large number of low to medium-magnitude earthquakes it is
particularly suitable for a seismological study of the continental crust in
Eurasia. The region's high attenuation values have been attributed to fluid-
filled cracks, which tend to cause the crust to be anisotropic. The project will
lead to a better understanding of the tectonics of Western Anatolia, which
comprises a portion of the Tethysides orogenic belt. The project will enhance
international collaborations between scientists in the U.S. and in Turkey. It
will involve a recent PhD (Zhu), as well as collaboration with and training of a
female seismologist from Turkey. &lt;br/&gt;