* 0217197
* Does Involving Girls as Designers Result in Girl-Friendly Science Education Software?  Comparing Processes and Outcomes of Same-Sex 5th and 8th Grade Girl and Boy Design Teams
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Carrie Heeter, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2007
* USD 768,919.00

OBJECTIVES: Virtual environments are increasingly being called upon to advance
science learning.&lt;br/&gt;With possibilities for interactive multimedia
displays and learner customization, these environments hold&lt;br/&gt;great
promise. But are these environments friendly to girls? Computer games, designed
by young men for&lt;br/&gt;boys and young men, epitomize technology's exclusion
of girls, their interests, and values. Less obvious&lt;br/&gt;but more
devastating, this technological estrangement exacerbates girls' lack of interest
and self confidence&lt;br/&gt;not just in computers but in science. Technology
itself and even the design of technology-enhanced science&lt;br/&gt;experiences
may disadvantage girls, turning them away from SMET instead of engaging them.
Experts&lt;br/&gt;urge more women and girls to become involved in software and
hardware design, to begin to transform&lt;br/&gt;computer culture. The
ihInvolving Girls as Designerslg (IGD) project will look at what can happen
when&lt;br/&gt;girls design their own technology-enhanced science learning
experiences. Do girls and boys approach the&lt;br/&gt;design process
differently? If so, what are the characteristics of a girl-friendly design
process? Do all-girl&lt;br/&gt;design teams create products that are more
appealing to other girls than products designed by all boy&lt;br/&gt;teams? Are
gender differences more strongly polarized by the end of middle school, or are
they equally&lt;br/&gt;evident even in fifth grade?&lt;br/&gt;METHODS: IGD will
invite small teams of girls to experience and critically assess a series of high
quality&lt;br/&gt;science-learning experiences diverse in their technology and
extent and form of interactivity, ranging from&lt;br/&gt;planetarium show to
role play simulated mission to Mars, from CD-ROM games to exploring space
science&lt;br/&gt;on the web, television to immersive virtual reality. These
young, newly expert technologists will then&lt;br/&gt;design their ideal science
learning experience, with the goal of teaching science and inspiring kids to
be&lt;br/&gt;interested in SMET. IGD will profile girl reactions to the diverse
forms of science learning. The design&lt;br/&gt;process and design outcomes of
the all-girl design teams will be analyzed and compared to all-boy
teams.&lt;br/&gt;IGD will compare fifth grade girls (whose enthusiasm for
science parallels boys) with eighth grade girls&lt;br/&gt;(whose enthusiasm and
self confidence in science has declined), looking for similarities and
differences in&lt;br/&gt;technology attitudes, design process, and design
outcomes. Professional software developers will create&lt;br/&gt;visualizations
of each team's prototype. With no indication of the gender of the designers,
each set of&lt;br/&gt;visualizations will be shown to same-age students to
discover whether boys and girls prefer prototypes&lt;br/&gt;developed by their
own gender.&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: IGD will test the assertion that
involving girls as designers can impact&lt;br/&gt;design process and product and
describe gender and age differences. IGD will contribute
concrete&lt;br/&gt;understanding of girls' attitudes toward diverse forms of
technology-enhanced science learning.&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: IGD could
provide compelling evidence to software developers about the
critical&lt;br/&gt;importance of involving girls as designers and ways of
enabling girl-friendly design processes. IGC could&lt;br/&gt;provide guidance to
teachers and curriculum designers about choosing among technology-enhanced
science&lt;br/&gt;learning experiences. The PIs teach graduate design research
classes (in education and digital media&lt;br/&gt;design). They will involve
their students in the research and integrate findings into their courses.
New&lt;br/&gt;understanding about girl-friendly science education designs will
be incorporated into the Mars Pioneer&lt;br/&gt;Learning Adventures initiative
and into the overall Comm Tech Lab software design process and
College&lt;br/&gt;of Education and Digital Media Arts curricula.