* 0217836
* Visualization &amp; Optimization Techniques For Analysis and Design of Complex Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Sean Meyn, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2005
* USD 195,001.00

This project concerns several interrelated approaches to managing complexity in
large interconnected systems. Specific application areas addressed in the
proposal include phase transitions in molecular models, and resource allocation
in large network models. Ideally, we wish to build a collection of 'microscopes'
that allow us to view these systems on various scales, and filter away
irrelevant information. The PI has recently developed methods that are intended
to perform exactly this task. Over the proposed funding period he will develop
these and new approaches for addressing visualization and optimization problems
in complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;Specific analytical approaches to be developed
include, (i) Relaxation techniques based upon separation of fast and slow time-
scales. This involves 'workload-relaxations' in the network domain, and recent
approaches to spectral theory for diffusion models. (ii) General theory of
Markov processes and diffusion models, especially recent results concerning
large deviations theory and entropy.&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Methods for including prior
knowledge to speed simulation and on-line learning for complex stochastic
models, and for predicting and simulating rare events. (iv) Extend fluid model
techniques for addressing control and sensitivity in network optimization in
realistic settings.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will collaborate with graduate students at
Illinois, researchers in applied mathematics at Brown University, and others in
computer science and physics at research institutes in Germany. The expected
impact of this research is far-reaching, and it is likely that cross-
fertilization between all of these mathematical and application areas will be
significant. In networks applications, these results will provide new methods
for providing intuition about the behavior of large networks, new approaches to
design, and efficient approaches to simulation and on-line tuning of policies.
If successful, the research on spectral theory and diffusions will provide
alternative-modeling techniques for molecular systems that capture essential
dynamics and can be easily simulated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;