* 0217146
* DEM: Girls Under the Hood
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Karen Harpp, Colgate University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2007
* USD 377,966.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Girls Under the Hood is a demonstration project designed
to encourage teenage girls in rural&lt;br/&gt;Madison County, New York, to
achieve excellence in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and&lt;br/&gt;Technology
(SMET) fields. Central to the success of this project is the hands-on
experience&lt;br/&gt;that will demonstrate the relationship of SMET to the
participants everyday lives. Using the&lt;br/&gt;automobile as a vehicle for
inquiry-based scientific learning, 24 girls ages 14-17 will&lt;br/&gt;explore
topics such as the science of internal combustion, the mathematics of fuel
economy,&lt;br/&gt;the engineering of the power train, the technology of
computerized diagnostic equipment, and&lt;br/&gt;the integration of all these
fields. In addition to exploring and learning many
scientific&lt;br/&gt;principles behind the various systems of the automobile,
participants will acquire practical&lt;br/&gt;skills that they can share with
their families.&lt;br/&gt;During a seven-day residential summer camp,
participants will experience two different&lt;br/&gt;college campus settings a
mere five miles apart: Colgate University, in Hamilton, New York,&lt;br/&gt;a
nationally-ranked liberal arts institution; and in America's Most-Wired; two-
year school, the&lt;br/&gt;State University of New York College of Agriculture
and Technology, in Morrisville, New&lt;br/&gt;York. Morning sessions will be
held in the new automotive technology building at the SUNY&lt;br/&gt;Morrisville
campus, where participants will engage in hands-on exploration of
the&lt;br/&gt;automobile. Meals, lodging, and most of the afternoon and evening
sessions will take place at&lt;br/&gt;Colgate University, where the girls will
further explore the basic scientific principles behind&lt;br/&gt;the operation
of automobiles and how those same principles can be transferred to a variety
of&lt;br/&gt;other applications.&lt;br/&gt;Girls Under the Hood will capitalize
on the natural curiosity of females in a non-threatening&lt;br/&gt;(cooperative,
welcoming, and predominantly female) environment at a critical time in
their&lt;br/&gt;lives when they are focused on getting their driver's license.
Through exposure to female role&lt;br/&gt;models (teachers, undergraduate
teaching assistants and successful industry practitioners)
and&lt;br/&gt;solicitation of parent, school, industry and government support,
this project will seize&lt;br/&gt;opportunities to relate course content to SMET
careers, and to challenge students' ideas about&lt;br/&gt;gender appropriate
careers. The confidence that girls gain in their ability to understand
the&lt;br/&gt;science and technology of automobiles will carry over into
confidence that they can succeed&lt;br/&gt;in other areas of SMET, and the
applications they will see of SMET courses will encourage&lt;br/&gt;them to take
more courses in those areas.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual benefit of this project
is that it will serve as an educational model for the&lt;br/&gt;application of
contextualized science education, as well as provide a better understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;gender-fair learning opportunities in SMET education utilizing a
unique combination of rural&lt;br/&gt;public high schools, public and private
universities, community, industry, and government.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of
the project include positive changes in participants' interest in
SMET,&lt;br/&gt;confidence in their ability to do math and science, and election
of upper level math and&lt;br/&gt;science courses. An added benefit will be the
establishment of an educational collaboration&lt;br/&gt;between a four year and
a two year college.