* 0217138
* DEM:  Hear Our Voices: Girls and Technology at the Computer Clubhouse
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Gail Breslow, Museum of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2006
* USD 894,733.00

Hear Our Voices is a Demonstration initiative that links twenty Clubhouses from
the &lt;br/&gt;Computer Clubhouse Network in creating new opportunities
specifically for girls and&lt;br/&gt;young women, to develop fluency with
computer technology, and to learn valuable career&lt;br/&gt;and life skills as
well. Hear Our Voices will serve as a model for the future in other
&lt;br/&gt;Computer Clubhouses in the Network, as well as like-minded informal
educational&lt;br/&gt;programs for girls and young women at other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Founded at the Computer Museum in Boston in
1993, the Computer Clubhouse has grown&lt;br/&gt;into a Network of 48 Clubhouses
in 13 states and the District of Columbia, plus 11&lt;br/&gt;Clubhouses
overseas, touching the lives of thousands of young people. The Computer
&lt;br/&gt;Clubhouses provide a successful, innovative, andempowering after-
school learning&lt;br/&gt;environment for young people (ages 8-18) from
underserved communities. A safe and&lt;br/&gt;welcoming milieu, skilled and
caring mentors, and high-end hardware and professional&lt;br/&gt;software tools
help Clubhouse youth become confident learners through a variety of
creative&lt;br/&gt;computer applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flagship
Computer Clubhouse moved to the Museum of Science in 1999, when
the&lt;br/&gt;Computer Museum joined forces with the Museum of Science. Since
then, the Network &lt;br/&gt;of Clubhouses has grown rapidly; with the support
of Intel Corporation and other&lt;br/&gt;sponsors, more Clubhouses are now being
planned and implemented. Based on community&lt;br/&gt;interest and the success
of the Clubhouse learning model in transforming young people's&lt;br/&gt;lives,
current plans call for growth to more than 100 Clubhouses by 2004.
Located&lt;br/&gt;primarily in youth-serving organizations such as Boys &amp;
Girls Clubs and Urban Leagues,&lt;br/&gt;Computer Clubhouses serve inner-city
neighborhoods as well as smaller communities &lt;br/&gt;with a high proportion
of under-served populations. The Computer Clubhouse community&lt;br/&gt;is
diverse, made up of African-Americans, Latinos, Asian-Americans,
Native&lt;br/&gt;Americans, recent immigrants, and
Whites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an effort to recruit and retain more girls and
young women in a field that has a &lt;br/&gt;dearth of participation by women
-computer technology - the flagship Computer Clubhouse&lt;br/&gt;in Boston since
1995 has pioneered several programs especially for girls, providing
them&lt;br/&gt;with access to rich technology resources, female mentors and role
models, a &lt;br/&gt;community of peers, and a positive, creative, and
supportive learning environment. &lt;br/&gt;The new Hear Our Voices program will
significantly expand the flagship Clubhouse's&lt;br/&gt;programming for girls
and young women, to 20 new venues and with new, locally-
designed&lt;br/&gt;programming. Specifically, it will enrich opportunities for
girls in four ways:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*Twenty of the Computer Clubhouses
within the United States will receive funding and &lt;br/&gt;support to hire and
train staff dedicated to gender equity and girls programming, and
to&lt;br/&gt;launch locally-based Hear Our Voices programs at their Clubhouses,
including at least &lt;br/&gt;one component of girls-only hours or days at each
participating Clubhouse.&lt;br/&gt;*Leveraging the experience gained at the
flagship Computer Clubhouse, Network staff&lt;br/&gt;from the Museum of Science
will provide professional development and program assistance&lt;br/&gt;for
girls'programming to Clubhouse Coordinators across the
Network.&lt;br/&gt;*Building on the momentum and resources of the growing
Clubhouse Network, a digital &lt;br/&gt;network called the Clubhouse Village
will support both a real and a virtual community of&lt;br/&gt;Clubhouse youth.
An area on the Village will be designated especially for
girls'&lt;br/&gt;activities, and the Village will also support interaction among
staff and mentors for&lt;br/&gt;mutual support and for sharing best practices.
The Clubhouse Village will consist of a&lt;br/&gt;secure, private Intranet,
using Internet technology and tools to enable Clubhouse youth &lt;br/&gt;to
communicate with each other and collaborate on creative projects.&lt;br/&gt;*The
virtual community will be made more viable by a face-to-face gathering of
&lt;br/&gt;participating youth and staff at a Computer Clubhouse Youth Summit in
the summer of&lt;br/&gt;2004.