* 0217932
* Structure-Property Relations for Nonlinear Optical Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* David Hagan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 345,000.00

An aggressive investigation is planned on the structure/nonlinear optical
property relations of materials with special emphasis on several classes of
organic compounds. An excellent collaborative team of experts has been assembled
in this area along with the best experimental facilities for nonlinear optical
(NLO) materials characterization. Along with the PI's at CREOL including a
chemist, collaborators include Seth Marder, Joseph Perry and Jean-Luc Bredas
with Chemistry at the University of Arizona, Francois Diederich in Chemistry at
ETH, Zurich, Olga Przhonska, Alex Kachkovski and co-workers at the Institute of
Physics, National Academy of Sciences, Kiev, Ukraine, and Anthony Brennan at the
University of Florida. State-of-the-art laboratory facilities have been
specifically designed and developed for the program outlined in this proposal.
Five laboratories are devoted to this investigation. The latest addition is a
femtosecond pump/continuum probe, nonlinear "spectrophotometer". This mimics the
operation of a standard linear spectrophotometer and is the closest one can come
to a facility that could be made into a commercial instrument for spectral
analysis of NLO material properties. Data are consistent with the two-photon
fluorescence (2PF) spectroscopy method, which takes considerably longer and
requires fluorescent samples. Thus, a broader range of materials can be studied.
These techniques, combined with the PIs' previously-developed experimental
Z-scan technique, along with complementary methods of single frequency pump-
probe methods with femtosecond, picosecond, and nanosecond tunable optical
parametric sources, provide a unique facility to carry out the goals of this
proposed effort. The ultimate goal of this study is to develop a predictive
capability for the NLO properties in terms of the linear optical properties
and/or molecular structure similar to what the PIs have accomplished for
semiconductors. The femtosecond continuum can range in wavelength from 300 nm to
&gt;1.7 mm and can thus probe the NLA over this broad spectral range. Thus, in a
single experiment the changes in absorption at all frequencies from the IR to
the UV are measured. By temporally delaying the probe, the dynamics of this
nondegenerate NLA are also obtained. This allows easy separation of the
ultrafast NLA process of two-photon absorption from cumulative nonlinearities
such as excited state absorption. With this instrument one can determine where
are the strong two-photon absorption bands, and what is the excited-state
absorption spectrum. The answers to these and similar questions will give
theoreticians the information necessary to test theories and practitioners to
find and exploit new NLO materials.