* 0217986
* ITR: Computational Prototyping of  Micro-Electro-Fluidic-Mechanical Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* N Aluru, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Miniaturized sensors and actuators, also referred to as Microelectromechanical
Systems (MEMS), play a critical role in information technology revolution. For
example, the development of wireless internet, complex systems on a chip for
aerospace, medical, health and various other industries is enabled by the MEMS
technology. Over the past decade, advances in microfabrication technologies have
enabled breakthrough developments in miniaturized sensors, actuators, devices
and systems (collectively called MEMS). Some of the most recent innovative
applications include accelerometers in navigational-grade guidance systems, rate
gyroscopes in&lt;br/&gt;antilock-braking systems, and chemical sensors in
complex biomedical instrumentation. MEMS based sensors are more attractive as
they are often less expensive and perform better than traditional devices and
they can more easily be integrated with control electronics to enable the
concept of systems-on-a-chip. The lack of efficient and accurate computational
prototyping tools has thus far been a significant barrier to the development of
MEMS, because most existing electronic and mechanical computational prototyping
tools do not have the ability to analyze&lt;br/&gt;microscopic phenomena
adequately. As a result, MEMS manufacturers have been forced to develop and test
prototypes, both of which have been time-consuming and very
expensive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal we focus on a particular class
of MEMS - referred to as microelectrofluidicmechanical systems (MEFMS). MEFMS
are miniaturized sensors, actuators, devices and systems, where mechanical,
electrical and fluidic energy domains play a central role. Many
electrofluidicmechanical devices have been designed and fabricated - e.g.
pressure sensors, accelerometers, gyroscopes, digital micro mirrors, microphones
and other devices. While fabrication approaches for these devices are mature
enough, investigation of design alternatives&lt;br/&gt;for many of these devices
is currently limited because of the lack of computational design tools. While
computational research primarily addresses engineering analysis, in this
proposal we focus on computational research for design and analysis of
microelectrofluidicmechanical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We expect this work
to break new grounds in the areas of software tools with advanced computational
methods for MEMS. Graduate students will be trained on the MEMS technology,
advanced computational methods and design methodologies for MEMS. We anticipate
that the design of miniaturized systems based on MEMS will progress rapidly with
the availability of efficient, accurate and robust computational prototyping
tools. Aggressive designers, who are currently handicapped because of the
limited computational analysis tools for MEMS, will be able to challenge their
design skills when computational prototyping tools for MEMS are in
place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;