* 0217550
* Inter-organizational Trust in Business to Business Electronic Commerce
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Pauline Ratnasingam, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 10/31/2003
* USD 60,000.00

Business-business e-commerce involves the use of computers and
telecommunications in routine business relationships. It mostly affects the
organizations' operations and daily relationships with their suppliers,
customers, banks, insurers, distributors, and other trading partners. Although
most popular accounts of e-commerce focus on business-to-consumer e-commerce,
business-to-business e-commerce is becoming the key in inter-organizational
relationships, (Keen, 2000; Lee and Turban, 1999). The close coupling between
buyers and suppliers (sellers) form inter-organizational relationships. Trust in
e-commerce participation has received a lot of attention, especially in the
recent years. However, to date there has been no systematic examination or
formulation of a model of inter-organizational trust for business-to-business
e-commerce. Much of the literature on trust has tended to focus from a
psychological rationale, while neglecting factors such as trading partner trust
behaviors, and the process involved in developing trust and its impact on
organizational and social issues within which e-commerce operations take place.
The purpose of this research project is to increase the growth of business-to-
business e-commerce in Vermont by examining how trust mechanisms evolve and
contribute to business-to-business e-commerce adoption in Vermont. Therefore,
the core objective of this research project is to investigate, explore and
examine the impact of trust mechanisms in business-to-business e-commerce. By
doing this, success factors in business-to-business e-commerce can be identified
and utilized to provide guidelines to enhance the growth of businesses in
Vermont that will in turn create more jobs. This will in turn, increase the
awareness of trust behaviors among e-commerce practitioners. E-commerce
organizations in Vermont will be able to practice business-to-business
e-commerce more confidently (by enforcing best business practices); thus
improving their chances of surviving in a competitive global market environment
(particularly against their neighboring cities such as Boston and Montreal).
Indeed the geographical location of Vermont makes it even more attractive to
conduct e-business. Experienced e-commerce practitioners (trading partners) will
be able to observe the behaviors of their trading partners and will be able to
monitor, assess, and evaluate trust behaviors of themselves and their trading
partners. Although governance mechanisms (in the form of legal contracts, trust
and security-based mechanisms in e-commerce) provide technological assurances
(using digital signatures, encryption mechanisms, functional acknowledgment
procedures, and trading partner agreements) that help mitigate perceived risks
of e-commerce, this research project will emphasize on the importance of
developing collaborative trustworthy trading relationships. A key strength of
the research is that the respondents will include practitioners from a wide
range of organizations and occupations. Therefore, while the organizations and
their people will not be selected randomly, quite a diverse group from a cross-
section of industries will participate that will in turn benefit the entire
Vermont business community.