* 0217942
* Incorporating Real-World Experience in Diverse Science Curricula through Community Building Partnerships
* EHR,DGE
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Erin Girdler, Kalamazoo College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 12/31/2003
* USD 43,640.00

Incorporating real-world experience in diverse science curricula through
community building partnerships.

The current proposal is a request for start-up funds to complement and extend my
PFSMETE (1999) post-doctoral fellowship at Middlebury College (Middlebury, VT):
"Teaching science through real-world experience: an introductory course in
applied conservation biology." That project tested a model of introductory level
science teaching in which students are motivated to learn how to do science by
giving them the opportunity to work on real-world projects in their laboratories
instead of cookbook labs with pre- determined results. Partnerships with natural
resource agencies supplied research opportunities for students in the course,
and these partnerships contributed to both student learning (by enhancing
motivation and reward), and to the partner agencies (by providing useful data,
ideas and public exposure). The logical next step for this model of teaching is
to expand it. In my new capacity as Assistant Professor of Biology and Co-
Director of the Environmental Studies Program at Kalamazoo College, I hope to do
just that. I will build upon the curriculum I developed under the previous
project in order to incorporate real-world experiences in large enrollment
introductory and non-majors courses, as well as upper level courses with
students who are more skilled but would still benefit from the real-world
motivating factors. Since enrollment in many undergraduate courses ranges from
fifty to several hundred, it will be useful to learn which aspects of the
partnership pedagogical model will be transferable to larger courses. I have
included letters of support from two potential agency partners, Convening for
Action (CF A), a local project with ties to Kalamazoo College that seeks to
coordinate county-wide land use planning through a geographic information system
(GIS) and intenet- based database, and the Southwest Michigan Land Conservancy,
which oversees many of our region's important natural areas. Most of the data my
students will be collecting will have a spatial component. That is, the data
must be analyzed in the context of their location, or in the very least
displayed spatially. A GIS is therefore essential to satisfy the goals of many
of the partnerships I envision. By working under the CF A umbrella, and by using
GIS I will ensure that the students' efforts are concentrated in those areas
where data are ,needed most.

At Kalamazoo College, I will eventually be responsible for five biology courses:
a non-majors Environmental Science course with an enrollment cap of 30, an
introductory biology course with a cap of 48, and iliree senior level courses,
each with expected enrollment of 12 to 15. The proposed research will test the
feasibility of scaling up the partnership model for use in these larger format
courses. Using student assistants during two summers, I will lay the groundwork
for incorporating experiential learning based on real-world partnerships into
these courses, and other funds will support the GIS technology and added
expenses of enabling students to conduct research in the classroom. The short-
term success for this project will be measured by students' performance and
attitude, and the utility of the partnerships for the agencies. To ascertain if
real-world experience facilitates student learning, I will administer a
questionnaire before and after each course to gauge students' attitudes toward
science, and their comprehension of the underlying basics of how we do science.
The longer term success of this project will be measured by whether or not
partnerships mature into mutually beneficial collaborations that have continuity
across the academic calendar. Meeting these short-term and long-term goals will
provide the track record to seek additional funding from regional resources to
ensure continuity of the partnerships after the proposed project is completed in
August 2003.