* 0217032
* Evaluation of Policy Impacts
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Christopher Taber, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2004
* USD 85,712.00

The first project covered in this grant is a continuation of work with on the
estimation of general equilibrium models of the labor market (supported by NSF-
SBR 9730657). It is well known but rarely addressed by applied microeconomists
that one can not properly evaluate national policies in a "partial equilibrium
environment." This is particularly true for policies that address skill
acquisition. When using data to perform policy analysis, labor economists
typically only concern themselves with the supply of skill and ignore demand.
The problem is that as the number of individuals possessing a particular skill
increases, the value the skill in the labor market falls. This effect
discourages skill formation. Our previous research shows that accounting for
general equilibrium effects when performing policy evaluations can alter the
results by as much as a factor of ten. The major weakness of our work to date is
the empirical approach. We have estimated the parameters of the individual
worker using standard methods which implicitly assume that the labor market is
not changing over time. This "steady state" assumption is clearly questionable
as there has been a large literature demonstrating the changes in the wage
structure. The biggest problem is that the model we estimated is not consistent
with the general equilibrium model that we used when we simulated it. The main
goal of this work is to estimate a dynamic general equilibrium model of the U.S.
labor market over the last thirty years. This involves simultaneously estimating
and simulating the model accounting for the changing U.S. labor market. This
procedure guarantees similarity between the simulated model and the U.S.
economy. We are using the estimated model to examine several different policies
aimed to address the increasing inequality in the workforce. A major goal of
these programs is to lower earnings inequality. This version of the model will
provide a consistent estimate of the distribution of earnings in the economy and
will allow us to do a much better job of estimating the effects of the policies
on earnings inequality than our previous work. We are also extending the model
to consider the effects of welfare policies and wage subsidies aimed a low wage
workers as well as a number of other policies aimed at addressing earnings
inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the second project is to address
one particular aspect that is likely to be very important in most
implementations of difference-in-differences estimators. Identification of the
key parameter often arises when a unit "changes" some particular policy.
Researchers typically assume that the product of the number of observations and
time period is large when they perform inference in their models. However, even
when the number of units or time periods is large, the number of actual policy
changes observed in the data is typically small. In this case these standard
methods that researchers use for inference in these models are not appropriate
and may be wildly misleading. We are developing two different approaches which
allow researchers to perform inference in these models. For the first approach
we assume that there are a finite number of policy changes in the data, but use
asymptotic approximations as the product of the number of observations and time
period gets large. In the second, we avoid large sample approximations
altogether by using exact tests.&lt;br/&gt;