* 0217398
* Dissertation Research: The Vestiges of Creation and Pre-Darwinian Evolutionary Debates in America: Receptions of Popular Science in Three American Intellectual Communities
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Phillip Sloan, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 07/31/2003
* USD 8,000.00

During the fifteen years immediately preceding the publication of Charles
Darwin's Origin of Species (1859), the American public was already grappling
with a theory of evolution. Robert Chambers' anonymously published Vestiges of
the Natural History of Creation (11 editions, 1844-1860) confronted the English-
speaking world with the first comprehensive theory of evolution to reach a mass
American audience. This dissertation research project investigates how three
American intellectual communities at Princeton, Yale, and Harvard drew from
their distinctive understandings of science when responding to Vestiges. Recent
studies in the history of science have revealed the importance of Vestiges for
the introduction of evolutionary thought into Victorian Britain, but this
scholarship has generally left American reactions to Vestiges unexplored. This
dissertation project extends to America the analysis of archival records that
James Secord recently brought to Vestiges' British respondents, tracing
discussions of Vestiges through correspondence networks, diaries, and
publishers' records (Victorian Sensation, University of Chicago Press, 2000).
The height of scholarly interest in Vestiges is further indicated by John
Lynch's recently published reprints of British reactions to Vestiges ("Vestiges"
and the Debate before Darwin, 7 volumes, Thoemmes Press, 2000). Though several
works in the history of American science have mentioned Vestiges, none compares
in depth or scope to Secord's study, nor do Lynch's volumes contain a single
American reaction. This dissertation project therefore fills two gaps in
historical understanding: identifying in sharper precision than previous
scholarship the scientific milieux of American intellectual communities on the
eve of Darwinism, and determining Vestiges' role in shaping those milieux.
Grounded in specific case studies, this dissertation project also provides
insights into two broader issues: the processes by which intellectual
communities form their reactions to popular scientific theories and the
relations between science and religion. This study will develop the first topic
by expanding upon the localist case-study methodology that David Livingstone
employed when comparing location-specific reactions to Darwinism among
Presbyterians in distinct cities (Evangelicals and Science in Historical
Perspective, Oxford University Press, 1999, chap. 8). This project will engage
the second issue by testing a claim made by John Brooke and Geoffrey Cantor
(Reconstructing Nature, T and T Clarke, 1998): science and religion
interpenetrate one another in ways too complex to be summarized by older
methodological categories such as "harmony" or "conflict." In particular, this
project will extend Brooke and Cantor's concept of community- specific science-
religion "totalities," or "amalgams", as an explanatory device for understanding
the distinctive evaluations that individuals made of Vestiges in the respective
Presbyterian, Congregationalist, and Unitarian/Congregationalist milieux of
Princeton, Yale, and Harvard. Funds will support necessary archival research at
the Smithsonian Institution and Princeton, Yale, and Harvard Universities in
order to identify with sharp focus how the intellectual communities at
Princeton, Yale, and Harvard responded to Vestiges. These results, in turn, may
serve as foundation for sharing with a broad audience new insights concerning
the nature of science, the process by which members of society evaluate
scientific claims, and the ways in which religious convictions shape, and are
reshaped by individuals' engagements with science.