* 0217061
* Integration of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Research, Education, and Outreach:   Systematic Tailoring of Carbon Nanotubes to Designed Electronic Properties
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2007
* Jun Jiao, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 06/30/2007
* USD 180,000.00

Title Integration of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Research, Education, and
Outreach: Systematic Tailoring of Carbon Nanotubes to Designed Electronic
Properties&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigator Jun
Jiao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sponsor Portland State University&lt;br/&gt;P.O. Box
751&lt;br/&gt;Portland, Oregon 97207-0751&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims at the development of an integrated
research, education, and outreach program in nanoscience and technology at
Portland State University, with an emphasis on carbon nanotube research. The
objectives of the proposed research are focused on (i) developing a reliable
method for synthesizing carbon nanotubes of controlled properties; (ii) studying
the growth mechanisms of various forms of nanotubes as a function of preparation
conditions, and establishing the correlation between microstructure and
preparation conditions; (iii) investigating the electron field-emission
properties of carbon nanotubes in relation to their geometrical configurations;
(iv) fabricating individual carbon-nanotube field emitters and exploiting their
use as electron sources for electron-beam instruments such as TEM, SEM, and
electron-beam lithography systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovative aspects
of this research are &lt;1&gt; to combine nanotube synthesis, microstructural
characterization, electron field-emission measurements, and individual nanotube
field emitter fabrications into a single project, and &lt;2&gt; to explore the
special requirements of electron-beam instruments, as opposed to flat-panel
displays. The effectiveness of this approach is that progress at each stage will
provide immediate feedback to advance the improvement of the others. The
research program is highly multidisciplinary, involving close collaboration with
colleagues in Physics, Chemistry and Electrical Engineering Departments, with
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, and with a local high-tech company (FEI).
One Ph.D. graduate student will be trained through this program, in addition to
eight undergraduate students and two high school students who will each year be
offered opportunities to participate in the research activities. All of them
will receive excellent training in preparation for careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational objectives of this program
include (i) incorporating research findings to develop a new curriculum. New
courses, introducing students to up-to-date knowledge and state-of-the-art
techniques, will be developed; (ii) involving undergraduate and high school
students (in particular, female students) in research and science-education
activities, and motivating them to pursue careers in science and engineering;
(iii) enriching outreach activities by collaborating with local educational
institutions to increase the awareness of local citizens with regard to the
future impact of nanoscience and nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;