* 0217308
* A Study on Minimization of Torque Ripple of Disk Brushless Permanent Magnet Motors Applied as Gearless Drive for Light Electric Vehicles
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Leszek Czarnecki, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 12/31/2004
* USD 119,995.00

The aim of the project is to study how to minimize the torque ripple of disc
brushless DC permanent magnet motors, keeping, at the same time, a high level
specific torque (torque to motor mass ratio). Some preliminary results indicate
that it can be achieved by modifying the shape of permanent magnets and the
structure of the stator core, and by modifying the current waveform. The
research on this subject will concentrate on analysis of magnetic field in 3-D
space for two versions of disc motors: torus-type and disc motor with axial
magnetic flux in a stator core, and on evaluation of motor performance using
dynamic model of electronic converter - permanent magnet motor set in order to
select the optimum solution. To verify the computer simulation a laboratory
motor model, together with the appropriate converter will be built and
tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results and experience obtained from the
project will allow the design and manufacture of smoothly running motors that
are required not only for light, low speed electric vehicles (in particular -
wheelchairs), but also in a vast area of drives, where high torque ripple cannot
be tolerated. The high efficiency motors with high specific torque, which will
result from the project will contribute to the extension of the driving distance
of electric vehicle and to save energy, if the motor is applied as a variable
speed drive in industry, as well as to low the cost of the final product.
&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide the subject for one M.Sc. and one for Ph.D.
theses. The results of this project will be disseminated through reviewed
publications. &lt;br/&gt;