* 0217229
* Aerodynamic Mechanisms of Animal Flight
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Michael Dickinson, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

Whether winding through alpine meadows, migrating across continents, or circling
garbage cans, insects display impressive aerodynamic agility. Although the
science of aeronautics is sophisticated enough to design airliners, space
shuttles, and stealth fighters, scientists are only just beginning to understand
the aerodynamic mechanisms that enable tiny insects to fly and maneuver. This
research program builds upon recent discoveries using a variety of experimental
and theoretical techniques to construct a comprehensive theory of animal flight.
The techniques used in this investigation include three-dimensional high speed
videography, with which it is possible to capture the complex wing motions of
tiny insects such as fruit flies as they actively steer and maneuver. The
research also employs a giant robotic model of flapping insect wings, immersed
in a 3 ton tank of mineral oil. By 'replaying' the wing and body motion of real
insects on the large robot, the researchers can directly measure the flows and
forces created by flapping wings. Through such experiments it will be possible
to determine not simply how insects manage to stay in the air, but how they
carefully manipulate aerodynamic forces to actively steer and maneuver. Whereas
much previous work on insect flight has focused on a small number of species,
this research will investigate how the aerodynamic mechanisms used by insects
vary with body size, wing shape, and flight speed. Because the physics of air
flow can change with scale, this broad comparative analysis is necessary to
construct a comprehensive theory of insect flight.&lt;br/&gt;Insects are among
the most diverse groups of organisms on the planet, and their flight behavior
plays a central role in their extraordinary success. Thus, by forging a clearer
picture of how they fly, this research will greatly extend our understanding of
this ecologically and agriculturally important group of animals. In addition,
just as with complex weather systems, predicting the complex patterns of forces
and flows created by flapping wings represents a challenging benchmark for
computer simulations in the important and challenging field of Fluid Mechanics -
the branch of Physics that determines such diverse phenomena as aerodynamics,
heat flow, weather, and global warming. By providing experimental verification
of the solutions to complicated flow problems, this research will help
mathematicians around the world improve the accuracy of their computer models.
Further, knowledge gathered in this study on the aerodynamics of flapping wings
will provide new and creative design concepts for the aeronautics industry.
Lessons from insect aerodynamics and sensory physiology are already being used
in the design of small autonomous air vehicles, whose potential applications
include search and rescue operations and planetary exploration. By moving
towards a more comprehensive theory of flapping flight aerodynamics, this
research will present engineers with a useful body of theory for the development
of novel aircraft.&lt;br/&gt;