* 0217287
* Theoretical Comparisons of Forms of Exchange
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Linda Molm, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2006
* USD 209,470.00

SES-0217287&lt;br/&gt;PI (s): Linda Molm&lt;br/&gt;University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is part of a long-term
project investigating how different forms of social exchange affect major
exchange outcomes. In previous work the PI established that negotiated exchange-
in which actors jointly bargain over the terms of strictly binding agreements,
and reciprocal exchanges-in which actors individually give benefits to each
other without negotiation, have very different effects on behavioral and
affective outcomes. Reciprocal exchanges produce weaker power use, greater
feelings of trust and affective commitment, and stronger perceptions of fairness
than equivalent negotiated exchanges. The goal of this research is to test the
independent effects of three causal mechanisms proposed to account for these
differences: (1) the risk and uncertainty of exchange, (2) the relative salience
of the competitive or cooperative aspects of exchange, and (3) the value of
voluntary reciprocity. The research focuses on affective outcomes (feelings of
trust, commitment, fairness, and solidarity), and extends the analysis to a
third form of exchange, generalized (or indirect) exchange, that entails even
greater differences in risk, salience of competition, and
reciprocity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five laboratory experiments test predictions
related to these goals. Experiments will be conducted to test the effects of
risk and uncertainty on trust and commitment by manipulating whether negotiated
agreements are binding or non-binding and whether actors can communicate their
intentions in reciprocal exchanges. Another experiment will test the effect of
increasing the salience of competition on perceptions of fairness in reciprocal
exchange, by allowing actors to choose not only which partner to reward, but
also how much benefit to give. Finally experiments will test the value that
actors place on frequency and predictability of reciprocity, relative to the
magnitude of benefits received and compare indirect (generalized) exchange with
the two forms of direct exchange (negotiated and
reciprocal).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to expanding the
scope of contemporary theory and research on social exchange to include the full
range of exchange forms that characterize social life. Findings will also help
explain why these forms of exchange have such different effects on the
development of trust and affective ties&lt;br/&gt;