* 0217988
* Networks and Knowledge Transfer
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Ray Reagans, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Naman
* 07/31/2005
* USD 81,914.00

In light of the increasing role of knowledge work in the economy, a fundamental
understanding of effective knowledge transfer has increasingly gained currency
in both the academic and managerial communities. Transferring knowledge across
organizational boundaries allows individuals to benefit from the experiences of
others and access a greater breadth of organizational, technological, and market
know-how. There is a considerable body of research documenting the beneficial
effects of knowledge transfer for organizational performance. Substantial
progress has also been made on investigating the psychological processes
underlying knowledge transfer. However, our understanding is less well developed
for how social networks influence knowledge transfer. An integrative network-
based theory of knowledge transfer has yet to emerge. Developing such a
perspective is important because it: emphasizes the ongoing patterns of
interaction through which knowledge spreads, considers the informal
organizational influences on knowledge transfer, and broadens the focus of
research beyond that of single individuals and dyads to larger
collectivities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tests a network-based theory
of effective knowledge transfer, framed as a search-transfer problem. We argue
that network patterns are important in solving both halves of the problem. For
search, we argue that people with interactions that cut across multiple areas of
expertise are better positioned to see how ideas developing in one area can be
combined with ideas developing in another area. People solving the search
problem can transfer knowledge using one of two strategies. The individual can
move knowledge from the source to the recipient acting as an intermediary. Or
the individual can facilitate the transfer of knowledge from the source to the
recipient by bringing the two parties together. We maintain that the most
effective knowledge transfer mechanism is contingent upon qualities of the
knowledge being transferred and the amount of knowledge overlap between the
source and the recipient. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test the predictions, the
researchers will gather sociometric, human resource management, and performance
data (at various levels) along with information about individuals' areas of
expertise. Data will be gathered from both primary and archival data sources.
The setting for the study will be three member organizations of the Twin Cities
Knowledge Management Forum (TCKMF), a consortium with the mission to help its
members implement knowledge management within their organizations by sharing
best practices. Members of the TCKMF include Fortune 500 and other leading
corporations (e.g., Cargill, Medtronic, Oracle, 3M Company, Unisys) located in
the Twin Cities area. Results of a pilot study completed with one member
organization have been presented to the consortium and the attending companies
agree that the initial findings are promising, the questions being addressed are
worth further examination, and the study shows clear potential for broader
impact.