* 0217479
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Drought and Development:  Technocratic visions for progress in Brazil's Northeast, 1900-1950
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2002,10/31/2004
* Steven Feierman, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 10/31/2004
* USD 4,500.00

This dissertation research project entitled "Drought and Development" is a
social and intellectual history of scientific development and the political
context in which such efforts take shape. This dissertation will contribute to
the literatures of Latin American history, environmental history, and the
history of science, preparing the author for a teaching and research career in
those fields. Although Latin America has not been a significant regional focus
for U. S. historians of science, scientific personnel (including experts from
more industrialized countries) were often important promoters of national
development there, particularly during the past century of urbanization,
national integration and industrialization. This study compares environmental
and social explanations for regional backwardness within a developmentalist
discourse focused on the problem of drought, between 1900 and 1950. During the
early decades of Brazil's First Republic (formed in 1889), sanitarians and
engineers undertook a range of technical efforts to ameliorate drought and
disease in the country's impoverished Northeast interior. These projects
provoked debate among Brazilian intellectuals as to which aspects of
Northeastern poverty were the result of natural factors and which were
attributable instead to social structure, in particular the colonial legacy of
latifundism and continued political domination by the landholding elite. By
researching in archives and libraries of both Rio de Janeiro and two
Northeastern cities, the investigator aims to uncover a variety of attitudes
prevalent in early twentieth-century Brazil about the effectiveness of science
as a solution to rural poverty. The author considers how the training and social
identity of several professional groups shaped their attitude toward medicine
and technology as modernization tools. These include medical personnel in
Brazil's rural sanitation movement; Rockefeller Foundation International Health
Board staff working in Northeast Brazil; and engineers of the Federal
Inspectorate for Works Against the Drought. Additionally, the author examines
sociological studies undertaken by Northeastern intellectuals during the 1930s
and 1940s. These analyses of regional poverty focused more on its social and
political history than on technological solutions. The period in question marked
a high point for the participation of doctors and engineers in promoting a
progressive national vision for Brazil; in subsequent decades, economists became
the professional group deemed best equipped to deal with regional
underdevelopment. Brazil's Northeast thus provides a lively context for
considering the political shaping and implications of scientific development
proposals that took place against a backdrop of debates about national economic
integration.