* 0217311
* Laser Ultrasound-Interferometric System for Packaged Electronic Devices Quality Evaluations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* I. Charles Ume, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2006
* USD 302,212.00

This grant provides funding to develop a novel quality inspection system that
will evaluate the defects in packaged electronic devices. Such defects would
include misaligned, short, missing, cracked, voided, delaminated, partially
connected, open, excessive and starved solder bumps that occur in such packaged
devices as flip chip (with no underfill), direct chip attach (DCA), chip scale
packaging (CSP), and cracks in chip capacitors and resistors. The PI proposes to
develop an automated laser ultrasonic-interferometric system that uses a single
optical fiber for evaluating the quality of packaged electronic devices. This
system can be used in a production line as a go/no-go inspection tool, or off-
line during process development for process optimization. This will be a high
resolution, non-contact, non-destructive, low cost, fast and accurate quality
inspection system. The PI will also develop a signal processing procedure for
determining the presence of one or more of these defects. A finite element
analysis model will be developed to explain the experimental results. The final
objective is to use the experiences gained in the conduct of this study to build
an industrial grade prototype system for use as a Beta test in industry. The PI
and his students will swiftly transfer this technology to the industry. This
research will result in the development of a novel and automated non-contact,
non-destructive, fast, sensitive, accurate and low cost solder bump quality
inspection system. It is also expected to be applicable to many types of surface
mount devices such as chip resistors and capacitors, and conventional lead frame
packages, making it a versatile and cost-effective automated manufacturing tool.
This tool could be used on-line as a go/no-go inspection tool, and off-line
during process development for process optimization. Use of this new Laser
Ultrasound-Interferometric inspection technology for automated manufacturing
inspection will bring tremendous cost savings by catching defects early in the
process. With access to rapid, accurate inspection systems, cost savings will
also be realized in process development by reducing the time to market new
products, and allowing better process optimization before manufacturing ramp-up.
If the research objectives are fully implemented, the proposed technique will
help to increase the yield of DCAs, flip chips, CSPs, silicon chips, and chip
resistors and capacitors. The research will impact the nation's human resources
by training these students in the development and application of low cost and
high performance sensors, for on-line and off-line quality evaluation of
microelectronic packaging devices. The students who will be participating in
this research will learn how to carry out applied and fundamental research in
microelectronic packaging, on laser ultrasound, on optical techniques, on system
integration, on signal processing and on finite element modeling. They will also
learn about technology licensing and commercialization