* 0217522
* International: Workshop on Computational Methods for Robust Statistics; Vancouver, Canada, May 19-22, 2002.
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2004
* Arnold Stromberg, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 04/30/2004
* USD 19,700.00

0127522&lt;br/&gt;Stromberg&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program award
will fund an international workshop on robust statistical methods to be held at
the Pacific Institute for the Mathematical Sciences and the Department of
Statistics of the University of British Columbia in conjunction with the 2002
International Conference on Robust Statistics (ICORS2002). The workshop, which
is being organized on the US side by Dr. Arnold J. Stromberg of the University
of Kentucky and on the Canadian side by Dr. Ruben Zamar of the University of
British Colombia, will bring together researchers and students in computational
robust statistics. The Division of Mathematical Sciences is joining in the
support of this workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust statistics deals with the
problem that many classical statistical procedures work well only for data that
comes from a population that is normally distributed. Robust statistical
procedures, on the other hand, work well independently of the normality of the
data or even when the data contains outliers. The last 25 years have seen
tremendous advancements in the theory of robust statistics, but many very useful
procedures are not used in practice due to the fact that they are difficult to
compute. Improved computational methods for robust procedures would be
beneficial in that current computational methods are only practical for small to
moderate sized data sets. Outliers are much more likely to appear in larger data
sets and thus improvement in computational methods will allow robust techniques
to be applied to much larger data sets. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The workshop will
serve as a forum to develop and share knowledge on improved computational
techniques that will allow more robust methods to be used in practice. A web
page on the ICORS2002 will be devoted to discussions related to the workshop and
drafts of papers will be posted there. An electronic mailing list will be used
to notify participants of important developments. &lt;br/&gt;