* 0217188
* DEM  (Informal) Science on Patrol
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2010
* Bonnie Brownstein, Institute for Schools of the Future
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2010
* USD 899,925.00

Science on Patrol (SOP), a demonstration project of the Institute for Schools of
the &lt;br/&gt;Future and the Police Athletic League in collaboration with the
Manhattan Robbery Squad,&lt;br/&gt;the Crime Scene Unit, the Arson and Explosion
Squad and other units of the New York City&lt;br/&gt;Police Department Detective
Division, selected New York City public schools, community&lt;br/&gt;outreach
organizations, science professionals and database and Web designers, is
designed&lt;br/&gt;to promote interest and achievement in science by providing
youngsters compelling &lt;br/&gt;problems ('crimes') they can solve by applying
the scientific processes and skills&lt;br/&gt;actually used by crime scene
investigators to solve crimes. This approach capitalizes on &lt;br/&gt;the
interest in high profile crimes treated in the popular press, movies and
current&lt;br/&gt;television programs. The informal science project is aimed
squarely at raising the level of&lt;br/&gt;participation and achievement in
science for adolescent females and other members of &lt;br/&gt;underrepresented
minority groups by achieving thee goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. using research-
based strategies to attract and retain underrepresented minorities,
particularly&lt;br/&gt; females, in informal science programs;&lt;br/&gt;2.
increasing their interest and achievement in science knowledge and skills;
and&lt;br/&gt;3. raising their awareness and interest in science-based
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will roll out through an existing
structure, PAL centers in the Bronx in Year&lt;br/&gt;One, in PAL centers
throughout New York City in Year Two and in PAL centers across &lt;br/&gt;the
country in Year Three. Interdisciplinary teams comprising PAL center
instructors,&lt;br/&gt;educators, police detectives, instructional designers,
and scientists will work &lt;br/&gt;collaboratively to: (1) develop, field test
and revise a minimum of 12 crime scenarios&lt;br/&gt;for the youngsters to
solve; (2) develop additional course materials, including
a&lt;br/&gt;Facilitator's Guide, the Science on Patrol website, a Student
Activities Kits which&lt;br/&gt;include case folders for each of the 'crimes',
and a manual for mentors and/or volunteers;&lt;br/&gt;(3) increase the
participants' capacity to apply science knowledge and processes to solve
&lt;br/&gt;real world problems; and, (4) build the capacity of faculty to
implement compelling and &lt;br/&gt;challenging problems in environments that
are gender-neutral, promote collaboration, &lt;br/&gt;encourage problem-solving
and reflect both research and best practice for increasing
&lt;br/&gt;participation and achievement in science-based
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decades of research on the root causes and outcomes
of the under representation of &lt;br/&gt;females in mathematics, science and
technology have amply demonstrated that the culture&lt;br/&gt;and context of
K-16 schooling clearly lies at the heart of the issue. Yet the
literature&lt;br/&gt;shows the very factors that constrain participation and
achievement of females and other&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented minorities in higher
levels of mathematics and science are alterable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science on
Patrol is an innovative project that links science knowledge and skills with
&lt;br/&gt;the real world applications of forensic specialists in a highly
motivating course of study&lt;br/&gt;for middle and high school students. The
key element, however, is the comprehensive use &lt;br/&gt;of research-based
findings to shape learning environments specifically designed to attract
&lt;br/&gt;and retain females and other underrepresentedminorities to advanced
study of science and&lt;br/&gt;science-related careers. Science on Patrol does
not single out specific research-based&lt;br/&gt;factors that promote success
for female and other underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;Instead, it
integrates all in an integrated and coherent manner to create learning
&lt;br/&gt;environments that are friendly to the target population. Information
about the culture&lt;br/&gt;and context of these learning environments will be
disseminated broadly and serve as a &lt;br/&gt;model for other informal science
efforts and for school-based K-16 classrooms.