* 0217038
* Aiming for Algebra
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Rachel Muir, Girlstart
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2006
* USD 899,908.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aiming for Algebra is a project of
Girlstart, a nonprofit organization in Austin, Texas. &lt;br/&gt;Its goal is to
prepare middle school girls for and support their completion of Algebra 1
&lt;br/&gt;in the eighth grade as a means of readying them for college
preparatory math and science &lt;br/&gt;classes in high school that lead
ultimately to completion of the college majors required&lt;br/&gt;for SMET
careers. The primary objectives of the initial 36-month demonstration period
&lt;br/&gt;include improving girls self confidence and academic self-esteem;
increasing girls'&lt;br/&gt;awareness of SMET careers and the high school and
college coursework required to enter &lt;br/&gt;such careers; enhancing girls
knowledge of and ability to use algebra in their lives; &lt;br/&gt;improving
parents awareness of SMET careers for women; and increasing
parents'&lt;br/&gt;awareness of ways to encourage their daughters' success in
algebra and&lt;br/&gt;subsequent math and science courses in high school and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed intervention methods to achieve these
ends include participation in an&lt;br/&gt;integrated continuum of activities as
part of a ifgirls-only science math clublc over &lt;br/&gt;a three-year period,
as well as involvement in a range of other community- and &lt;br/&gt;Internet-
based math and science experiences with parents and other adults. The
&lt;br/&gt;intellectual merit of this project derives from its translation of a
significant &lt;br/&gt;portion of the body of previous research on the best
practices for addressing gender&lt;br/&gt;inequities in SMET careers and the
disparity in the mathematics and science &lt;br/&gt;achievement of girls in the
United States into a single, cohesive informal program &lt;br/&gt;approach.
Moreover, the project will employ a cohort design that will facilitate
an&lt;br/&gt;understanding of what parts of the intervention model have the most
impact on the&lt;br/&gt;intended outcomes. A rigorous evaluation component and a
strong dissemination plan &lt;br/&gt;further strengthen the likelihood that
Aiming for Algebra will result in a better &lt;br/&gt;understanding of how
specific programmatic activities affect girls mathematical &lt;br/&gt;skills and
their attitudes about and aspirations for math and science
careers.&lt;br/&gt;The straightforward, unwavering focus on the completion of
Algebra 1 in the eighth&lt;br/&gt; grade is another feature&lt;br/&gt;that makes
this project meritorious. By tying its success to a single, observable
goal&lt;br/&gt;and directing all of its energies to achieve this one purpose,
the project sets itself&lt;br/&gt;up for rigorous comparison with other efforts
with an identical goal. Aiming for Algebra &lt;br/&gt;intends to make its
methodologies so transparent and so well documented that future
&lt;br/&gt;research and demonstration projects can be erected squarely on the
intellectual&lt;br/&gt;capital it creates and disseminates. Insofar as its
broader impacts, the project will&lt;br/&gt;contribute to an improved
understanding of the ways girls can be best prepared for &lt;br/&gt;taking and
making good grades in Algebra 1 before they reach high school; it
will&lt;br/&gt;advance understanding among teachers and teacher preparation
programs of how girls' &lt;br/&gt;expectations of their science and math
performance in high school and beyond can be &lt;br/&gt;improved; it will
provide empirical evidence of ways that female members of
groups&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented in SMET careers- including but notlimited to
those who are ethnic &lt;br/&gt;and racial minorities, low-income, linguistic
minorities, and differently abled- can&lt;br/&gt;be included in informal
programming designed to redress the inequity; and, perhaps
most&lt;br/&gt;importantly, the project will benefit society by improving the
nation's ability to &lt;br/&gt;identify and remedy long-standing social,
economic and academic practices that have&lt;br/&gt;disadvantaged its female
population and created obstacles to their full and equal
&lt;br/&gt;participation in scientific, mathematical, engineering and
technological professions.