* 0217691
* The University of Texas System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2008
* Helmut Knaust, University of Texas at El Paso
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2008
* USD 5,393,432.00

The University of Texas System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Texas System Alliance for
Minority Participation (UT-System&lt;br/&gt;AMP) brings together all nine
academic components of The University of Texas System&lt;br/&gt;and ten regional
community college partners in an effort to increase the number of
under-&lt;br/&gt;represented minority students and students from other under-
served populations enrolling &lt;br/&gt;in and graduating from baccalaureate
programs in science, mathematics, engineering, and &lt;br/&gt;technology and
entering graduate programs in SMET fields at UT-System
universities.&lt;br/&gt;The activities of the UT-System AMP are supported by
partnerships with industry and&lt;br/&gt;government agencies, particularly
national laboratories. The educational institutions in &lt;br/&gt;the Alliance
serve a rapidly growing region, where by the decade's end minorities will
&lt;br/&gt;comprise a majority of the population. Prominent among the
institutions are those in the&lt;br/&gt;U.S.-Mexico Border regions serving large
numbers of Hispanic students and those in &lt;br/&gt;metropolitan areas serving
mainly commuter students,including many minorities. The&lt;br/&gt;UT-System
places a high degree of importance, system-wide, on improving
retention&lt;br/&gt;among undergraduates and providing enhanced opportunities
for these undergraduates &lt;br/&gt;to enter graduate programs in SMET. This
proposal also emphasizes the system-wide&lt;br/&gt;sharing of resources to
attain these goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Phase III, the University of Texas
System Alliance for Minority Participation is &lt;br/&gt;committed to achieving
the following objectives: 1) The UT-System LSAMP universities &lt;br/&gt;will
enroll a minimum of 200 under-represented minority and other under-served
student &lt;br/&gt;in their STEM doctoral programs by the fall of 2008, an
increase of about 100% over the &lt;br/&gt;fall 2000 baseline and 2) The UT-
System AMP universities will continue to work towards&lt;br/&gt;the Phase II
goal of graduating a minimum of 1,374 under-represented minority and other
&lt;br/&gt;under-served students with B.S. degrees in SMET. It is estimated that
we will achieve this&lt;br/&gt;goal by 2006. When achieved, this will represent
a 244% increase over 1991-1992 baseline.&lt;br/&gt;LSAMP program activities will
focus on three major areas: (1) retention of students who&lt;br/&gt;are STEM
majors through the development of strategies at all partner institutions to
&lt;br/&gt;address retention of second year students in SMET; (2) mentoring and
career development&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for STEM majors interested in
pursuing an advanced degree. Activities will&lt;br/&gt;include the development
of GRE workshops and career development/mentoring activities at&lt;br/&gt;each
partner institution; and (3) a summer research academy where rising junior and
senior &lt;br/&gt;students will have the opportunity to work in a research
laboratory at one of the five&lt;br/&gt;doctoral-granting institutions in the
alliance. Students will receive stipend support, &lt;br/&gt;mentoring and
training. The UT-System LSAMP has permanently changing the nature
of&lt;br/&gt;SMET higher education in Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the
UT-System LSAMP, the participating universities have raised the
&lt;br/&gt;visibility and increased the awareness of the chancellor, presidents
and chief academic &lt;br/&gt;officers about SMET program outcomes and the
status of under-represented minority&lt;br/&gt;students. Providing leadership to
the UT-System Alliance for Minority Participation will &lt;br/&gt;be a Governing
Board, chaired by Ed Sharpe, Executive Vice Chancellor of The University
&lt;br/&gt;of Texas System, which includes presidents, vice-presidents, or
provostsof UT-System &lt;br/&gt;member institutions and participating community
colleges as well as a selected number &lt;br/&gt;of experts from industry and
the national R&amp;D community. Meeting annually, the Governing&lt;br/&gt;Board
will continue to provide general oversight of the UT-System AMP. The
Academic&lt;br/&gt;Leadership Council (ALC), composed of deans, chairs and
distinguished faculty are involved&lt;br/&gt;in the implementation of AMP
activities at their institution. The ALC meets twice &lt;br/&gt;