* 0217508
* Population Science and the Making of China's One-Child-Per-Couple Policy, 1975-2000
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Susan Greenhalgh, University of California-Irvine
* Fixed Amount Award
* Ronald Rainger
* 07/31/2004
* USD 110,000.00

Proposal Abstract&lt;br/&gt;SES 0217508&lt;br/&gt;Population Science and the
Making of China's One-Child-Per-Couple Policy, 1975-2000&lt;br/&gt;Susan
Greenhalgh, University of California-Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of modern science and technology has played a crucial part in
China's post-Mao economic and global ascent. Important political dimensions of
Chinese science have been studied, but key issues in science studies--in
particular, how scientific knowledge is created, and how science shapes public
policy and society--remain largely unexplored in the Chinese context. China's
controversial one-child-per-couple policy, introduced in 1979-80, provides a
striking case of the impact of science on policy and society. In the U.S., both
scholarly and popular thinking associates the policy with China's (repressive)
politics, not its (weak) science. Yet interviews with Chinese insiders suggest
that, behind the scenes, Chinese population scientists, borrowing heavily from
western science (especially the limits- to- growth models of the 1970s), played
a critical role in the making (and later unmaking) of the one-child policy.
Today that role remains shrouded in mystery. This project seeks to open the
black box, "Chinese population science" to see how its central notions of
"population crisis" and the one-child policy as "the only solution" were
constructed, how they evolved over 25 years, and how they produced their
extraordinary political and social effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taking
seriously the "science" in the social sciences, the project draws on science
studies, histories of numbers, and governmentality studies to develop a science
studies approach to population science (or demography) and its role in
population governance. The approach seeks to problematize the term "population"
by showing how "population" is actively constituted as a domain of science and
governance, and how "population problems" such as "crises" and their "optimal
policy solutions" are humanly constructed by historically situated actors
operating in highly consequential political and cultural contexts. This project
is the first to theorize the science of population and its connections to
population governance in a non-Western context. The China work should underscore
the unappreciated power of population science and make clear the stakes involved
in how we view the human sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves
interviewing influential Chinese scientists and policymakers (as well as
selected foreign scholars and practitioners); visiting policy pilot projects;
and conducting archival research on the history of population science- and
policy-making. During ten years as anthropologist and policy analyst at the
Population Council , a nonprofit research organization, the PI built up a large
personal network in Chinese demographic and policymaking circles, acquired an
extensive specialist vocabulary, and gained a reputation as a "friend of China."
This familiarity with China's population field helps ease problems of access to
interviewees and material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;