* 0217816
* GOALI:  A Strickly Thermal Route to Thin Film Nanotemplates Via Functionalized Block-Random Copolymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Craig Hawker, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 08/31/2005
* USD 329,762.00

Block copolymers, comprised of two chemically distinct polymer chains linked
together at one end, microphase separate into arrays of ordered nanoscopic
features that, in thin films, can be used as scaffolds and templates for the
fabrication of sub-micron devices and structures. By developing novel
chemistries to synthesize block copolymers, where one of the blocks can be
thermally crosslinked and the second block can be decomposed at higher
temperatures, the fabrication of templates and scaffolds can be dramatically
simplified, opening up new avenues in the manufacture and utilization of
nanostructures. It is the intent of this work to develop new block copolymers
and fabrication strategies, which will meet the demands of this "one-step"
processing goal. In addition, routes will be investigated for the
fuctionalization of these nanostructures and to enhance the lateral ordering of
thin films of the block copolymers so that each element can be quantitatively
described in terms of its lateral position.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated
collaboration between academic and industrial institutions described in this
proposal has the potential to provide a unique opportunity for enhancing the
career development of students and postdoctoral fellows. Close interaction with
industry will also help guide the academic research towards real-world goals,
while at the same time facilitating technology transfer to industry. By
performing cross-disciplinary research at both institutions, the students in
this program will also develop fundamental skills in the synthesis,
characterization and physics of polymeric materials and in the generation of
well-defined nanoscopic structures. As a consequence, they will be better
prepared for a multi-disciplinary industrial or academic career in materials
science. The total educational experience gained by performing research at these
two premier institutions will therefore far exceed that possible in a single
academic environment. The utilization of x-ray and neutron facilities at
national laboratories will further enhance the development of the researchers,
exposing them to a third different research setting while at the same time
integrating the program into a much larger national and international endeavor.
The research environments of each of these institutions have strong, well-
recognized efforts in the development of a diverse workforce and this program
will draw on both efforts to promote the education and training of female and
under-represented minority students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;