* 0217498
* AAAS History and Archives Web Site Project
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Amy Crumpton, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 12/31/2005
* USD 80,334.00

Project Abstract SES 02-17498 AAAS History and Archives Web Site Project Amy
Crumpton American Association for the Advancement of Science

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) intends
eighteen-month project to enhance the original content and technical development
of its AAAS History and Archives Web site (http://archives.aaas.org). The intent
is to: 1) expand the complexity of searchable historical information on the
site, 2) evaluate and further develop the usefulness of the database and
applications that provide access to this information, and 3) publish the design
code for the database and applications as an open source tool for use by other
archives, manuscript collections, and libraries.

The AAAS History and Archives site uses a content management system that
generates pages by selecting information from a relational database containing
data on people, meetings, documents, publications, awards, and archives
collections related to the Association's history. Users have access to this
information through links set between related elements in the database or
through open queries. The site has several purposes: 1) an organizational
management strategy for the AAAS archivist, 2) an online institutional memory
for AAAS staff and membership, and 3) a research tool for scholars interested in
the history of a key organization in American science or in broader issues
related to the history of science for which the AAAS Archives might have
pertinent information. This project is intended specifically to evaluate,
refine, document, and publish the software code used for the project as a
contribution to efforts to make database building tools accessible to archives,
libraries, and other institutions. Interrelated with this task is the AAAS plan
to increase the quality content of the database. The database lacks information
on the scope and tenure of AAAS committees and programs, group data that provide
context for the emergence of Association meetings, publications and resolutions.
The database also lacks online finding aids for the collections. Gathering and
editing this information will take place in conjunction with developments and
refinements to our software code to ensure that new information connects well
with other aspects of the database.

The AAAS History and Archives Web site is an important mechanism to publicize
the richness of the AAAS archives and the relevance of the Association's history
to the development of science over the past 153 years. By enhancing the site's
searchable content we will increase the breadth and usefulness of this research
tool for scholars, AAAS staff and members, and the interested public. By
publishing the software code for our system, we will make a content management
tool available without charge to repositories with limited resources. Our
proposal complements the interests of the NSF STS program to collect, preserve,
and make accessible primary resources on the history of science and technology.
It also complements efforts by the NSF National Digital Library Program to
develop electronic infrastructure for archival and library resources on science,
engineering, and mathematics via the World Wide Web.