* 0217939
* Pulsed Thermal Excitation of Self-Assembled Nanotemplates for Manufacturing Dimensionally Controlled Nanostructured Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Pritish Mukherjee, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 378,973.00

The physical, chemical and biological properties of matter undergo transitions
over critical length scales in the range of 1-50 nanometers, leading to a
diversity of new functionality. The investigation of fundamentally new phenomena
is coupled with commercial interest in the development of devices based on
nanostructured materials. This research project will investigate a novel
technique for the controlled synthesis of mono-disperse, nanograined materials.
Chemical and physical processing of materials on the nanoscale will be combined
for the growth of coatings with columnar nanocrystalline grains of uniform size
and distribution, which will be tuned on the nanometer scale. The formation of
ordered, mono-disperse, dimensionally-controlled nanotemplates by chemical self-
assembly will be followed by selective pulsed laser heating of the nanotemplates
in synchronization with a pulsed dual-laser ablation growth process. This
technique will be extended to commercially viable large-area deposition by
substituting a pulsed, hollow-cathode plasma deposition process in lieu of the
dual-laser ablation process. Our prior discoveries in pulsed laser ablation and
plasma deposition will provide the basis for the growth processes. Au and TiO2
nanoparticles will be used as the template material while the hard coatings will
be made using TiN and SiC, as representative examples. Morphological, structural
and mechanical properties of the nanostructured material will be investigated
for varying nanograin size and separation. The mechanical functionality of the
nanograined coatings will be assessed by studying film properties such as
hardness, ductility and wear resistance, yielding fundamental insight into the
correlation of elastic properties with the nanocrystalline grain dimensions.
Such studies have not been possible in the past because of poly-dispersity in
grain sizes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will involve the hands-on
training of graduate and undergraduate students in the exciting area of
nanomanufacturing that is of national importance, and lead to curricular
enhancements at both the graduate and undergraduate level. Pre-college outreach
through annual summer workshops for high school teachers and research
opportunities for high school students, particularly women and minorities, will
permit the early introduction of suitable aspects of this emerging area to
promote future careers in nanomanufacturing. If successful, the impact of the
research project will be the development of a new hybrid manufacturing process
combining chemical and physical processing on the nanoscale with nano-micro-meso
scale integration. Potential applications include not only the investigation of
new physical phenomena at the nanometer scale but also a manufacturing process
with changes in functionality leading to improvements in mechanical properties
of hard coatings. &lt;br/&gt;