* 0217466
* Causes and Consequences of Children's Focused Interests on Conceptual Domains Related to Science
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Joyce Alexander, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 09/30/2004
* USD 73,321.00

For most children, the preschool and elementary school years are rife with
opportunities to cultivate a wide variety of interests that set the stage for
later learning. Some young children develop intense, focused interests on narrow
topics such as dinosaurs or trains and doggedly pursue their parents and
teachers to provide them with books, videotapes, and toys that will help to
increase their knowledge in these areas. While developmental psychologists have
long been interested in such children from the standpoint of examining the
impact of heightened knowledge on children's processing of information, few
researchers have attempted to answer the more difficult question of why some
children develop narrow interests that could potentially lead to childhood
expertise in the first place. This research entails the continuation of an
ongoing prospective longitudinal analysis of the factors that contribute to the
development of narrow interests in a sample of 215 preschoolers. A preliminary
model of focused interest development has been constructed based on data
collected through laboratory visits, bimonthly contacts with parents, and home
visits. One consequence of focused interests, the early acquisition of childhood
expertise, has been examined through a detailed analysis of the knowledge
acquisition and strategy use of 20 children with very high levels of interest in
dinosaurs. This research will follow children throughout the transition to
elementary school and continue detailed analyses of the acquisition of expertise
on dinosaurs. The work will consider the impact of the transition to school on
the expansion of focused interests, in addition to the impact of developing
metacognitive awareness on children's strategy use and the transfer of expertise
to related areas of interest. This, this research will help to provide a link
between research on intrinsic motivation and interest and research on the
cognitive implications of childhood expertise. A second objective of this
research is to investigate the effects of preschool interests related to science
on subsequent science learning. During the first two years of the study, the
majority of children with focused interests on topics that entailed concept
learning concentrated their interests in domains related to science (e.g.,
insects, dinosaurs, horses). Most other children had considerable opportunities
for science learning through books, toys, and family activities. Given the
availability of extremely detailed information on the play habits and behaviors
of all of the children in the sample, combined with psychometric data collected
through yearly visits to the laboratory, this research is uniquely situated to
investigate the impact of preschool play interests related to science (i.e.,
emergent science literacy) on children's achievement motivation and success
throughout the transition to formal science instruction in elementary school.
Due to the importance of science for the advancement of technology and global
economic competitiveness, it is essential that the range of factors that
contribute to children's scientific competence, particularly through the
preschool and elementary school years, be assessed. These studies will support
such an analysis and provide answers to important developmental questions that
might not emerge in cross-sectional studies.