* 0217290
* Life-Cycle Cost Model Simulator for Decision Making in Bridge Network Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Dan Frangopol, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/2006
* USD 196,510.00

Future continued economic growth of the United States is linked to the
reliability and sustainability of our civil infrastructure systems, such as
highways and bridges. It is widely recognized that optimal resource use in
bridge infrastructure management should be based on integrating structural
reliability, evaluated from a probabilistic perspective, and life-cycle cost. In
the United States, transportation officials consider life-cycle cost and
reliability analysis for bridges to be the most advanced techniques for
assisting with investment decisions. In so doing, they attempt to determine and
implement the best possible strategy for maintaining an adequate level of bridge
reliability at the lowest possible life-cycle cost. The research delves into to
rationally distribute limited available resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
objective of the research is to develop a model-based simulator to optimize
management decisions for bridge networks based on simulated time-dependent
performance and life-cycle cost. This innovative model will integrate
computational sciences, bridge network modeling, and reliability technologies
for simulating and visualizing optimal network-level bridge maintenance planning
and management processes based on lifetime reliability and life-cycle cost. The
solution is based on characterizing abrupt discontinuities, including phenomena
such as failure of a bridge in the network and large-scale performance
simulations of bridge networks. The approach will also entail representation of
uncertainties propagating through the network during the service life of each
bridge. By simulating the time-dependent performance of the bridge network, new
data will be exploited to update the network performance as well as to auto-
adapt. Finally, to facilitate real-time cost-effective decision-making in the
bridge management process performance visualization techniques will be developed
for each individual bridge in the network, the overall performance of the
network, and the cost-benefit of each maintenance strategy. A database of about
three dozen bridges located in highway networks in Colorado will be used to
demonstrate the applicability and efficiency of the methodology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research represents an important step in creating the
basis of a new generation of bridge management systems where optimal maintenance
decisions based on life-cycle cost are made at the network-level while
explicitly taking into account the propagation of uncertainties during the
entire service life of individual bridges in network. In this manner, the multi-
billion dollar investment in the maintenance of bridge infrastructure in the US
will be optimized. The impact of the optimization on improving the quality and
functionality of the nation's highway bridges could be enormous. Finally, life-
cycle cost modeling and simulation results will be integrated into engineering
education at both undergraduate and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;