* 0217651
* Design &amp; Analysis of Microarray Gene Expression Studies in Plants: Toward Sound Statistical Procedures
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Stephen Barnes, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2007
* USD 2,298,924.00

Microarrays are a powerful new technology offering plant biologists the
opportunity the measure the&lt;br/&gt;expression of thousands of genes
simultaneously. This potentially allows plant biologists to make major
leaps&lt;br/&gt;forward by increasing the number of factors they can examine and
offering the opportunity to study the&lt;br/&gt;complex relations and
physiological coordination among entire genomes. For this technology to achieve
its&lt;br/&gt;potential, a richer understanding of the statistical properties of
the data produced and statistically sound&lt;br/&gt;methods for analyzing those
data must be developed and made available. Unfortunately, many
statistical&lt;br/&gt;procedures currently used in microarray research do not
have a sound statistical foundation.&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute
novel statistical techniques to the microarray field that are, in all cases,
rigorously validated by either mathematical proofs or computer simulations.
Methods will be developed in three areas:&lt;br/&gt;Measurement &amp;
Estimation, Design, &amp; Inference. Methods will be tested on real and
simulated data. Software&lt;br/&gt;for all methods developed will be publicly
available. A plan to educate and inform students, plant biologists&lt;br/&gt;and
statisticians about the methods will be implemented including a short course
held at a National plant&lt;br/&gt;biology meeting in year 4. The investigative
team includes a cadre of investigators with track records
in&lt;br/&gt;organizing large collaborative efforts, developing novel
statistical techniques, and disseminating methods&lt;br/&gt;through educational
activities and quality software. The investigative team is complemented by a
blue-ribbon&lt;br/&gt;panel Advisory Committee with expertise in plant biology,
microarrays, and computer science.&lt;br/&gt;Historically, plants of economic
importance (e.g., maize, soy, wheat, pine) have been critical to our country's
prosperity and growth. Today, America's strength in supplying food of high
nutritional value for human and livestock consumption, cash crops for sale and
export, and plant materials for construction remains critical.&lt;br/&gt;Indeed,
as the world population grows, the ability to produce plants for nutrition and
construction materials&lt;br/&gt;with tightening resources in a broadening range
of environments will be essential. Given their potential to&lt;br/&gt;rapidly
advance understanding of basic plant biology, microarrays can enhance the
ability to produce plants&lt;br/&gt;with increased efficiency and enhanced
characteristics in the greatest range of environments.
Developing&lt;br/&gt;valid techniques and facilitating use via quality software
and systematic dissemination and educational&lt;br/&gt;activities as will be
done here can have greatly amplified impact by providing tools of use to the
more than&lt;br/&gt;100 other NSF-funded microarray grants and the vast ongoing
microarray research world-wide.