* 0217144
* RES: Bringing Young Girls Into Science With Books And Inquiry
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Nancy Brickhouse, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2007
* USD 333,585.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the gendered nature of learning
science in the elementary grades.&lt;br/&gt;Standards-based science instruction
largely consists of students engaging in first-hand&lt;br/&gt;investigation of
scientific phenomena. This is in contrast to traditional science
&lt;br/&gt;instruction that relies heavily on textbooks. The justification for
investigation-based &lt;br/&gt;instructional design has typically been that the
authority for scientific belief ought to&lt;br/&gt;reside in the actions of
children rather than the authority of text. However, this &lt;br/&gt;unfortunate
dichotomy between investigation and text undermines the potential uses
&lt;br/&gt;of both.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Girls are typically strong readers- an
attribute that ought to make them strong in science.&lt;br/&gt;After all, at
some point they must be able to read scientific text to excel in science
classes.&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, research on text preferences shows that
although girls are strong readers, &lt;br/&gt;they prefer to read fiction rather
than nonfiction. The primary objective of the project is &lt;br/&gt;to learn how
science-related text embedded in inquiry science instruction can be used to
&lt;br/&gt;engage girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first year of this three year
study willbe spent in four third grade&lt;br/&gt;classrooms to observe how
science-related texts are used. This will include documentation of text
experiences created by teachers and created by girls in encounters with text
supplemental to regular &lt;br/&gt;instruction (e.g., library visits, classroom-
reading centers, books from home). This will be&lt;br/&gt;supplemented by
classroom observations and interviews with girls, teachers, librarians
&lt;br/&gt;and parents to collect additional data on the use of and interest in
science books.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second year of the project will consist
of design experiments in the classrooms&lt;br/&gt;during which the teachers and
researchers work together to analyze classroom activities &lt;br/&gt;and design
instruction in cycles that allow research and teaching practice to influence
&lt;br/&gt;one another. Data from the first year will be used to better
understand how girls may &lt;br/&gt;engage with science text and design
instruction to maximize girls interest in science&lt;br/&gt;and learning from
science inquiry instruction that includes the use of
text.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;1.
What role does text play in girls classroom science experiences?&lt;br/&gt;2.
How do teachers view the role of text in girls' learning of
science?&lt;br/&gt;3. What texts are present in girls' homes and how are they
used?&lt;br/&gt;4. What science texts do girls prefer when exposed to a large
range of text genres and&lt;br/&gt;uses?&lt;br/&gt;5. How do girls uses of text
enable and/or constrain their engagement and development&lt;br/&gt;of scientific
ideas?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final year will be spent analyzing results of
the design experiment and conducting &lt;br/&gt;cross-year analyses, preparing
research papers for submission to science and literacy&lt;br/&gt;education
journals, and developing a web-based curriculum unit for use in
teacher&lt;br/&gt;education programs, including our own NSF-sponsored science
teacher education reform &lt;br/&gt;effort.