* 0218386
* CRCNS: Dynamics and Plasticity of a Neuromechanical System
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,10/31/2006
* Michael Branicky, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Paul Malchow
* 10/31/2006
* USD 800,000.00

Some small networks of neurons are remarkable for their ability to execute
multiple functions. It has been a challenge to understand what the rules are for
integrating feedback into features such as phase relationships among the firing
patterns of active neurons, and how a small network can 'switch' from one
characteristic behavior to another. Although research is clarifying the cellular
and molecular mechanisms of learning, it has been more difficult to understand
how changes in the properties of individual neurons change the activity of a
whole neural circuit, and in turn alter an animal's overall behavior. This
project is a collaboration using computational, theoretical and experimental
approaches to analyze the feeding behavior of a marine mollusk, the sea hare
Aplysia. This animal ingests food with rhythmic rasping and sucking motions of a
jawless buccal mass, run by a network of about 130 motor neurons and
interneurons; if potential food is sensed by its physical properties as
inedible, the pattern of muscle activity changes from ingestion to food
rejection. The overall goal is to determine how small changes in the properties
of individual nerve cells create the large changes in feeding behavior that are
observed after learning. Specific Aim 1 is to construct a kinetic mathematical
model of the buccal mass (finite-element method), its neural control
(continuous-time recurrent neural network (CTRNN), with Hodgkin-Huxley models
for motor and sensory neurons), and inedible food, and to conduct experimental
studies to improve the understanding of each of these components of the model.
The focus of this modeling is to reproduce the changes in motor pattern observed
during repeated encounters with inedible food. Specific Aim 2 is to develop a
numerically optimal controller for the new kinetic model, and use it to predict
the effects of small changes in timing, phasing and intensity of neural input on
the behavior generated by the buccal mass. The focus here is on how the
biomechanics of the periphery influences the design properties of the neural
controller. The models developed in Specific Aims 1 and 2 will be used to
analyze the contributions of individual neurons to the shifting coalitions that
stabilize the rhythmic behavior, and to predict the importance of local changes
in synaptic strengths or intrinsic properties to the overall dynamics of the
neural circuit both in isolation and when it is connected to the biomechanical
model. Under Specific Aim 3, experimental studies will be designed to test these
predictions from simulation studies. These experimental studies will record
neural activity in intact animals as they learn that food is inedible, and in
reduced preparations (that show feeding-like movements) after perturbations of
the activity of specific nerve cells.

This work will have an impact beyond computational neuroscience and behavioral
neuroscience, to invertebrate physiology, engineering, robotics and control
systems. First, it is likely to generate principles for understanding the
effects of localized changes in neural activity on an animal's overall behavior.
Second, it may suggest design principles for devices that can persistently
pursue a specific goal despite distracting inputs, and at the same time be
remarkably flexible and change behavior if an appropriate stimulus occurs in the
correct context. . Third, these principles are likely to serve as the basis for
novel biologically-inspired robotic and control devices. In addition, students
and collaborators will be involved together in cross-disciplinary approaches and
techniques that will enhance training for the next generation of scientists.