* 0218837
* Managing Portfolios of Projects Under Uncertainty with Application to Construction Activities
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Mark Turnquist, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward John Jaselskis
* 09/30/2006
* USD 360,700.00

Projects are often undertaken in an environment of considerable uncertainty.
Uncertainty may be reflected in the duration and outcomes of specific tasks, as
well as in the effectiveness of resources applied to them. Project and program
managers must decide, in these uncertain conditions, how to allocate and manage
scarce resources across many projects that have competing needs. The
construction industry is one in which this need is particularly acute. Today,
project planning and scheduling is done using algorithms that either ignore the
resource constraints and consider uncertainty in task duration, or ignore the
uncertainty in task duration and focus on resource-constrained
scheduling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on developing new
computationally tractable modeling tools for allocating resources under
uncertainty in realistic multi-project planning and scheduling environments. A
key aspect of the mathematical approach we are using is that it provides an
explicit mechanism to evaluate the tradeoff between the planned schedule for a
project (or portfolio of projects) and the level of risk that the schedule will
become infeasible (as a result of uncertainties in the task durations and
outcomes). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has obvious application to
construction projects, as well as to many other industrial, commercial and
public sector applications. Our approach will create significant new tools for
use by project and program managers in many types of undertakings. Furthermore,
since the need to work in the presence of uncertainty is a critical element of
engineering practice, it is important to provide students with an exposure to
project management under uncertainty. To this end, we will develop cases studies
and a master of engineering project based on the research described in this
proposal. Those case studies and project will support education in three
programs: undergraduate civil engineering, and the Master of Engineering
programs in engineering management and systems
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;