* 0218668
* Development of Force-Frequency Shifting for Low Frequency Structural Vibration Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Martin Trethewey, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2006
* USD 220,000.00

Research Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:
0218668&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: PA St U University Park&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM:
DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Trethewey, Martin
W.&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Development of Force-Frequency Shifting for Low Frequency
Structural Vibration Testing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental vibration testing
of civil and architectural systems is useful for addressing a number of issues
including; assessment of structural health (degradation of bridges), and
reduction of troublesome oscillatory motion in buildings for sensitive
installations such as medical MRIs in hospitals and electron microscopes. The
testing of these systems requires that a high amplitude force excitation be
applied at very low frequencies (0.1 - 10 Hz), which is inherently very
difficult to accomplish. The research program is focused on developing a new
technique, referred to as Force Frequency Shifting (FFS), to provide such an
excitation. The FFS technique is based on the application of a high amplitude,
high frequency force (at frequency fz) to a structure in a spatially time
variant fashion (at frequency fx). The nonlinear dynamic behavior of the system
produces an excitation at a sum and difference (fz+fx, and fz-fx) of the force
and spatial motion frequencies. Of particular interest for low frequency
vibration testing, is the difference frequency component (fz-fx). It is the
innate ability of the FFS technique to create this low frequency component that
is the focus of the project. The research will develop an FFS exciter with a
computer-controlled array of variable stiffness actuators. This development will
increase the low frequency force performance and control making the FFS suitable
for vibration testing of the targeted systems. &lt;br/&gt;