* 0218749
* ITR -- Polar Satellite Remote Sensing: Toward Full On-Line Access and Education
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Dan Lubin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Falkner
* 08/31/2007
* USD 499,998.00

This project was funded under the Information Technology Research (ITR) program,
which enables research and education in multidisciplinary areas, focusing on
emerging opportunities at the interfaces between information technology and
other disciplines. The program seeks innovative projects in research and
education that elucidate, expand and exploit information technology.
&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic and Antarctic Research Center (AARC) at the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography has been an important source of polar satellite
remote sensing data and related services. It receives direct-broadcast telemetry
from NSF-supported satellite tracking facilities at McMurdo and Palmer Stations
in Antarctica, and from the U.S. Coast Guard icebreakers when these ships are
operating at high latitudes. The AARC provides specialized data distribution and
instruction to polar researchers and expedition planners, including real time
data access, near-real time sea ice mapping for research cruise support,
customized data processing in support of research projects, and in-house
training in the use of satellite remote sensing data over the polar regions. The
AARC, as a "regional" data center providing customized support for polar
researchers, has a threefold operating mandate: (1) to provide satellite data in
a timely manner at no cost to the user, (2) to provide training that introduces
a great many polar researchers from all disciplines in the use of remote sensing
data, and (3) to develop low-cost ways to overcome the practical "barriers" to
satellite data access. &lt;br/&gt;This project will remove two remaining
significant barriers to satellite data access: a tape based archive, and a
manual system of retrieving requested images. First, a server system that
maintains the most recent year of satellite data on-line in three appropriate
formats (raw binary telemetry, HDF-EOS, and high resolution JPEG imagery), with
full internet access, will be developed. Most AARC users request data from the
preceding 12 months, so this is an appropriate subset of the archive with which
to begin. The architecture will be scalable to eventually allow on-line access
to the entire archive. Second, a comprehensive on-line educational curriculum
will be developed that discusses all important aspects and applications of
remote sensing to polar research and expeditionary work. The goal is that a
researcher should be able to log onto the AARC's web site, learn in great detail
about the data, and then select and download the required data in a readily
usable format using an easily navigable search facility. This project involves
research into high level on-line access to remote sensing data for the
geophysical sciences, and can serve as a model for other institutions or
collaborative programs that need to make satellite remote sensing data available
to a broader research or educational community.&lt;br/&gt;