* 0218309
* Impact Analysis and Development of New Protection Schemes for Distributed Generation in Distribution Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2007
* Mehrdad Ehsani, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 03/31/2007
* USD 154,928.00

Distribution systems are most commonly radial type and composed of overhead and
underground lines. During the past decade, there has been increasingly more
interest in utilizing distributed generators (DGs) in distribution systems to
offer the best long-term solution to reliability, price and pollution issues for
power utilities. Distributed generators provide a source of active electric
power, and are directly connected to the distribution network or to the network
on the customer side of the meter.&lt;br/&gt;Protection for distribution systems
aims to minimize the duration of a fault and the number of customers affected by
the fault. This entails the selection and coordination of appropriate protective
devices. Presently, protection schemes for radial type distribution feeders are
developed assuming there are no generation sources on the distribution system.
Hence the protection schemes must be adapted for the new and different
characteristics that the integration of DGs will bring to distribution feeder
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to perform studies of load and fault
currents by developing new load flow and short circuit analysis methods for
radial distribution feeders with DGs. Also the PIs propose to adapt the
coordination and overcurrent relays methodology (directional and non-
directional) for radial distribution feeder circuits when DGs are energized or
not energized. The distributed generators that will be studied include AC
generators (induction and synchronous) and inverter-connected generators
(photovoltaic modules, fuel cells, etc.)&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will include one
graduate student and three undergraduate researchers on the research project.
Also the results will be integrated into two graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;