* 0218166
* Potato Functional Genomics: Aplication to Analysis of Growth, Development, Metabolism and Responses to Biotic and Abiotic Stress
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Barbara Baker, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2008
* USD 8,368,574.00



Award Abstract As the fourth most important contributor to human calorie
consumption, the potato bears an enormous influence worldwide. Its economic
significance is evidenced by the large output percentage of potato by the
developing world. Thus, the global influence and impact of potato makes it
extremely important and relevant to plant biology and genome research. No other
crop system currently being subjected to intensive genomic research possesses
such a high degree of real-world applicability juxtaposed with biological
uniqueness. This project is focused on furthering the understanding of important
features of potato biology: tuber development, disease resistance,
heterozygosity, and polyploidy. As potato is highly related to other important
Solanaceae species such as tomato, we will incorporate other Solanaceae species
into our studies such that comparative analyses can be performed and that we can
leverage our potato-based resources for maximal gain. This project will provide
a comprehensive set of resources for genome and transcriptome profiling of
disease resistance responses and key developmental traits and pathways. These
comprehensive resources include: targeted genome sequence analysis of potato and
other Solanaceae genomic regions where numerous resistance (R) genes and general
resistance traits have been identified; an evolutionary resource for resistance
traits including models and bioinformatic tools for prediction and functional
analysis of durable candidate resistance genes. A transcriptome resource will be
generated by microarray analysis of Solanaceae development, and response to
abiotic and biotic stress. We will extend the use of these arrays outside the
project by soliciting proposals focused on additional physiological conditions
from the Solanaceae community. All data will be made public in a rapid fashion
to allow the entire Solanaceae community access to the data. This database will
provide the first comprehensive resource for gene expression patterns in the
Solanaceae family. We will extend our knowledge of plant genomics to the
community through an outreach program that will include a training program for
high school and college students and instructors in plant genomics including
bioinformatics and data mining for marker development for tracing the origin of
Native American potato varieties and for studies on potato evolution and
breeding for crop improvement. Solanacae gardens and associated public
educational programs on plant genetic diversity, plant breeding and the impact
of plant genome research on society. We will also have Each of these components,
in conjunction with the overarching project objectives, will lead to a
comprehensive understanding and working knowledge of potato, one of the most
important dicot foods in the world.

Deliverables:

Public Solanaceae dataset of annotated R gene region sequence, R genes and R
gene candidates (SOLAR) Conatcts: Baker, Buell, Brown, Jahn, Jiang, May,
Bradeen, Helgeson, Austin-Phillips

Public predictive bioinformatic tools to identify candidate resistance traits
for functional testing of resistance genes Contact: May

Public functional genomic Solanaceae resource, Solanaceae Gene Expression
Database, of expression profiles Contacts: Buell, Baker, Jiang

Gene expression profiling of Solanaceae through external collaborations with
the plant community Contact: Buell

Functional identification of genes operating in pathogen defense pathways using
silencing Contact: Baker

Genomics training program for high school and college students. Community
Solanum gardens and public information on Solanum Contacts: Baker, Brown, Buell

Internet Addresses (Web or Email) for Project Information: 1. NSF Potato Genome
Project http://www.bakerlab.usda.gov/NSFPotatoGenome/ 2. TIGR: NSF Potato
Functional Genomics http://www.tigr.org/tdb/potato/ 3. Solanaceae Genome Network
http://soldb.cit.cornell.edu/index.html

