* 0218015
* US-Cameroon Cooperative Research:  Pade Approximants and the Physics of Waves
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2002,10/31/2002
* Prabasaj Paul, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 10/31/2002
* USD 27,000.00

0218015&lt;br/&gt;Paul&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a
two-year collaborative research project between Professor Prabasaj Paul, with
the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Colgate University, and Professor
Daniel Nkemzi, with the Department of Physics at the University of Buea, in
Cameroon. They will investigate the application of Pade approximants to the
problems of scattering of electromagnetic waves, and of photonic materials with
maximal bandgaps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of electromagnetic wave
scattering from rough surfaces is important to many branches of physics and
mathematics. Using some powerful mathematical techniques, the multipoint Pade
approximants, the two researchers will investigate the scattering of waves off
uneven surfaces with very large roughness parameters, as well as the
transmission of light through regions with a spatially varying refractive index.
The Pade approximants of the scattering matrix will preserve two important
properties, reciprocity and unitarity. The investigators expect their model to
yield better results than existing mathematical models that are based on a
classical perturbation series. The study combines Professor Paul's expertise in
condensed matter and quantum physics with Professor Nkemzi's knowledge of
applied mathematics, principally in wave propagation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results are expected to add new knowledge about wave scattering from rough
surfaces, and will have application to many areas of mathematics and
physics.&lt;br/&gt;