* 0218222
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Functionalized Acrylates with Tailored Properties and Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Lon Mathias, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/2006
* USD 70,000.00

0218222&lt;br/&gt;Mathias &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a cooperative project by Dr. Lon Mathias, Department of Polymer
Science, University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, Mississippi and Dr.
Duygu Avci, Chemistry Department, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey. They
plan to carry out an exchange of professors between the two universities for the
purpose of teaching classes, running short courses, an exchange of scientists,
graduate and undergraduate students for research purposes. They also plan to
establish the first international symposium on multifunctional acrylates
involving a workshop and proceedings containing comprehensive overviews of the
polymer chemistry, properties and applications of alpha-hydroxymethylacrylates
and derivatives (RHMA's). A novel aspect of the research in the area of
multifunctional acrylates, a group of compounds distinguished by their unique
cyclization and copolymerization properties, is the extensive use of
computational techniques for modeling the chemical reaction kinetics of the
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: In this project the collaborators plan to
combine their expertise in an important scientific research effort, and to
provide international experiences to U.S. graduate and undergraduate students.
Previous collaborations between the two teams focused on experimental design and
production. The combination of the proposed analytical and computational
research and experimental approaches will contribute significantly to the
advancement of new knowledge. New multimedia education material will be an
outcome of this collaboration, focused on both synthetic and computational
aspects of new monomer and polymer systems. These will build on courses taught
or to be taught at University of Southern Mississippi and Bogazici by the
collaborators. The international collaborations involving students is an
important feature. This project is supported by the Office of International
Science and Engineering and the Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;