* 0218100
* Doctoral Dissertation:  Negotiating Progress: The Construction of Systems of Value Around Digital Divide Interventions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Faye Ginsburg, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Priscilla Regan
* 07/31/2004
* USD 11,890.00

This dissertation research project explores the ways in which systems of value
are constructed within and around technology-based international development
"digital divide" projects, where discourses and traditions of technology
innovation, nonprofit fundraising, commercial technology, and international
development intersect. A central hypothesis is that IT-oriented nonprofits will
face a significant challenge as they reconcile these intersections, such as that
between nonprofit principles (based on altruism and a concern about the
conditions of disparity) and technoromantic ones (based on inevitable progress,
often facilitated by commercial capital). The ways in which these contradictions
are worked out within individual organizations will reflect the ways in which
participants selectively identify with nonprofit, business, and technology
traditions as well as the specific generational and historical experiences of
the participants. Are these new systems of value fundamentally different from
those of earlier nonprofit projects, and if so, can they be understood as
expressing an "elective affinity" between new formations of capital and
technoromantic ideals? (Gerth and Mills 1946, Weber 1958) What is it about
certain values that encourages actors to perceive them as worthy of adoption?
The researcher will examine the ways in which individuals within these groups
understand their work and participation in relation to broader projects of
development, technology innovation, and global information infrastructures.
Three nonprofit groups in Massachusetts have been selected for a multi-sited
study; each represents a particular attitude towards the intersection of the
fields of development and technology. Geekcorps, which sends techie volunteers
to assignments in Ghana, is a nonprofit run in the spirit of a commercial
startup. KITE accepts computer donations and then reconfigures them with open
source software and redistributes them to nonprofits in Africa, bridging the
international nonprofit community and the Open Source movement. ThinkCycle is a
voluntary association of students at MIT working with nonprofits overseas to
design aninformation architecture that allows engineers to work collaboratively
with NGOs in the design of development solutions; engineers turned nonprofit
development workers. In order to access both self-conscious and transparent
systems of value and meaning, research methods will include participant
observation, interviews, and textual and social network analyses. This study
will bring theories of social dramas and liminality to bear on the emergent
aspect of these organizations, and to the contestation of meanings that takes
place in the negotiation of values and categories. The researcher will apply
exchange theory to the analysis of the complex, layered web of giving and
receiving that takes place around nonprofit and development work, and theories
of value to make sense of the ways in which participants understand the value of
technology and of nonprofit work as means to further certain ideologies, and as
ends in themselves.