* 0218805
* Low-Cost Electrically and Mechanically Steerable Array Antennas for Internet-in-Sky Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Akira Ishimaru, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2004
* USD 91,946.00

0218805&lt;br/&gt;Kuga&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the economical and technical
problems with the current Iridium and GlobalStar and proposed Teledesic
satellite systems, it is expected that a high-speed satellite-based internet
will become practical in the near future. Iridium and GlobalStar do not have
sufficient bandwidth to accommodate high-speed transmission of data. It is
undeniable that the future anywhere-anytime high-speed internet access requires
low-earth-orbit K or Ka-band satellite systems similar to the one proposed by
Teledesic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the major problems with the proposed
Teledesic system is the cost of the ground station antenna and control system.
Unlike a geo-synchronous satellite, the low-orbit satellites move from horizon
to horizon in 10 to 20 minutes. The antenna must be able to keep track of one or
more satellite locations in order to obtain an uninterrupted connection. This is
usually performed using phased array or mechanically steerable antennas.
Unfortunately, the mechanically steerable antennas which use electro-mechanical
actuators are usually bulky and prone to mechanical failures. The electronic
phased array antennas are fast and no moving parts are involved, but they are
very expensive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Their objective is to develop a low-cost
steerable antenna using a novel phase shifter and electro-active polymer (EAP)
actuators. In order to achieve this objective, the PIs propose the following
four tasks.&lt;br/&gt;Task 1: Develop a low-cost phase shifter for a phased-
array antenna using EAP.&lt;br/&gt;Task 2: Design a practical, low-cost phased-
array antenna.&lt;br/&gt;Task 3: Develop a variable reflector surface antenna
with EAP actuators.&lt;br/&gt;Task 4: Develop reliable and practical EAP
materials and actuators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The phase shifter consists of a
tiny mechanically movable dielectric element on&lt;br/&gt;transmission lines. To
move the dielectric block, they will use a newly developed EAP actuator which
requires only 1-2V. An EAP actuator can also be used as a microwave switch to
create a controllable delay line. The whole unit can be integrated with the
patch antennas on a multi-layer PCB. The proposed antenna does not contain any
solid state microwave switches or electromechanical devices. It can be
fabricated inexpensively. They have already conducted the numerical simulations
and results were obtained for several TL configurations. Another application of
the EAP actuator is for a mechanically steerable antenna. A profile of a
flexible membrane or plates can be controlled accurately with an array of EAP
actuators. A desired radiation pattern can be quickly created by adjusting the
surface profile. There are many technical challenges to realize the EAP-based
antenna. To achieve their objective, they must develop reliable EAP materials
and actuators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs believe that the proposed low-cost
antenna will be one of the key components to realize the "Internet-in-the-Sky".
Although many aspects of this antenna have been tested and verified, they still
need to work on several details. An EAP actuator is still in an infant state. To
design the proposed antenna, they need a close collaboration between a material
scientist who can design the EAP actuator and electrical engineers who can
utilize the EAP actuator for the antenna applications.&lt;br/&gt;