* 0218406
* Medium Energy Ion Scattering Studies of Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Torgny Gustafsson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2006
* USD 360,000.00

This project addresses fundamental issues of structure, composition, growth and
reactivity on tech-nologically relevant thin films. The research explores film
and interface behavior of ultrathin oxides in the critical 1-10 nm thickness
range. Plans include growth and analysis of films grown on Si, Ge and SiC. The
primary technique employed is high-resolution medium energy ion scat-tering
(MEIS), enabling accurate determination of composition as a function of depth,
and, in some cases, precise structure determinations. The MEIS experiments will
be complemented with infrared absorption spectroscopy, scanning tunneling
microscopy, atomic force microscopy, and photoelectron spectroscopy. Some
aspects will be done in collaboration with industrial scientists at Bell Labs
and elsewhere. The project also addresses fundamental studies of ion-surface
inter-actions, specifically the effect of electronic excitation processes on ion
scattering spectra as the film thickness drops below one nanometer. The aim is
to provide fundamental understanding of high-resolution depth profiling of
surfaces and ultrathin films. This work will be done in close collaboration with
theorists. The broader technological impact of this work results from devel-
opment of a microscopic understanding of thin film growth and of new
experimental and theo-retical tools. A new level of conceptual understanding,
based on atomic concepts, is expected to emerge which will aid in the continued
development of electronics. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
fundamental research issues in areas of electronic materials science and
condensed matter physics having technological relevance. An important feature of
the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research
and education. The research program provides excellent opportunities for hands-
on experience in the use of sophisticated sci-entific equipment. The combined
resources, including experimental and theoretical methods, provide special
opportunities for education and training of post doctoral associates, graduate
and undergraduate students involved in highly interdisciplinary forefront
research. The direct and visually oriented nature of the information obtained
facilitates communication of the excitement of surface and materials science to
undergraduates as well as middle and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;