* 0218909
* ITR:   Collaborative Research: Computerized Decision Aid for Acute Care Nursing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Paul Fortier, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 09/30/2006
* USD 455,425.00

EIA-0218909&lt;br/&gt;Paul J. Fortier&lt;br/&gt;University of Massachusetts at
Dartmouth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: "Collaborative research: Computerized
Decision Aid for Acute Care Nursing"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project
addressed problems associated with building Decision Support Systems to serve
nursing. Most healthcare environments call upon nurse clinicians to make complex
decisions on a contiual basis. Automated decision support systems backed by
evidence-based knowledge and standardized guides, such as clinical algorithms,
are capable of supporting clinical nursing decisions. However, effective real-
time access is limited. This project addresses this problem by delivering
current clinical knowledge via an off-the-shelf handheld computer using wireless
access to a central server. Innovative data mining and knowledge discovery
algorithms, using a combination of case based and rule based learning with added
confidence measures, permit bi-directional inferencing based on individual
client data. This technology provides real-time decision support for the
multiple cases and sequential decisions characterzing present nursing practice.
Nurses are able to consider a full range of alternative explanations, determine
addtional data needs, find, isolate and examine patient case outliers for
additional diagnostic data or verify the appropriateness of a selected strategy.
A fully developed system may have the capacity to maintain a history of series
of decisions and outcomes thereby, overtime, improving the case base and rule
bases used for decision support. Outcomes of this real time decision support may
include timely health care, less biased decisions, and improved patient
outcomes.