* 0218966
* ITR: Ecometrics - New Directions for Multilevel Spatial Analysis in the Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Stephen Raudenbush, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2006
* USD 299,995.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Proposal 0218966&lt;br/&gt;New Directions for Multilevel
Spatial Analysis in the Social Sciences&lt;br/&gt;Stephen
Raudenbush&lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research has
long documented that risks and opportunities vary systematically over space and
time. Just as poverty, residential instability, and home ownership are
concentrated in certain sections of cities, so too are social disorder, crime,
and violence as well as infant mortality, low birth weight, and accidents. Rates
of crime and other outcomes surge and decline with time, and some neighborhoods
are more strongly affected by these changes than are other neighborhoods. To
examine how neighborhoods affect a variety of outcomes and how these effects
change over time, this study will develop a method of statistical analysis that
combines multilevel and spatial models. Four aims organize the proposed work: 1)
to incorporate a spatial auto-regressive process into the now-standard two-level
hierarchical linear model; 2) to elaborate this model to include repeated
measures on participants; 3) to incorporate repeated measures at the
neighborhood level; and 4) to exploit spatial dependence in order to improve the
reliability and validity of measures of neighborhood social process. Predictive
validity will be assessed using data from thc Project on Human Development in
Chicago Neighborhoods (PHDCN), which conducted a citywide neighborhood study in
1995 and will complete a replication of' this study in 2002. Methods will also
be illustrated with PHDCN data on 6000 young people growing up in those
neighborhoods between 1995 and 2002. Software to implement the proposed methods
will be tested through simulation studies before being distributed
publicly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multilevel aspect of the model expresses the
notion that urban space is divided into uniquely defined, more or less
contiguous, self-contained "neighborhoods," often bounded by railroad tracks,
major arteries, parks, or industrial districts. The spatial aspect of the model
reflects theory and empirical evidence suggesting that neighborhoods, while
somewhat distinct, are not independent. Rather, neighborhood social processes
"spill over" into surrounding neighborhoods. The model thus represents the view
that neighborhoods are socially meaningful units that are linked spatially.
Using the proposed methods, it will be possible to study not only how the social
composition and processes in each neighborhood are related to human development
but also how the composition and processes in surrounding neighborhoods affect
the development of persons within a given neighborhood.&lt;br/&gt;