* 0218022
* US-Africa Workshop:  Integrated Land Use Change in Southern Africa: Process Modeling, Impacts, and Implications for Sustained Development, Zomba, Malawi, July 2002
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2002,10/31/2003
* Paul Desanker, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 10/31/2003
* USD 33,000.00

0218022&lt;br/&gt;Desanker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports 16
participants (nine from the United States and seven from Africa) in a US-Africa
Workshop on "Integrated Land Use Change in Southern Africa: Process Modeling,
Impacts, and Implications for Sustained Development," scheduled for July 8-12,
2002, in Zomba, Malawi. The co-organizers are Professor Paul Desanker, with the
Department of Environmental Sciences at the University of Virginia, and
Professor Mzoma Ngulube, with the Faculty of Environmental Science at Mzuzu
University, Malawi. There will be a total of approximately 27 participants, who
will be drawn from academia and governmental organizations in the United States,
Malawi, Mozambique, Tanzania, South Africa, Lesotho, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. The
workshop will draw upon process studies of land cover-land use change (LCLUC) to
advance the discussion of how the emerging field of sustainability science can
inform and guide the sustained development of complex human-ecological systems.
The meeting is also expected to establish linkages between investigators in the
United States and Africa for the development of collaborative, interdisciplinary
research and education programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The way people use land is
fundamental to the livelihoods, political stability, and economies of many
countries, especially in Southern Africa where there is a heavy reliance on
land-based economic activities. And while the adverse impacts of land use are
well known, they have not yet been well quantified. Workshop participants will
focus on better understanding the processes, rates, and modeling of land use
change in Southern Africa, especially for the linked human-river basin-
ecological systems within the greater Zambezi River Basin and its components,
the Miombo biodiversity ecoregion, and Southern Africa in general. The meeting
will consist of plenary talks and small group discussions, and will also include
site visits to examine ongoing projects within the Lake Malawi and Lake Chilwa
basins. It is expected that the results of the workshop will lead to a state-of-
the art synthesis of land use change for the Zambezi region. More broadly, the
meeting's findings will inform the larger scientific community about integrating
fundamental, multidisciplinary research studies on LCLUC into sustained
development programs. This information will also be useful to policy makers and
resource managers. Results will be disseminated through professional journals
and meetings, and via a web site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project supports the
participation of five junior investigators from the United States, as well as a
postdoc and graduate student from Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of
International Science and Engineering, the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive
Sciences, and the Division of Environmental Biology jointly support this award.
&lt;br/&gt;