* 0218701
* Integrated Personnel Scheduling in the Service Industry
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Jonathan Bard, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Realff
* 12/31/2004
* USD 109,568.00

The principal goal of this project is to develop an integrated decision support
system that can be used by the service industry to better meet their long-term,
mid-range, and day-to-day staffing needs. At each of these levels, the
underlying problems will be modeled as large-scale integer programs and solved
with a combination of exact methods and heuristics. A significant portion of the
research is aimed at devising efficient solution algorithms. An associated
objective is to develop new decomposition techniques and bounding schemes.
Because many of the subproblems that arise at each of these levels have yet to
be addressed by the research community, it is likely that additional modeling
will be required to deal with qualitative issues, uncertainty, and the intricate
nature of the constraints that inform practical applications. The methodologies
developed will be implemented with an eye toward computational efficiency and
robustness in the face of uncertainty. Expected results include: (1) the
development of improved solution methods for personnel planning and scheduling
in the service industry; (2) a greater understanding of modeling issues with
respect to weekly tour generation and disruption management; (3) theoretical and
practical characterizations of the performance of related algorithms; and (4)
the design of an integrated decision support system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective personnel scheduling has become one of the
primary means by which service enterprises remain competitive. Unlike
manufacturing where standard shifts and days off are the rule, service
organizations operate up to 24 hours a day, 7 days a week and face widely
varying demand. Poor staff schedules can lead to an oversupply of workers with
too much idle time, or an undersupply with customer dissatisfaction and a
resultant loss of business. Stated alternatively, an important goal of this
project is to find robust schedules for a nonhomogeneous workforce. The general
problem faced by management is to meet daily staffing requirements at minimum
cost without violating labor agreements, company policies, and government
regulations. At the long-term planning level, consideration must be given to
issues that determine the size and composition of the permanent workforce. At
the weekly level, critical resources must be tracked and schedules updated to
meet changes in demand. Real-time control come into play at the day-to-day level
where absenteeism, equipment failures, and other disruptions call for online
rescheduling.