* 0218139
* Family Disruption, Family Response: Social Change, Family Organization, and Child Well-being in Southern Africa
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2005
* Susan Short, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 03/31/2005
* USD 90,667.00

This project is designed to improve scientific understanding of the connection
between family organization and child well-being. Surprisingly, despite the
well-established connection, we continue to know little about how and why the
organization and content of social ties shape child outcomes. This project uses
the significant variation in family organization created by family disruption in
Lesotho to elaborate mechanisms linking family organization and resource
transfers to children. Adopting a life course approach, the research team will
collect contextualized, child-centered data on living arrangements, social ties,
and resource transfers, and the reasons for their variation within and across
families. Methods will include the collection of life histories, as well as in-
depth interviews, case studies, and participant observation focused on two
lowland communities. Recent research with U.S. families has suggested that
biological relatedness may be important to the transfer of resources to
children. We assess the generalizability of this finding, and that of competing
explanations, by exploring their plausibility in Lesotho, an African setting
characterized by complex and varied living arrangements, where it has been
argued that extended kin provide a safety net for children. Lesotho is one of
four countries in the world where national adult HIV prevalence exceeds 30%. The
devastation created by this epidemic is further compounded by long-term poverty
and recent drought. A better understanding of the social processes that underlie
resource transfers to children promises to inform policies designed to promote
the welfare of children in Lesotho, and other countries in the midst of such
crises. More generally, this project will contribute to our understanding of the
factors that promote children=s resilience in times of family disruption, and in
so doing, further delineate the boundaries of the family institution as a social
welfare provider. This research is supported by NSF's Sociology program and
NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering.