* 0218129
* GOALI - The Effect of Changing to Pb Free Solders on Manufacturing Processes: Evolution of Solder Joint Microstructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Eric Cotts, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 08/31/2006
* USD 388,000.00

This GOALI project is a collaboration with Universal Instruments Corporation to
study how a transition to lead (Pb)-free solders will affect manufacturing
processes for electronic packaging. A comprehensive treatment of solder joint
reliability requires at least three major research efforts: (1) Development of a
fundamental understanding of solder joint microstructure (grain size/structure,
phase regions, intermetallics), including the ability to predict microstructure
at any given time during any given thermal history. (2) Development of
constitutive relations which quantify deformation properties as functions of
temperature, strain rate, and detailed microstructure. (3) Development of damage
functions that quantify the progression of damage for given temperature,
strain/stress (or integrated functions thereof such as ductility exhaustion) and
microstructure. In principle, after characterizing these relations, establishing
a predictive capability for the mechanical behavior and reliability of Pb free
solder joints is relatively straightforward, although extensive, mechanical
modeling is required. This capability would allow the prediction of accelerated
test results for specific solder based assemblies, as well as the interpretation
of experimental results and extrapolation to service conditions.

However, without the ability to predict the variation of important aspects of
the microstructure over the history of the joint, efforts 2 and 3 above become
at best semi-empirical and highly questionable for purposes of extrapolation.
Particular complications are the effects of the progress of damage and the
(often cyclic) effects of the thermal mismatch induced deformations. This
project addresses significant issues related to environmentally benign
manufacturing, with specific emphasis on manufacturing electronics. It is
expected that advancements in fundamental knowledge of material behavior and
processing of this material substitution will be made. There is direct
involvement of undergraduate and graduate students through both research and an
educational component, strengthen by the industrial collaboration.