* 0218245
* GOALI:  Nonlinear Control of an Electrostatically-Actuated Spatial Light Modulator
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Wijesuriya Dayawansa, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2006
* USD 587,000.00

0218245&lt;br/&gt;Berg&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project
described below is to dramatically improve the capabilities of a class of micro
electromechanical (MEMS) and micro optoelectromechanical (MOEMS) systems of
great promise in areas where miniaturization of optics and machines is
advantageous. Applications include emerging technologies such as holographic
data storage for genomic and security databases, wavelength division
multiplexing (WDM) and adaptive optics. The PI's propose to demonstrate, using
an interesting MOEMS device, that techniques of nonlinear control theory will
play a central role in future of this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the
fact that commercial applications of MOEMS are still in their infancy, notable
successes like accelerometers in airbag deployment systems and digital
micromirror arrays in high-end projection systems suggest a bright commercial
future. This promise is accompanied by numerous interesting research problems,
which are inherently cross-disciplinary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A very promising
device in this class is the electrostatically-actuated analog micromirror and
micromirror array, used as a spatial light modulator (SLM). At the heart of
these microfabricated devices is a small (&lt;100 um square) mirror suspended by
fixed springs and driven by applying an external voltage. While the micromirrors
are interesting novelties, for them to reach their full commercial potential it
is essential to control their displacements extremely precisely-within tens of
nanometers or less. This poses a series of fascinating controls
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal has four major objectives: 1.
Fabricate micromirror SLMs, both individual and in arrays. 2. Develop control
methodology suitable for governing micromirror actuation both with and without
optical position feedback. This control serves both a stabilizing and tracking
function. 3. Set up and implement optical testing and metrology capabilities for
studying deflection properties on the subnanometer scale. 4. Actuate them using
custom-designed on-chip electronics combined with off-chip commercial digital
signal processors. Each of these objectives possesses several challenging
problems in various research fields. The PI's preliminary results are very
promising and they are confident that they can meet these objectives in this
research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of researchers brought together
under this proposal has the expertise necessary to carry out each of these
objectives. Dr. Jordan Berg (Mechanical Engineering) will direct the proposal.
He has expertise in control theory and in microfabrication. He will be primarily
responsible for the fabrication of the micromirror devices, and closely work
with the controls team. Dr. W. P. Dayawansa (Mathematics) is an expert in
control theory. He will lead these efforts, and closely interact with the test
team. Dr. Mark Holtz (Physics) works in microfabrication and optics. He will
lead the optical test effort. This group is critically augmented by Dr. Richard
Gale (Electrical Engineering, beginning 5/02). For the past ten years Dr. Gale
has directed the development and commercialization of the Texas Instruments
Digital Light Products (DLP) device. This is the world's most advanced
commercial MOEMS device, the only commercialized micromirror array, consisting
of over 700,000 micromirrors 12 um square, for high-end projection systems. Dr.
Gale will lead the electrical test and work closely with the optical test and
fabrication groups. While the emphasis areas are noted for each P.I., this
network of interdisciplinary researchers will&lt;br/&gt;function together
without boundaries to best achieve our proposed goals.&lt;br/&gt;