* 0218780
* A Clearinghouse on Natural Hazards Research and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Kathleen Tierney, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2005
* USD 1,462,354.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Natural Hazards Research and Applications
Information Center at the University of Colorado in Boulder has served as a
national and international clearinghouse for research data on natural disasters,
related technological events, and programs to reduce damages from them since
1976. This proposal requests renewal of support for the Center for the two-year
period from October 2002 through September 2004. While the Center's basic
activities will not changer significantly, they will be adjusted to reflect the
new challenges facing the hazard community in the 21st century. The Center will
continue to monitor and disseminate hazards research information to multiple
users. Furthermore, it will publish and distribute the Natural Hazards Observer
to over 15,000 subscribers six times a year, operate the electronic Disaster
Research newsletter, and disseminate information via the World Wide Web and
traditional hard copy publications. The Center will continue to co-sponsor the
Natural Hazards Review journal with the American society of civil Engineers and
produce the Natural Hazards Information publication series. It will continue to
build its library database as well as upgrade the system it uses to put the
database on the Web. In July of 2003 and 2004, the Center will sponsor an annual
national and international workshop involving hazards researchers and
practitioners. Also, the Center will provide travel grants to social scientists
to conduct "quick response" studies of specific hazard events in the immediate
post-disaster period, while simultaneously facilitate a conversation to explore
the need for the United States to establish a more systematic approach to "quick
response" research following major urban disasters. The Center's in-house
research program will focus in two directions. First, it will develop a program
to sponsor competitive dissertation grants for new scholars of hazards and risk.
Second, research will continue to questions identified in Disasters by Design: A
Reassessment of Natural Hazards in the United States (Mileti and others, 1999).
&lt;br/&gt;