* 0218977
* Design and Construction of Responsive Surfaces by Means of Tethered Chain Nanolayers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Arthur Cammers, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/2007
* USD 372,195.00

Lynn S. Penn, Et al, University of Kentucky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Design and
Construction of Responsive Surfaces by Means of Tethered Chain
Nanolayers"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores use of a tethered chain
strategy to create surfaces that respond dynamically to their environments or
other external stimuli. (A tethered chain is defined as a polymer molecule that
is attached by a single point along its length to the surface of a solid.)
Tethered chains are uniquely suited for creating responsive surfaces because,
except for chain segments adjacent to the point of attachment, their segmental
mobility is not impaired. Thus, even though they are attached permanently to the
substrate, tethered chains can change conformation-- and thereby change the
nature of the surface-- in response to an applied field or alteration in the
local environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tethered chains of the appropriate
chemical structure and molecular architecture, and with specific chemical
functionalities attached, can be used to construct surfaces that exhibit a wide
variety of responses. Surfaces can be constructed to have dynamic capabilities
such as reversible appearance of nanoscale patterns, trapping of hazardous
biological or chemical agents, and mimicry of surface energy of contacting
phases. Surfaces with these capabilities have applications in electronics
manufacture, clean-up of environmental pollution, biomedical devices, adhesive
bonding, sensors in scientific instrumentation, adhesion and wetting, and
biological and chemical warfare defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project
the investigators will gather the remaining experimental data needed to broaden
their current mathematical model of the tethering process and make it versatile
enough for practical use and will use controlled tethering to construct three
demonstration surfaces that exhibit diverse response capabilities. The three
demonstration surfaces will be able to 1) exhibit reversible, in-plane phase
separation in response to temperature changes, 2) trap large anionic species
from a passing stream, and 3) change surface energy to match that of a
contacting phase, respectively. Project activities include synthesis of large
organic molecules and polymers, execution of tethering procedures under
controlled conditions (with real time monitoring), and characterization of
structure and function of the surfaces by means of a variety of
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact: The modification of surfaces with
polymers to manipulate nano-surface structure and properties is technologically
important on many fronts. This work addresses a critical need. The training
provided in these sophisticated techniques will enable research in this
important nano-technology to expand. The networking between departments and
universities proposed in this proposal is considered to fully utilize the
advantages of multidisciplary approaches and inculcates this approach in the
formation of the many students involved. If the research is successful, new
responsive surfaces will be available for a wide variety of important nano-
technological applications which will provide great benefit to
society.&lt;br/&gt;