* 0218365
* Effect of Fines Type and Content on Liquefaction Resistance and Ground Failure Potential
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Charng Juang, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2006
* USD 224,518.00

0218365, Charng H. Juang, Clemson University "Effect of Fines Type and Content
on Liquefaction Resistance and Ground Failure Potential"

The ability to accurately evaluate the liquefaction potential and the
liquefaction-induced ground failure potential is important in the engineering
planning and design of structures in seismic regions. This research project
addresses two important issues in the mitigation of earthquake-induced
liquefaction hazards, namely the effect of fines type and content on
liquefaction resistance, and the liquefaction-induced ground failure potential.
The first topic concerns the triggering of liquefaction, and the second
addresses the consequence of liquefaction.

With respect to the first topic, recent studies by numerous investigators have
concluded that both fines content and fines type affect the liquefaction
resistance of soils, but these affects are not fully accounted for in the
existing simplified design methods. Data from recent earthquakes offers a rare
opportunity to investigate these effects and to improve on the current state of
the art on liquefaction triggering analysis.

The second topic is more challenging, as reflected in the fact that no readily
applicable site-specific model is currently available for evaluating
liquefaction-induced ground failure potential. However, the number of case
histories from recent earthquakes is now sufficient to establish empirical
models for estimating site-specific ground failure potential. This project is
collecting this additional case history data on liquefaction triggering and
ground failure. This case history data, together with the existing databases, is
used to improve the current state of the art on liquefaction triggering
analysis, and to develop new empirical models for evaluating liquefaction-
induced ground failure potential. Advanced data analysis techniques, including
logistic regression analysis, mapping function approach based on artificial
neural network, and Bayesian updating technique, are examined and utilized for
developing the empirical models.

Both deterministic and probabilistic models are being developed. Since the
geotechnical engineering profession prefers the deterministic approach, the
deterministic models will be developed, but equipped with suggested guidelines
including risk-calibrated factor of safety. The probabilistic models are being
developed for use in performance-based earthquake engineering, as well as for
mapping liquefaction-induced ground failure.