* 0218047
* Crossing Death Valley Together: Industry-University Intellectual Property Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Mariann Jelinek, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Donald Senich
* 01/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This award is for a study entitled "Crossing Death Valley Together: Industry-
University Intellectual Property Dynamics" which is designed to provide a
systematic inquiry into the organizational-level dynamics between industry and
universities around intellectual property (IP). While interest in IP has soared
since the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980, virtually all data collected on IP centers on
the positives in the aggregate; the number of licenses negotiated the number of
patents or disclosures, the total number of revenues or number of products
launched. There is little information on what doesn't work, failures and
strained relationships, or the impact on broader industry-university relations
on current emphasis on IP.&lt;br/&gt; The material will be gathered through
confidential (i.e., not-for-attribution), face-to-face interviews essential to
get at the rationales, expectations, criteria and comparisons that frame the
decision-makers understandings. Sources for the study will include university
administrators, faculty and technology management officers, industry managers
responsible for dealing with universities and a limited number of interviews
with venture capital managers. Data analysis will center on in-depth content
analysis of interview materials in search of underlying models of practice
together with statistics characterizing the interviews and comparisons with
available quantitative data including AUTM surveys and information on IP
failures. The research will be conducted with the cooperation with the
Industrial Research Institute and the Center for Innovative Management Systems.