* 0218507
* CRCNS: Stochastic Models of Executive Control in Monkeys and Humans
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Jeffrey Schall, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 03/31/2007
* USD 756,181.00

Stochastic Models of Executive Control in Monkeys and
Humans&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science
Foundation support, Drs. Logan, Palmeri, and Schall will conduct a three-year
investigation of the executive control processes that underlie flexible
responding in monkeys and humans. It is the hallmark of primate intelligence to
be able to respond flexibly, focusing on different aspects of the same situation
to produce arbitrary responses that are appropriate to current goals. The goal
of this project is to specify executive processes computationally and neurally,
focusing on the control of attention, categorization, and response preparation.
To accomplish this goal, monkeys and humans will perform tasks that require them
to make saccadic eye movements toward or away from targets that appear in
displays of distractors. Experimental variables will be manipulated to
selectively influence attention to the targets, categorization of targets and
distractors, and preparation of eye movement responses. The timing and accuracy
of eye movements will be recorded in both humans and monkeys performing the
task, and the activity of ensembles of neurons in the frontal lobes of monkeys
will be recorded while they are performing the task. The overt eye movement
behavior of humans and monkeys and the neural activity of monkeys will be
described in terms of a mathematically precise computational theory with three
distinct components, as follows. (1) An attention component that selects
behaviorally-relevant targets from a field of distractors; (2) a categorization
component that selects goal-relevant interpretations of target stimuli; and (3)
a response preparation component that selects responses necessary to accomplish
the goals. The theory provides a common language that makes it possible to
relate the overt behavior of humans to the overt behavior of monkeys and to
relate the overt behavior of monkeys to the neural activity that underlies
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is significant in three respects. First,
it will advance understanding of executive control processes by specifying them
concretely in terms of computational and neural processes. Executive control
processes are critical in a variety of contexts in the workplace, educational
settings, and mental health settings that require people to deal with competing
goals and switch between various activities, including the workplace, education,
and mental health. The research will have implications for human factors,
ergonomics, design of training programs in education and industry, and diagnosis
and treatment of mental disorders. Second, the research will advance
understanding of neural processes by providing linking propositions that relate
single-cell behavior to psychological states of the cognitive processes that the
single cells implement. Single-cell behavior makes sense only in the context of
the behavior it underlies, and the research will provide that relation. Third,
the research will advance understanding of the computations that underlie
cognitive processes of attention, categorization, and response preparation.
Computational models of these processes are limited by an inability to "open the
black box" and observe the inner brain processes that underlie them.
Computational models with very different internal processes often predict the
same overt behavior. The research will identify cognitive processes with neural
behavior, allowing distinctions between these computational models of human and
monkey cognition.&lt;br/&gt;