* 0218413
* Enabling the Next Generation of Hazard Researchers:  An Education and Training Proposal
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Raymond Burby, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 06/30/2007
* USD 370,000.00

Time period: September 1, 2002-August 31, 2004&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
initiation and eventual institutionalization of fields of inquiry is heavily
dependent upon generational cohorts of scholars who not only produce new
knowledge but also produce new generations of scholars who will continue to
develop the field. The project responds to a serious issue in the field of
research on societal aspects of extreme events: the lack of an adequate cohort
of junior faculty to sustain scholarship into future generations. This education
and training initiative addresses this issue by developing a comprehensive,
creative program of mentoring for recently appointed junior faculty at research
universities. The objectives of the program are to: (1) identify and recruit
another cohort of well-trained social scientists for undertaking relevant
research about societal aspects of extreme events; (2) engage this cohort of
researchers in discussions about social science scholarship as it relates to
research about extreme events; (3) enable this cohort of faculty members to
undertake sustained research on these topics; and (4) foster an expanded network
of social scientists undertaking research on extreme events. To accomplish these
objectives the project will bring bright, newly appointed faculty in sustained
contact over a one-year period with seasoned researchers from the fields of
decision sciences, economics, geography, political science, psychology, public
health, sociology, and urban planning. They will engage in an intense period of
mentoring with 16 junior faculty members who will be competitively selected to
participate as fellows. Mentoring activities include two workshops, one-on-one
mentoring by the faculty panel, and research and writing activities by the
faculty fellows. The field of research on societal aspects of extreme events is
at a critical juncture. This project is arguably important to its future
development and fulfills a central mission of the National Science Foundation in
enabling individuals to contribute to solving the nation's problems through new
scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;