* 0218169
* GOALI:  Multi-Materials Laser Densification for Dental Restorations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Leon Shaw, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 08/31/2005
* USD 360,000.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) grant is to develop a solid freeform fabrication process, termed as
Multi-Materials Laser Densification (MMLD), for dental restorations. There are
currently between 10,000 and 15,000 dental laboratories in the US and a majority
of these laboratories use porcelain-fused-to-metal (PFM) restoration for
permanent fixed prosthodontics. PFM restoration is a very time consuming and
labor intensive work. Labor costs account for about 90percent of the final cost
to the patient, while dental materials only account for less than 5percent of
the final cost. It is anticipated that with MMLD technology a dental restoration
can be built in about one hour from a computer model without part-specific
tooling and human intervention. As such, the labor cost of the dental
restoration will be substantially reduced, while a better and faster service can
be provided to dental patients. The eventual goal is to provide MMLD facilities
as on-line stations for remote fabrication. At the end of this three-year
project fixed single unit prosthodontic restorations will be demonstrated using
the MMLD machine and the STL file of human tooth provided by the industrial
partner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goal set forth above, clear
strategies have been defined to (i) investigate line-by-line and point-by-point
powder delivery and localized laser densification of multiple materials, (ii)
address various engineering challenges arising from complex laser-material
interactions, mismatches of multiple materials, and small feature sizes due to
the nature of dental restoration, and (iii) perform modeling and simulation so
that dental restorations with adequate mechanical properties, desired aesthetic
appearance, good dimensional accuracy and fine surface finish can be produced in
a precise, economical and reproducible fashion. The PI plans to continue to
encourage women and underrepresented minority undergraduate students to
participate in this GOALI project. The research experiences in integrating
materials laser processing, and solid freeform fabrication for biomedical
applications provides students with a strong incentive to take on graduate
education in this emerging area.