* 0218799
* ITR/AP (EAR) COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Web Tools for Global Time Scale Development: An Example from the Pennsylvanian-Cisuralian (Early Permian)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2002,09/30/2008
* Clyde Northrup, Boise State University
* Continuing grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2008
* USD 656,617.00

ITR/AP\(EAR) Collaborative Research: Web tools for global time scale
development: an example from the Pennsylvanian-Cisuralian\(Early Permian\)
(EAR-0218799)

Vladimir Davydov, C. J. Northrup, Tamra Schiappa Boise State University

ABSTRACT

"Web Tools for Global Time Scale Development: an Example from the Pennsylvanian-
Cisuralian (Early Permian)" is an information technology project that deals with
the development of the geologic time scale. The geologic time scale is a
fundamental tool of Earth Science research. The correlation of global events and
the calculation of rates of processes during Earth's history all depend directly
on the accuracy and precision of the geologic time scale. These processes
include, for example, the rates and causes of extinction, climate change, plate
motions, and mountain building. Despite its critical role, portions of the time
scale have not been formally defined. The focus of this project will be twofold:
1) to develop a method that will serve as a model for international discussion
and agreement on the development of a complete time scale, and 2) to use a
particular part of the time scale that is presently undefined, as an example of
how to achieve this goal. Specifically, PIs will develop Web-based tools that
will facilitate the international debate for establishment of the Pennsylvanian
and Early Permian stage boundary definitions, and that will serve as a permanent
resource for the data utilized for these definitions. This tool will allow all
interested workers to easily enter and extract a wide variety of data from a
system that is global in extent. The time scale is based on the succession of
fossils that are preserved in the stratigraphic record, and therefore, these
data will include a wealth of information on paleontology and biostratigraphy.
The ability to interact with these data and other researchers over the Internet
will help resolve issues about the terminology for specific species, and hence
remove fundamental road blocks to international agreement. The system must also
accommodate information about the stratigraphy - the architecture of the
succession of sedimentary rocks - that are the hosts for the fossil record. It
must also include so-called absolute ages of rocks based on radiometric dating.
Various geochemical, paleomagnetic and other data must be included to form a
true systems approach to building the time scale. By combining these and other
data types into a single system, PIs hope to be able to, for the first time,
develop a reliable approach to the development of the geologic time scale.