* 0218957
* ITR: Large-scale, Grid-enabled Gaussian Orbital Implementation of Current Density and Spin Density Functional Theory for Ordered Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Samuel Trickey, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2007
* USD 448,000.00

This award is made in response to a proposal submitted to the Information
Technology Research (ITR) Initiative. The objective of the research is to
design, develop and implement, test, and apply major enhancements of the high-
performance, all-electron, full-potential, relativistic gaussian-basis density
functional theory (DFT) code for crystals, slabs, and periodic polymers called
"GTOFF" (Gaussian Type Orbitals for Fitting Functions). The goals are (a) to
include imposed magnetic fields as a major extension of materials-specific DFT
prediction and interpretation of periodic systems; (b) make major speed-ups to
handle much larger systems, e.g., nano-featured surfaces, ordered hard-soft
interfaces; (c) introduce algorithms and data structures that will enable
treatment of extremely large and/or complicated systems via grid technologies;
(d) substantially improve the capability for revising and/or adding methods and
capabilities to do more science.

A major advantage of GTOFF is use of the same kinds of basis sets and procedures
as the majority of molecular codes. It thus provides a seamless way to study
chemically differentiated systems, from constituent atoms to molecule, cluster
or nanoparticle to crystal or slab, including cluster-surface interactions and
nano-featured surfaces.

Successful, robust spin DFT algorithms in GTOFF will be reimplemented in C++
(from Fortran 77) to achieve modularity, manageability, and extendability now
lacking. Those algorithms include generalized Ewald techniques to sum long-
ranged contributions (rather than more common, sometimes less reliable multipole
expansions), variational Coulomb fitting to eliminate 4-center integrals,
fitting of exchange-correlation densities to fitted densities (eliminates extra
sums over Brillouin Zone points), accuracy-conserving constraints on fittings,
Douglas-Kroll-Hess relativity (including spin-orbit contributions). GTOFF now is
serial. The redsign/reimplementation will exploit known parallelism
opportunities as well as provide grid enablement. Current-density Functional
Theory (C-DFT) will be built into the new design as a major extension to provide
predictive treatment of materials at high magnetic field.

The planned effort involves several major components: (a) redesign (not mere
transcription) of the present GTOFF to take advantage of modern programming
practices, construct a proper organization for parallelism (with hooks for MPI),
include algorithms and data structures for grid-enabled computing; (b) design of
gaussian orbital algorithms and techniques for current DFT; (c) re-
implementation in C++ of the redesigned GTOFF for spin DFT; (d) extensive
testing to assure reproducibility in serial mode, then in parallel; (e)
implementation and testing of current DFT in the new GTOFF; (f) grid-enablement,
including (but not limited to) interpolation among precalculated integral
arrays, interpolation among approximate energy calculations, and energy gradient
calculations direct from density fitting.

The grant will provide support for a postdoctoral associate and graduate
students who will will learn programming skills in addition to the fundamental
chemistry and physics necessary to develop and apply the GTOFF codes. %%% This
award is made in response to a proposal submitted to the Information Technology
Research (ITR) Initiative. The objective of the research is to design, develop
and implement, test, and apply major enhancements of the high-performance, all-
electron, full-potential, relativistic gaussian-basis density functional theory
(DFT) code for crystals, slabs, and periodic polymers called "GTOFF" (Gaussian
Type Orbitals for Fitting Functions). The goals are (a) to include imposed
magnetic fields as a major extension of materials-specific DFT prediction and
interpretation of periodic systems; (b) make major speed-ups to handle much
larger systems, e.g., nano-featured surfaces, ordered hard-soft interfaces; (c)
introduce algorithms and data structures that will enable treatment of extremely
large and/or complicated systems via grid technologies; (d) substantially
improve the capability for revising and/or adding methods and capabilities to do
more science.

A major advantage of GTOFF is use of the same kinds of basis sets and procedures
as the majority of molecular codes. It thus provides a seamless way to study
chemically differentiated systems, from constituent atoms to molecule, cluster
or nanoparticle to crystal or slab, including cluster-surface interactions and
nano-featured surfaces. The grant will provide support for a postdoctoral
associate and graduate students who will will learn programming skills in
addition to the fundamental chemistry and physics necessary to develop and apply
the GTOFF codes. ***