* 0218871
* ITR:  3-D Microstructure/Property Investigations of Open-Cell Polymer Foams
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Gerald Seidler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2008
* USD 450,000.00

This an Information Technology Research (ITR) award. It is a computationally-
intensive research program that will probe the microstructure/property
relationships of open-cell polymer foams with unprecedented detail. First, a
comprehensive database of the full 3-dimensional (3-D) microstructures of a wide
range of foam materials will be obtained by using high-resolution synchrotron
x-ray microtomography with integrated with 3-D image processing. Second, these
data will provide realistic initial conditions for supercomputer-based
micromechanical simulations to allow isolation of key structural elements that
are poorly understood in existing theories of foam mechanics. Third, the
microstructure database will be rapidly disseminated on the Internet to provide
a unique educational and research resource in the field cellular solids. This
3-D microstructure information should stimulate improvements in both materials
processing and theories of foam mechanics. The results should have applications
in areas spanning consumer, medical, industrial, and aerospace products. The
graduate and undergraduate students involved in this project will receive
multidisciplinary training in condensed matter physics, materials sciences,
mechanical engineering, and information technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
an Information Technology Research (ITR) award. With growing frequency, the
frontiers of materials research are marked by an intimate interplay between
experiment, computation, and theory. This project will apply this synergy to the
study of polymer foam materials for the first time. These materials have global
applications spanning consumer, medical, industrial, and aerospace products.
However, lack of knowledge of their real 3-dimensional microstructures is
constraining both the design of new materials and also the improvement of
existing theories of foam mechanics. A new combination of 3-dimensional x-ray
imaging, computer vision, and supercomputer-based simulations will be used to
overcome this barrier. These techniques will enable a comprehensive study of the
real microstructures, and lead to a realistically-simulated micromechanics for a
wide range of open-cell polymer foams. A major output of the project will be the
rapid creation of a unique Internet database of foam microstructures to provide
a new educational resource and add significantly to the national materials
research infrastructure. The graduate and undergraduate students involved in
this project will receive multidisciplinary training combining condensed matter
physics, materials sciences, mechanical engineering, and information
technology.&lt;br/&gt;