* 0218426
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  What Do Maya Pseudo-Glyphs Say? An Analysis of Late Classic Period Pottery from the Southern Maya Lowlands
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Payson Sheets, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00

Over the past 50 years, an increasingly significant part of our understanding of
Classic Period (A.D. 250-900) Maya society has derived from the study of Maya
hieroglyphics. Scholars now recognize that Maya scribes used a mixed phonetic
and iconographic system of writing to record elite exploits, document royal
lineages and inscribe artifacts with ownership statements. Defined by linguists
as full writing, Maya hieroglyphics represent a system of graphic symbols that
could be used to record and convey any thought that could be
spoken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deciphering the texts painted on polychrome pottery
has revealed information regarding the function, geographic and social origin of
particular vessels and provided insight into Maya beliefs and the nature of
elite interactions. In the process of examining these ceramic texts, epigraphers
have divided the painted signs into two categories: (1) conventional hieroglyphs
that can be phonetically read and translated into meaningful words or phrases,
and (2) symbols described as "pseudo-glyphs" because they do not conform to the
established canons of glyph morphology (Longyear 1944, 1952). With National
Science Foundation support, this study seeks to define more clearly the nature
of literacy for members of Classic Period Maya society by documenting and
examining a large sample of scientifically-excavated ceramics decorated with
pseudo-glyphs. This study will emphasize both archaeological context and glyphic
analysis to assess the social function and significance of pseudo-glyph-
decorated pottery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After creating a comprehensive
photographic database of vessels curated in Guatemala by the Museo de
Antropologia e Ethnologia, the Ceramateca of the Instituto de Antropologia e
Historia and the Morley Museum, and vessels from various in-process field
projects, this study seeks to establish whether pseudo-glyphs, like conventional
pottery texts, form a written symbol system that conveys meaning. Statistical
and comparative analysis of the texts should reveal what pseudo-glyphs, if any,
are consistently employed or combined and whether pseudo-glyphs exhibit a
grammar. Additionally, comparing the vessels excavated from different locations
may reveal whether pseudo-glyphs functioned stylistically to signal ethnic,
gender, kinship, or economic identity. For example, does pseudo-glyph
embellished pottery appear most frequently in household or lower-status
contexts? Or is there an indication that such pottery appears disproportionately
at a particular site or group of sites?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By creating the
first database of scientifically-excavated Maya ceramics that are embellished
with pseudo-glyphs, this research will form a foundation for future
interpretations of the nature of Maya literacy during the Classic Period. More
broadly, this analysis may be cross-culturally compared with the uses of writing
in other societies.&lt;br/&gt;