* 0218939
* ITR:  Enabling Novel Digital Sequential Circuit Designs through Error Control and Noise Tolerance Techniques
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Naresh Shanbhag, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2006
* USD 240,000.00

The proposed research aims at extending the benefits of scaling (i.e., Moore's
Law) into the ub-0.07$\mu$m regime by developing error control techniques for
digital sequential circuits. The overall goal is to evaluate the practical
implications of recently developed dynamic error correction and algorithmic
noise tolerance techniques in terms of enabling the design of sequential circuit
architectures that are cost-effective and operate at speed and energy
efficiencies that exceed the limits imposed by current VLSI architectures. The
successful completion of this project can lead to the development of
acomprehensive set of circuit design techniques that permit tradeoffs between
reliability, speed and energy-efficiency in ways that have not been exploited
before.

The objectives of this research thrust are two-fold: (i) The immediate goal is
to develop error control methodologies that enable the construction of
functional sequential systems out of unreliable components that may be fast,
inexpensive or have reduced energy requirements. The novelty of the proposed
research lies in that it it explores the case when the error correction
mechanism operates at a different time scale than the rest of the system. (ii)
The ultimate goal is to build prototypes of such sequential circuits in order to
evaluate their actual performance and potential.

The proposed research also has a significant educational and outreach component,
motivating graduate students to contribute to research that focuses on the
fringes of circuit theory, signal processing, coding and graph theory, control
theory and information theory.