* 0218049
* US-Turkey Workshop:  The First ICFA School/Workshop at the New Center for Instrumentation in Istanbul, June 2002
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Muzaffer Atac, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00

0218049 Sheaff

Description: This award provides partial support for the first ICFA
School/Workshop at the new Center for Instrumentation at Istanbul Technical
University (ITU) in Istanbul, Turkey, June 17-28, 2002. ICFA, which is the
International Committee on Future Accelerators, has been holding a regular
series of instrumentation schools/workshops every two years in different
locations. The US organizers for this school/workshop are Dr. Marleigh Sheaff,
Senior Scientist Emerita, University of Wisconsin, Madison and member of the
International Committee on Future Accelerators (ICFA), and Dr. Muzaffer Atac of
Fermilab and UCLA and the Scientific and Technical Advisor for the Center. The
Turkish co-organizer is Professor Mahmut Hortacsu of Istanbul Technical
University, who is also the Director of the new Center. The Center for
Instrumentation will be a permanent facility where lecture courses and lab
exercises will be offered on a regular basis to students from Turkey and other
countries in the Africa, Near East, and South Asia region. This first workshop
at the Center focuses on instrumentation in elementary particle physics. The
goals of the workshop are to encourage the development of instrumentation by the
students at their home institutions and to promote collaboration among
physicists at early stages in their careers.

Scope: Turkey is a suitable host for this workshop because of its location
between Europe and Asia and its proximity to Africa, from which it is especially
desirable to attract students. The Center for Instrumentation will provide
training and online help with questions on instrumentation for the students
after they return to their home institutions. Support for the new center will be
provided by Istanbul Technical University and by the Turkish Science and
Technology Council (TUBITAK). Several other Turkish universities are also
expected to contribute. This award is supported by the Office of International
Science and Engineering and the Division of Physics.