* 0218029
* SGER:  Evolving Dynamic Capabilities in Times of Dramatic Environmental Change
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* M Taylor, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Donald Senich
* 05/31/2004
* USD 53,094.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) is a 12 months study to develop
new theoretical ideas about the processes through which firms evolve their
dynamic capabilities. The study will contribute to the emerging body of work on
the dynamic capabilities in two ways: a) by examining the role of managerial
knowledge structures in shaping a firm's dynamic capabilities and their
development: and b) by comparing the effects of differential environmental
change (e.g., rate and predictability) on the process of capability
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In conducting the proposed research the teams
will take advantage of a naturally occurring experiment created by the
terrorists attacks of September 2001. The large-scale dramatic change created by
the events of September 11th will enable the research team to determine the
impact of such change on the evolution of firms' capabilities. The study focuses
on two industries - defense and biotechnology--that were both dramatically
affected by the events of September 11th , yet have been characterized
traditionally by different rates and types of change. The team will utilize a
qualitative approach and rely primarily on an interview methodology to assess
the processes of capability development in participating divisions of defense
companies and biotechnology firms. The results of the study will be communicated
through a series of company briefings, as well as publications in academic
journals.