* 0218248
* US-Pakistan Cooperative Research:  Population Genetics of Benthosema Pterotum, A Mesopelagic Fish from the Arabian Sea
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Giacomo Bernardi, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/2008
* USD 20,000.00

0218248&lt;br/&gt;Bernardi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a joint research project between Dr. Giacomo Bernardi, Biology
Department, University of California-Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California and Dr.
Shahid Amjad, Department of Oceanography, The National Institute of Oceanography
(NIO), Karachi, Pakistan. They plan to study the population genetics of
Benthosema pterotum, a mesopelagic fish from the Arabian Sea. The Arabian Sea
has &lt;br/&gt;complex oceanography, which results in high biological
productivity. In the open ocean, the topmost trophic level is represented by
nekton such as marine mammals and large fishes such as tunas and mackerel. In
the northwest Arabian Sea and adjacent Gulf of Oman, the topmost trophic level
is represented by mesopelagic fishes. These are small, midwater species such as
Lanternfishes (Myctophidae), Hatchetfishes (Sternoptychidae), and Bristlemouths
(Gonostomatidae). The main species reported in abundance is the lanternfish
Benthosema pterotum. This will be collected off the coast of Pakistan from the
Gulf of Oman to the Central Arabian Sea. Specifically, the investigators plan to
investigate the genetic differences between Gulf of Oman and Arabian Sea
populations of B. pterotum off the coast of Pakistan (smaller-scale). They will
extract DNA, PCR amplify and sequence nuclear intron, and mitochondrial loci to
establish patterns of population structure in B. pterotum. The sampling protocol
will have approximately 500 individuals to have enough statistical validity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This award will allow a US team headed by the PI to
collaborate with a Pakistani team from the NIO in a research project of
significant scientific interest. The PIs will be working closely with young
Pakistani scientists at NIO to train them for the optimum methods for fish
surveys and to catch the specific species. These scientists will then carry out
most of the fieldwork. They will also be trained in the new molecular
techniques. Pakistan's ocean science is at a stage of development where this
collaboration will greatly help. This project will have a positive impact on NIO
and the fisheries departments in Pakistan. All countries bordering the
northwestern Indian Ocean would like to harvest B. pterotum commercially.
Improved understanding of its population genetics, and other knowledge that will
follow from this pilot study, will help scientists in the region utilize this
unexploited fishery resouce.&lt;br/&gt;