* 0218862
* International Trenchless Technology Colloquium
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Sanjiv Gokhale, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Heller
* 06/30/2003
* USD 50,000.00

The aim of this International Symposium is to provide a forum for discussion of
developments, in the GIS (Geographical Information Systems), CMMS (Computer
Maintenance Management Systems), and IT (Information Technology) areas in the
application of an intelligent assessment, renewal and management of underground
municipal infrastructure. Research in this area is characterized by
international and interdisciplinary cooperation. The proposed international
forum by bringing together researchers from universities, municipal managers,
and industry representatives, provides a major step towards a holistic approach
to municipal infrastructure management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
activities will help in advancing knowledge and understanding in the fields of
assessment, monitoring &amp; intelligent management of underground municipal
infrastructure. The development of highly automated GIS systems capable of
searching, organizing, preserving, and interacting with large quantities of
condition &amp; maintenance data will provide a cost-effective tool for
municipalities faced with shrinking budgets, growing problems and increasing
regulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is being organized in three
phases. Phase I is the Trenchless Technology Research Colloquium, hosted by the
Infrastructure Engineering and Management Research Center, School of
Engineering, The University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK. Phase II
consists of field trips to visit the municipalities of Helsinki, Finland, and
St. Petersburg, Russia. Phase III consists of presenting research findings and
contributing to panel discussions at the 2002 International NoDig Conference,
Copenhagen, Denmark.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Research Report containing the
documentation of the research process, case studies, results of the data
collection and analysis efforts, will be compiled by University of Birmingham,
UK. Electronic copies will be made available through the Trenchless Technology
Research Colloquium web site hosted by Trenchless Technology Center (TTC),
Louisiana Tech University, Ruston, Louisiana
(http://www.latech.edu/tech/engr/ttc/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;