* 0218370
* Collaborative Research: Mobile Elements and Primate Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Lynn Jorde, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,418,681.00

Mobile elements are DNA segments that make copies of themselves that are then
inserted elsewhere in the genome. These elements can influence many important
evolutionary processes, including mutation and rearrangement of chromosomes.
They may also play an important role in the development of new species. Although
mobile elements make up nearly 30% of the human genome, little is known about
their origins and their mechanisms of replication and insertion. The major goal
of this research is to learn more about mobile elements and the roles they have
played in human and primate evolution.&lt;br/&gt; Some mobile elements,
particularly those termed Alus and L1s, are either present or absent at a
specific chromosome location. Because the presence of a mobile element at a
specific location is the more recent, or derived, state, and because these
elements are not deleted after they are inserted, these polymorphisms are ideal
for evolutionary analysis. &lt;br/&gt; In this collaborative project, a series
of at least 100 Alu and L1 elements will be ascertained in a diverse collection
of at least 16 primate species in order to provide a resource for primate
evolutionary studies. Because of the role that some mobile elements play in key
evolutionary processes, a comparison of humans with other primate species will
help to define unique genetic attributes of our species. Key changes that
accompanied human speciation may be identified. Thus, important information
about the origins of our species will be obtained.&lt;br/&gt; A diverse
collection of 300 humans will be typed for 100 L1 insertion elements (this will
be added to an existing collection of 100 Alu insertion polymorphisms typed in
the same individuals). This will produce a powerful resource for addressing
questions about the demographic history of our species. Did anatomically modern
humans experience a population bottleneck in their history? If so, how severe
was this bottleneck, when did it occur, and where did it occur? This research
will help to further test the hypothesis that modern humans originated in
Africa, with a small subset of individuals later migrating out of Africa to
other parts of the Old World. &lt;br/&gt; In addition to addressing questions
about human origins, this project will provide a resource of newly identified
and characterized mobile elements that can be used by any investigator
interested in primate genetics. An important aspect of this project is the
training of graduate and undergraduate students and of members of under-
represented minority populations.&lt;br/&gt;