* 0218938
* ITR/EHR:   Augmenting Individuals:   Tools for Promoting Productive Reflection in Science Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Janet Kolodner, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2006
* USD 449,388.00

0218938 Janet L. Kolodner Georgia Institute of Technology

Title: "Tools for Promoting Productive Reflection in Science Learning "

This project builds on this institution's prior successes with an educational
software system called SMILE. This system provides structuring and prompting for
students working in small groups or as individuals as they are getting ready to
carry out project-based activities and as they are interpreting results and
making sense of whole-class discussions. It builds on discussions about the
"how-to's" of carrying out activities in class and reminds students what to pay
attention to. The software suite, SMILE, includes tools for planning and
reporting on several kinds of investigative activities, for reporting on and
justifying design ideas, for reporting on and explaining design experiences, and
for carrying on conversations across classrooms about each. SMILE's intentions
are (a) to help students be productive while working in small groups and (b) to
provide the kind of help that will make students presentations to the class more
articulate and understandable by their peers. The goals of the current project
are: 1) to investigate the hypothesis that relatively simple general-purpose
software can be used to promote sophisticated reasoning among students about
both content and process and that that same software is useful to teachers in
providing them the kinds of reminders that help them better facilitate the kinds
of reflective reasoning that result in transfer (a) in the contexts of both
Learning By Design and more general-purpose project-based inquiry science
classrooms, (b) across a variety of science disciplines, (c) across a variety of
grade levels, and (d) possibly, in project-based contexts outside of science
(e.g., math, social studies), 2) to iteratively extend the reach of the software
tools already designed and constructed to make them more capable and to make
them applicable to a larger variety of project-based contexts, 3) to develop
guidelines for productive design and use of tools in support of planning and
reflection in project-based inquiry classrooms, and 4) to develop teacher
materials and disseminate software on the web. This institution's experiences
with Learning by Design have contributed to understanding the ins and outs of
creating opportunities in the project-based inquiry classroom for the kinds of
reflective experiences that lead to lasting learning. This current project will
provide additional insights and tools that may be of value in the broader
educational community.