* 0218609
* ITR: American National Corpus: A Primary Resource for Linguistics Research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Randi Reppen, Vassar College
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2005
* USD 322,127.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Nancy Ide and Randi Reppen will
conduct a three-year project to annotate extensively a 10-million word portion
of the American National Corpus (ANC). The ANC consists of both spoken and
written language from North America across a range of registers, such as planned
speeches, conversations, fiction, and newspapers. This research project uses
techniques from both computational linguistics and corpus linguistics to
annotate the ANC for a range of grammatical and semantic characteristics.
Specifically the project seeks to accomplish three major objectives: 1) develop
automatic tools for annotating various elements and structures in the corpus; 2)
create a 'gold standard' portion of the ANC, consisting of 10 million words in
which the markup, annotation, and parts of speech have been hand-validated; and
3) describe the conceptual and meaning relations among words in the ANC within
the framework of the 'semantic web', thus greatly enhancing analysis and
retrieval capabilities. The investigators are to carry out this research through
a variety of software programs (many created specifically for this project), and
through extensive human/computer interaction to hand-validate the computer
assigned labels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is important for
several reasons. First, the resulting corpus will be the first publicly
available tagged corpus of spoken and written American English. Second, because
the annotation of the corpus will be hand-validated, the resulting product will
approach 100% accuracy. With this carefully annotated 10-million word corpus,
language researchers will be able to address a number of structural and
linguistic relationships across texts that previously could not be addressed.
Since the corpus will be hand-validated, researchers can use this information to
develop models for processing previously unseen texts. The ANC corpus will be
readily available to researchers via the web. In addition to the annotated
corpus, the project will make available to researchers a suite of tools designed
to retrieve information from the corpus.&lt;br/&gt;