* 0218597
* ITR:    An Agent-Based Negotiation Framework for the Robust Design of Active-Passive Hybrid Piezoelectric Vibration Control Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Kon-Well Wang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 12/31/2006
* USD 350,000.00

PI's Name, Institution: Kon-Well Wang, Penn State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0218597&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: ITR - An Agent-Based Negotiation
Framework for the Robust Design of Active-Passive Hybrid Piezoelectric Vibration
Control Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Abstract &lt;br/&gt;The objective
of the proposed research is to investigate novel information technology
(IT)-based approach for synthesizing electromechanically optimized smart
structures. Specifically, we will develop an Agent-based Negotiation framework
for the robust design of large-scale active-passive hybrid piezoelectric
networks (APPN) for structural vibration control. The framework is to assist the
designer in making high-level design decisions (e.g., the selection of circuit
topology) and in analyzing the tradeoff among conflicting design objectives,
which include the robustness requirement for dealing with model uncertainty. The
research tasks include methodology development, system analysis, and
experimental investigation. The goal of the education plan is to integrate the
research with various educational programs at Penn State and achieve a broad
range of impact on student learning. &lt;br/&gt;The significance and impacts
are: (a) This study will be a pioneer effort exploring the feasibility of
utilizing IT to optimally tailor a large-scale electro-mechanically coupled
smart structure system, considering design uncertainties, tradeoffs, and circuit
topology selections. (b) The investigation will have significant impacts on
agent-based technology because it addresses the increasingly important issue of
negotiation among a structured team of collaborative agents. It can increase the
scalability of agent teams and enable them to adapt themselves to avoid
cognitive overload in complex domains such as distributed decision makings. (c)
The research will have broad influence on many engineering systems. The
automotive, aerospace, manufacturing, instrumentation and many other industries
will benefit from the vibration control technologies developed based on the
outcome of this investigation. (d) The educational efforts will have broad
impact on teaching the next generation of engineers and IT workforce to utilize
modern computer technology for solving large-scale complex engineering problems
with uncertainties and conflicting design requirements.&lt;br/&gt;