* 0218007
* Dissertation Research:  Reimagining Anthrax: Constructing the Threat and Science of Biological Warfare at Fort Detrick, 1943-1969
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Richard Burkhardt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 06/30/2003
* USD 7,550.00

Between 1943 and 1969, biological scientists in America engaged in a major
program of secret weapons development. They did so in large measure in response
to a perceived threat: namely, that, German and Japanese scientists, and later
the Russians, were pursuing biological weapons programs of their own. The
successes of the American scientists only confirmed for them the reality of the
threat they had perceived. If American bioweapons scientists could solve the
complex problems of production and delivery of pathogenic organisms (such as
enhanced Anthrax bacilli) to military and civilian targets, they had every
reason to imagine that America's major foes could do the same. American
scientists' earlier conception of the threat of organic weapons served to shape
the direction of their subsequent researches and in so doing had a central
influence in the development of the science of biological warfare. The
perception of enemy threat was a critical stimulus for American weapons research
and development during World War II and the Cold War. The side of the story
involving the physical sciences has been intensively studied and is well known,
particularly with respect to the development of nuclear weapons, Radar, and
intercontinental ballistic missiles. In contrast, the side of the story
involving the biological sciences and the development of biological weapons has
only begun to be described. Recent studies have provided us a general outline of
when and where the United States pursued its Cold War biological weapons
program, but the intimate dynamics of that development have yet to be brought to
light and examined in any meaningful way. Such an analysis is now possible,
thanks to the declassification of crucial archival documents. The goal of this
dissertation research project is to examine how fears of enemy biological
weapons projects catalyzed American biological weapons research and development,
and how the continued perception of threat proceeded to structure the
assumptions, motivations, justifications, rationalizations, and scientific and
technical accomplishments of American Cold War biological weapons scientists.
Because of the very sensitive nature of the U.S. BW program and its relationship
to national security, most reports, memoranda, correspondence, etc. concerning
bacteriological weapons remained classified and thus little known until
relatively recently. Over the last two decades, as the result of
declassification, the Freedom of Information Act, and the willingness of former
Biological Defense Research Program scientists, politicians, and military
officers to talk about their experiences, new material has become available. An
initial research trip to both the National Security Archives at George
Washington University and the National Archives at College Park in May 2000
allowed the researcher to prepare a draft of a dissertation chapter, a lecture
on biological warfare and its development, a conference paper delivered in
November at the History of ScienceSociety's annual meeting, and to confirm the
importance of this topic for the history of science. This funding will allow the
researcher to continue and complete research at the National Archives-College
Park, with particular attention to the large documents collection of the
Chemical Warfare Service (Record Group175.3-7). These large record groups
contain interoffice memos, overviews of meetings, group presentations to senior
military and civilian officials and, most importantly, monthly, quarterly, and
yearly reports on laboratory research for a significant portion of the period in
question.