* 0218226
* Modeling, Identification and Validation of Uncertain Systems;  Theory and Experiments
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Roy Smith, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2006
* USD 234,983.00

The objective of the proposed work is to develop an integrated suite of tools
and approaches for the modeling of uncertain systems for feedback control design
purposes. Our modeling framework is based upon robust control theory, which is
supported by several sophisticated control design methods. These models are in
effect set descriptions, where the sets are generated by unknown but bounded
dynamic perturbations within the model. These models allow the designer to
capture the variety of uncertain behaviors that a physical system will generate.
Although this is a powerful and flexible modeling framework, the tools available
for modeling physical systems are limited. We address this area in this
proposal, with the ultimate goal being the development of a suite of modeling
techniques and software tools for control system modeling.

Our prior work on model validation for robust control models forms the basis for
the work proposed here. This approach has led to tools which allow the designer
to experimentally quantify the difference between a physical system and the
closest member of a robust control model set. In the area of theoretical model
development we propose extending our current model validation approaches to
describe non-linear and parametrically varying systems. In the experimental
application area, two systems will be studied: control of semiconductor growth
rate and composition in a metalorganic vapor deposition (MOCVD) reactor; control
of unstable rotating magnetic bearing systems. Both applications have a great
deal of industrial relevance, as well as providing challenging testbeds for the
theoretical work. In the algorithmic development work, we propose refining
structured algorithms to handle the very large problems that arise when applying
model validation methods to data driven problems.

The strong experimental component has significant wider benefits. The MOCVD
experimental system is a nontraditional area for control work and fosters
interaction and the exchange of ideas between the control theory community and
semiconductor and materials scientists. The experiments are also integrated into
engineering course work at UCSB, and are currently used as demonstration
examples in undergraduate control courses and graduate level design
laboratories.

