* 0218159
* Center for Research on Culture, Development and Education
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Catherine Tamis-LeMonda, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 09/30/2008
* USD 2,529,926.00

The academic underachievement of certain ethnic minority groups in America
continues to perplex educators, scientists, and policy makers, despite thousands
of studies, hundreds of remedial programs, and decades of being considered a
crisis. Several recent trends add weight to the crisis. First, within the next
50 years, people identified as ethnic "minority" will comprise half the U.S.
population. Second, new waves of immigrants continue to arrive, ensuring
fundamental but unknown changes in the intercultural dynamics of schools and
other contexts. Third, the United States has evolved into a "knowledge-driven"
economy, making a solid education, particularly in math and science, vital for
an increasingly large sector of the workforce. Finally, recent federal
legislation calls for annual standardized assessments of school children, a
prospect that may disadvantage certain minorities who typically underperform on
these tests. More than ever, a sizable proportion of our nation's children are
at risk of academic failure, posing a serious threat to the current
Administration's goal of "leaving no child behind." In line with this national
goal, the Center for Research on Culture, Development and Education (CRCDE),
housed at New York University (NYU) will conduct research designed to identify
pathways to academic success for all children. Prior research has focused
narrowly on a single context (e.g., the family, peer relationships, school
quality, etc.) in predicting academic outcomes, or has investigated the roles of
ethnicity, race, immigrant status, gender, or socioeconomic status separately.
Neither approach, however, has adequately addressed the ways in which multiple
contexts contribute to educational success and/or disparities, nor how pathways
vary by developmental period and culture. Furthermore, an over-emphasis on group
differences has resulted in the neglect of patterns of academic outcomes within
ethnic, socioeconomic, or cultural groups. Finally, studies across all of these
areas have tended to utilize single methodologies, rarely integrating survey,
ethnographic, experimental, and observational methods. To address these gaps,
the CRCDE will gather and disseminate data about the pathways that lead to
successful academic engagement and performance among culturally diverse children
and adolescents. The scientific mission of the CRCDE is to use an integrative
conceptual framework, cross-disciplinary collaboration, and multiple methods to
(1) identify the nature of relationships that link children's experiences in
five educationally relevant contexts, home, school, peers, caregivers' work, and
media, to their academic engagement and performance; (2) examine whether and how
these processes vary within and across cultural groups and across developmental
periods; and (3) advance an understanding of how home, peers, school,
caregivers' work, and media affect one another and jointly influence children's
and adolescents' academic engagement and performance. The educational mission of
the CRCDE is to (1) train a new generation of scholars, especially those from
underrepresented minority groups, to engage in research that advances the
scientific mission; (2) produce instruments and methods that will strengthen the
scientific capacity of the research community to conduct culturally sensitive
research on academic engagement and performance; and (3) transmit findings to
policy makers, practitioners in education, and researchers, through
dissemination of findings and lessons for educational policy and practice. The
Center's location in the diverse context of New York City (NYC) is ideal for a
center devoted to research at the confluence of culture, development, and
education.