* 0218619
* Signaling Pathways Regulating Synaptic Vesicle Dynamics
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Timothy Turner, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2006
* USD 372,478.00

Neurons communicate with one and other primarily by secreting
chemical&lt;br/&gt;neurotransmitters that influence the electrical or
biochemical activities of&lt;br/&gt;neighboring cells. These neurotransmitters
are stored in small organelles&lt;br/&gt;called synaptic vesicles that are
localized to presynaptic nerve endings. In&lt;br/&gt;order for neurotransmitter
to be secreted, a synaptic vesicle must fuse with the&lt;br/&gt;surface membrane
at the nerve terminal, which allows neurotransmitter to diffuse&lt;br/&gt;to the
nearby target neurons. This tightly regulated fusion process is
the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental event in interneuronal communication. Recent work has
revealed that&lt;br/&gt;vesicle fusion is a low probability event related to the
number of synaptic&lt;br/&gt;vesicles docked with the active zone, the site at
which fusion occurs. A dynamic&lt;br/&gt;equilibrium exists between vesicles
that are fusion-competent and the majority&lt;br/&gt;of vesicles that are held
in reserve; this equilibrium is regulated in a&lt;br/&gt;Ca2+-dependent manner.
The molecular basis for these Ca2+-dependent changes in&lt;br/&gt;the brain is
incompletely understood, in part because billions of microscopic&lt;br/&gt;nerve
terminals are distributed throughout the brain, making it difficult
of&lt;br/&gt;impossible to synchronize the activity of the nerve terminals in an
intact&lt;br/&gt;preparation. Work proposed by Dr. turner is designed to study
the&lt;br/&gt;signaling pathways that regulate synaptic vesicle dynamics using
synaptosomes, a&lt;br/&gt;preparation of isolated nerve terminals that is
relatively uniform in&lt;br/&gt;composition. Dr. Turner's laboratory will use
synaptosomes to measure biochemical changes in&lt;br/&gt;the activities of
specific signaling pathways that have been implicated in&lt;br/&gt;regulating
synaptic vesicle maturation, including Ca2+-regulated kinases and
a&lt;br/&gt;monomeric GTP-binding known as Ral. In parallel, the
relevance&lt;br/&gt;of these signaling pathways will be evaluatued by measuring
the strength of synaptic transmission in a more intact preparation, the acute
brain slice obtained from cerebellum.&lt;br/&gt;The parallel fiber to Purkinje
cell synapse found in this preparation is a &lt;br/&gt;well-characterized
excitatory synapse that should be representative of&lt;br/&gt;excitatory
synapses found in all parts of the brain. Simultaneous measurements&lt;br/&gt;of
neurotransmitter release and the attendant changes in cytoplasmic
signaling&lt;br/&gt;pathways will advance a more detailed understanding of the
mechanisms that underlie Ca2+-dependent changes in synaptic strength important
to interneuronal signaling in the brain.&lt;br/&gt; The impact of this work will
extend broadly throughout neuroscience because of the fundamental importance of
synaptic transmission in information processing by the brain, for features
including sensory reception, motor control, attention and decision, and learning
and memory. In addition, this project will help launch the independent career of
a young investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;