* 0218141
* GOALI:  Investigating Metrology Issues in Chemical Mechanical Planarization Process for Microelectronics Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Richardson Adebanjo, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2007
* USD 265,000.00

The objective of the proposed activities under the Grant Opportunities for
Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) with Agere Systems Inc. is to develop a
strong well-integrated research and education program focused on the
understanding of the mechanical and tribological properties of chemical
mechanical planarization (CMP) processes for semiconductor manufacturing
applications. Integration of low-k materials in the metallization structures
creates severe problems during process integration. One of the major challenges
in the process integration after the incorporation of low-k materials is CMP of
these films due to the reduced modulus and cohesive strength. Due to the
emergence of CMP as the method of choice for global planarization of dielectric
and metal films, the frictional forces generated during the CMP process have
assumed significant importance. Understanding the mechanical and tribological
properties of complex stacks involving low-k dielectrics is critical for
successful evaluation and implementation of these materials and the main goals
of the proposed research are to obtain the fundamental understanding of the
nature of surface planarization and identify the mechanism to control the CMP
process. As part of this GOALI proposal, Agere Systems Inc. will support as in-
kind services like: a) provide CMP consumables (wafer, slurry, and pad) to
perform the CMP experiments, b) provide engineer/scientist from the industry to
serve as a thesis/dissertation advisor, b) provide resident workspace for a
graduate student together with all on-site cost of materials and supplies to
support the research, c) assign one engineer/scientist (approximately 10 % of
their time to work and monitor the progress of the research), e) to emphasize
technology transfer and implementation of research findings in manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;This GOALI proposal aims to synergize the Agere-USF partnership by
providing opportunities for faculty, postdoctoral fellows and students to
conduct research and gain experience with production processes in an industrial
setting. The university-industry collaboration will provide additional
opportunity for students to work with industrial scientists and use of their
additional state-of-the-art equipment facilities. Apart from providing hands-on
experience, the proposed research will provide a unique opportunity for the
students to be involved in interdisciplinary research- a must for future
success. Results of the project will be disseminated by paper presentation in
regional and national conferences, and published in appropriate scientific
journals&lt;br/&gt;