* 0218033
* US-South Africa Workshop:  Operations Research for Global Logistics Involving Africa, Pretoria, South Africa, August 2002
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Anton Kleywegt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 06/30/2003
* USD 27,000.00

0218033&lt;br/&gt;Kleywegt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports 10 US
participants in a US-South Africa Workshop on "Operations Research for Global
Logistics Involving Africa," scheduled for August 12-15, 2002, in Pretoria,
South Africa. The co-organizers are Professor Anton J. Kleywegt, with the School
of Industrial and Systems Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology,
and Mr. Hans W. Ittmann, in the Information and Communication Technology
Department at the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research. There will be
a total of approximately 30 participants, who will be drawn from academic,
industrial, and governmental organizations in the United States, the Republic of
South Africa, Mauritius, and South East Asia. The workshop will focus on global
logistics and supply chain issues, with an emphasis on operations research
models and techniques for global logistics involving Africa. The co-organizers
expect the participants to develop a better understanding of the similarities
and differences between first-world and third-world logistics problems, as well
as the usefulness of different techniques for addressing these problems. Site
visits will be made to logistics facilities in the Johannesburg/Pretoria/Midrand
region. A major goal of the workshop is to establish linkages between the
logistics communities in the United States and the Republic of South Africa for
the development of collaborative research and education programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most logisticians throughout the rest of the world know
little about Africa's unique logistics challenges. For example, South Africa's
logistics system can be characterized as heterogeneous, yet it has a fragile
infrastructure. Workshop participants will share information about advances in
supply chain management and operations research applications in logistics. They
will also identify those operations research problems involving Africa that are
the most relevant and important to global logistics. Results of the meeting are
expected to identify new research problems not presently encountered by US
investigators. Additionally, the African researchers and practitioners will be
exposed to new skills and tools that they can use to address some of their
logistics problems. Workshop results will be disseminated through the web page
of The Logistics Institute at George Tech, at http://www.tli.gatech.edu, as well
as by CD-R copies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project supports the participation
of five junior investigators from the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Design,
Manufacturing, and Industrial Innovation jointly support this award.&lt;br/&gt;