* 0218601
* ITR: Novel Hybrid (Discrete/Continuous) Computational Models for Very High Dimensional Nonlinear Dynamical Systems: From the Molecular to the Continuum Scale
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Earl Dowell, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2006
* USD 319,866.00

PI Name: Earl H. Dowell&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Duke University
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0218601 &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: ITR:Novel Hybrid
{Discrete/Continuous} Computational Models for Very High Dimensional Nonlinear
Dynamical Systems: From the Molecular to the Continuum Scale&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This ITR research and educational project is in an
application area at the intersection of Information Technology and an
engineering/science discipline. Work is proposed that will develop computational
models of complex nonlinear dynamical systems that are often encountered in
nanoscale phenomena and devices such as biological and polymer materials that
are currently being studied experimentally with Atomic Force Microscopes. The
principal goal is to develop a hybrid discrete/continuum model that will reduce
by orders of magnitude the number of degrees of freedom needed to describe the
system without any essential loss of information. &lt;br/&gt;The research will
be complemented by an educational plan that includes a newly developed course,
"Dynamics of Very High Dimensional Systems", the writing of a new
textbook/monograph of that same title and the mentoring of a post-doc and
undergraduate student who will assist with the research and the new
course.&lt;br/&gt;