* 0218357
* Fundamental Molecular Studies of Complex Fluids for Preservation of Biological Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Juan De Pablo, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2004
* USD 191,679.00

Juan J. de Pablo, U of Wisconsin - Madison

"Fundamental Molecular Studies of Complex Fluids for Preservation of Biological
Systems"

Labile biological systems such as proteins, cells, or tissue must often be
stored for prolonged periods of time. This is generally achieved by freezing the
system of interest in an aqueous solution containing various additives, whose
purpose is to minimize the damage that arises from the formation of ice
crystals. In some cases, it is also possible to freeze-dry the resulting
formulation, thereby resulting in a product that can be stored without a need
for refrigeration. In most cases, a large fraction of the biomolecules or cells
do not survive the freeze-thawing or freeze-drying processes; the rates of
recovery are low and contribute significantly to the cost and availability of
the resulting product.

Some examples of these additives, or "protectants ", are provided by
dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and ethylene glycol, both of which have undesirable
side effects. In practice, protectant formulations are generally conceived
through a costly trial-and-error process. And, while some general ideas have
emerged regarding their function, the precise mechanisms by which protectant
molecules act to preserve viability during freezing and drying are not well
understood.

In this work the PI proposes to conduct a systematic and comprehensive study of
the role of various protectant molecules on the stability of proteins in
solution and in anhydrous, protectant matrices. The work is largely focused on
the study of the disaccharides, which in recent years have shown promise for
effective preservation of biological systems. The PI also examines how the same
protectants act to stabilize lipid bilayer membranes in solution and in dry
matrices.

The project includes both modeling and experimental components. Computational
aspects will take priority over experimental (X-ray structure analysis, NMR and
calorimetry work will not be performed). At the modeling level, the PI uses
molecular simulations to elucidate the mechanisms by which protectants work, and
to identify the main structural attributes that render some protectant molecules
more effective than others. This will require that new simulation methods be
develop to facilitate the study of large ensembles of complex molecules (water,
disaccharides, electrolytes and oligopeptides) both remote and near the glass
transition point. At the experimental level, the PI intends to characterize the
thermophysical properties of various protectant and model-protein solutions and
glasses, and to relate these to preservation efficacy and to the results of our
simulations. The PI may characterize the equilibrium thermodynamic properties of
lipid bilayers in the presence of protectants and varying amounts of water.
These data will be compared to simulation results, and will be used to
rationalize his observations and those of others regarding the preservation of
cells.

The broader impact of the research is that it will lead to a deeper
understanding of protein and cell stability in solution and in the presence of
protectant solutes. It will also generate predictive models and experimental
thermodynamic-property and transport-coefficient data for rational design and
optimization of preservation processes. More importantly, it has the potential
to result in improved protectant molecules and formulations that will permit
long-term storage of food, pharmaceutical, and biomedical products. The
potential educational impact of the research is considered high since the PI has
a record of involving students, including underrepresented groups, in his
research.