* 0218882
* ITR:  A Versatile, Extensible System for Neutron Scattering Data Visualization and Analysis
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Ruth Mikkelson, University of Wisconsin-Stout
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2005
* USD 260,003.00

This is a grant funded through the Information Technology Research (ITR)
initiative. The award is to a predominantly undergraduate institution. Time-of-
flight neutron scattering experiments provide important insights into the
structure and dynamics of materials. These experiments are critical for academic
and applied research and are carried out at a small number of advanced research
facilities around the world, including the Intense Pulsed Neutron Source (IPNS)
Division at Argonne National Laboratory (ANL). To utilize these resources
effectively, this project will develop a freely available, platform-independent,
Java-based system for access, visualization and analysis of neutron scattering
data. Initial work has already been undertaken. The result of this initial work
is an Integrated Spectral Analysis Workbench (ISAW). ISAW is, in principle,
applicable to data from a wide variety of sources and is extensible by users of
the system both through "plug-in" operators written in Java and through a basic
scripting language. The system provides some highly interactive visualizations,
analyses and transformations of neutron scattering data in real time for some
instrument types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project will add important
new capabilities to ISAW. Single crystal diffractometers that utilize multiple
area detectors and LPSD's to obtain volumes of data as a function of time-of-
flight pose unique problems. There is a large amount of data and the data is not
regularly gridded. These problems are exacerbated when the data is mapped into
Q-space or reciprocal space. This project will construct operators and 3-D
viewers that allow scientists to view, select and manipulate data from such
instruments in scientifically meaningful spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition, the project will add interactive data modeling and extensive data
access capabilities to ISAW. Specifically, access to raw time-of-flight event
data and data from ancillary equipment will be added. Support for importing and
exporting data will be extended to the file formats NeXus, XML, and some site-
specific formats from other neutron facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
grant funded through the Information Technology Research (ITR) initiative. The
award is to a predominantly undergraduate institution. Time-of-flight neutron
scattering experiments provide important insights into the structure and
dynamics of materials. These experiments are critical for academic and applied
research and are carried out at a small number of advanced research facilities
around the world, including the Intense Pulsed Neutron Source (IPNS) Division at
Argonne National Laboratory (ANL). To utilize these resources effectively, this
project will develop a freely available, platform-independent, Java-based system
for access, visualization and analysis of neutron scattering data. Initial work
has already been undertaken. The result of this initial work is an Integrated
Spectral Analysis Workbench (ISAW). ISAW is, in principle, applicable to data
from a wide variety of sources and is extensible by users of the system both
through "plug-in" operators written in Java and through a basic scripting
language. The system provides some highly interactive visualizations, analyses
and transformations of neutron scattering data in real time for some instrument
types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project will add important new
capabilities to ISAW. Single crystal diffractometers that utilize multiple area
detectors and LPSD's to obtain volumes of data as a function of time-of-flight
pose unique problems. There is a large amount of data and the data is not
regularly gridded. These problems are exacerbated when the data is mapped into
Q-space or reciprocal space. This project will construct operators and 3-D
viewers that allow scientists to view, select and manipulate data from such
instruments in scientifically meaningful spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition, the project will add interactive data modeling and extensive data
access capabilities to ISAW. Specifically, access to raw time-of-flight event
data and data from ancillary equipment will be added. Support for importing and
exporting data will be extended to the file formats NeXus, XML, and some site-
specific formats from other neutron facilities.&lt;br/&gt;