* 0218113
* Modeling of Part-Fixture Dynamics With Application to Synthesis of Dedicated and Flexible Fixturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Shreyes Melkote, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2006
* USD 311,024.00

This grant provides funding for the development of models for analysis of part-
fixture dynamics in machining and application of these models to the synthesis
of dedicated and flexible fixturing systems. The models developed in this
research will enable part-fixture interaction to be considered in the stability
analysis of multiple-point machining processes such as milling. In addition, the
models will allow the impact of part-fixture dynamics on the final part quality
to be analyzed and accounted for in the synthesis of both dedicated and flexible
fixturing systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this goal, a dynamic model of
the part-fixture system accounting for the effects of micro-slip induced damping
will be developed. A simplified lumped parameter approach based on contact
elasticity principles will be used to develop the model. The model will account
for nonlinearities arising from unilateral contact conditions, micro-slip and
gross stick-slip. In addition, a modified dynamic friction tester will be used
to develop empirical models of part-fixture contact friction for use with the
dynamic model. The dynamic part-fixture model will be applied to the analysis
and synthesis of both dedicated and flexible machining fixtures such as the pin-
array flexible fixture. On a fundamental level, the models developed in this
research will complement the existing body of scientific knowledge in part
fixturing. On a practical level, it will provide the necessary dynamic analysis
and synthesis tools, heretofore unavailable, for designers and end-users of
dedicated and flexible fixturing systems. Application of these models will lead
to the development and implementation of truly process-capable fixtures.