* 0219411
* ITR:  Free-Boundary Problems in Precipitative Growth
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Raymond Goldstein, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 07/31/2005
* USD 498,000.00

0219411&lt;br/&gt;Goldstein&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses mathematical and
computational challenges posed by growth phenomena involving novel and difficult
free-boundary problems in fluid flow, precipitation/crystallization and
evaporation. These appear in contexts as diverse as hydrothermal vents in the
ocean floor, terrestrial caves, and electrochemical pattern formation, where one
finds growth of complex structures by precipitation. These range from hollow
soda-straw stalactites to fantastic curved helictites and undulating sheet-like
draperies in limestone caves, to iron-sulfide chimneys tens of meters high on
the ocean floor. Despite years of empirical study, these fascinating growth
morphologies are largely unexplained in any quantitative manner. We will develop
computational methods to study precipitative growth phenomena, based primarily
on boundary-integral and differential geometric methods in the study of surface
evolution. The enormous geological time scales on which many of these structures
form has created a paucity of experimental results, and few if any laboratory
analogs have been created. We will also develop and explore experimentally model
systems that can display such pattern formation on accessible time scales. One
such system, discovered in our laboratory, involves tubular growth by
electrodeposition, in which macroscopic tubular deposits grow in tens of minutes
around bubbles of hydrogen gas evolving off a cathode. Theoretical approaches
will include the study of the underlying electrokinetics at large Peclet number
and depletion layer modifications due to Lorentz forces, all as a means of
understanding the geometrical laws of surface growth that can produce the rich
and fascinating morphologies seen in nature, and the computational techniques to
study such laws.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;