* 0219834
* Collaborative Research:   Static and Dynamic Properties of Municipal Solid Waste
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Ellen Rathje, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2007
* USD 196,328.00

0219834, Ellen M. Rathje, Kenneth H. Stokoe U. of Texas-
Austin&lt;br/&gt;"Collaborative Research: Static and Dynamic Properties of
Municipal Solid Waste"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past 15 years, municipal
solid-waste landfills (MSW) have evolved from local "dumps" into sophisticated
engineered systems. Yet, despite the sophistication and complexity of the
engineered environmental protection systems required at modern solid-waste
landfills, and the dependence of the performance of many of these systems on the
behavior of the waste mass, our understanding of the mechanical behavior of MSW
is, at best, rudimentary. Uncertainty regarding MSW mechanical properties is a
major limitation on performance of reliable landfill stability analyses, the
design of waste containment systems for new landfills, and the closure and
redevelopment of old landfills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action is to support a
three-year collaborative research program whose objective is to evaluate
systematically the significant factors that influence the static and dynamic
geotechnical properties of municipal solid-waste landfills. The Environmental
Protection Agency requires that all landfills in the United States be designed
to withstand earthquakes. For landfills in areas having significant seismic
shaking potential, the dynamic properties are needed for design. Currently,
dynamic strength properties are assumed to be the same as the static properties,
and dynamic stiffness is based on limited small strain data. MSW is a highly
heterogeneous material composed of various degradable (e.g. paper, food waste)
and non-degradable (e.g. soil, plastic) materials. While the behavior of MSW is
likely to be influenced by waste composition and the state of material
degradation, a fundamental understanding of the influence of these factors on
the static and dynamic behavior of MSW is lacking. As a result, MSW properties
for static and dynamic analysis are typically based upon rules of thumb,
engineering judgment, and a handful of laboratory and field measurements.
Factors being investigated in this study include waste composition (particularly
with respect to the relative proportions of refuse and soil-like materials),
waste degradation, and particle size. Shear strength, compressibility, and
dynamic material properties of MSW are evaluated using laboratory and field
investigations. Research on the influence of the refuse-to-soil ratio and on the
state of waste degradation will further our understanding of the fundamental
behavior of MSW as a composite material composed of refuse and soil. Research on
the influence of test specimen size is intended to facilitate both further
research and site-specific studies for engineering design by possibly reducing
or eliminating the need for large-sized test specimens and testing devices in
future studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project capitalizes on
the insights and experienced gained by the principal investigators on previous
studies of MSW characterization and landfill performance. It will advance the
profession's understanding of MSW landfills as engineered systems, leading to
safer and more economical landfill designs. It is an important step in moving
beyond the over-reliance in current landfill design practice on rules of thumb
and conjecture. This project involves collaboration between researchers at the
University of California - Berkeley, the University of Texas - Austin, and
GeoSyntec Consultants in Huntington Beach, California.