* 0219528
* ITR: A Novel Framework with Fast Inverse Scattering Algorithms for Future Environmental Sensing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Qing Huo Liu, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2006
* USD 297,000.00

Qing Huo Liu&lt;br/&gt;Duke University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims
to develop a novel framework for rapid and accurate processing
of&lt;br/&gt;geophysical subsurface measurements in multilayer media. At
present, only 2-D mappings&lt;br/&gt;(i.e., the low-resolution images on the
ground surface) are available, greatly limiting the target&lt;br/&gt;depth
information. Due to the excessive computational demand, previous inverse
scattering&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for these sensors have been developed, but only
for objects in a homogeneous&lt;br/&gt;background medium. This new computational
framework is expected to dramatically improve&lt;br/&gt;the way environmental
site characterization is being performed.&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will
develop rapid and accurate computational algorithms for the
process-&lt;br/&gt;ing of some of the arguably most important measurements in
environmental site characteriza-&lt;br/&gt;tion and oil exploration, namely
electromagnetic induction (EMI), ground penetrating radar&lt;br/&gt;(GPR),
surface seismic, and borehole sonic imaging measurements in 3-D
heterogeneous,&lt;br/&gt;multilayer media. These algorithms, coupled with large-
scale computing and visualization&lt;br/&gt;platforms, form a novel framework
for current and future environmental site characterization&lt;br/&gt;where 3-D
subsurface structures can be directly investigated, and sensor arrays can be
adap-&lt;br/&gt;tively optimized. The main contributions of this research are:
(1) Rapid inversion methods&lt;br/&gt;based on accelerated extended Born/Rytov
approximations in layered media; (2) High-fidelity&lt;br/&gt;imaging algorithms
based on preconditioned contrast source inversion methods in a
multi-&lt;br/&gt;layer background; (3) A 3-D imaging and adaptive optimization
framework using these fast&lt;br/&gt;inverse scattering algorithms for multi-
sensors. These approaches are expected to yield a&lt;br/&gt;high resolution
because they account for the important multiple scattering effects that
cause&lt;br/&gt;the resolution degradation in previous linear inversion methods.
The development of the al-&lt;br/&gt;gorithms for objects embedded in multilayer
media represents significant advances in inverse&lt;br/&gt;scattering and its
applications in environmental site characterization and oil exploration.