* 0219987
* Preliminary Evaluation of Colloidal Silica Transport Mechanisms for Passive Site Remediation of Liquefiable Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Patricia Gallagher, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2004
* USD 77,189.00

CMS-0219987, Patricia M. Gallagher, Drexel University "Preliminary Evaluation of
Colloidal Silica Transport Mechanisms for Passive Site Stabilization of
Liquefiable Soils"

This project involves an exploratory evaluation of colloidal silica transport
mechanisms to stabilize liquefiable soil formations. The results will be used to
support development of a non-disruptive technique for ground improvement.
"Passive site remediation" is a new concept for non-disruptive mitigation of
liquefaction risk at developed sites susceptible to liquefaction. The concept is
to slowly inject a stabilizing material at the up-gradient edge of a site, and
deliver the stabilizer to the liquefiable area using the groundwater flow.

The focus is on the ability to deliver colloidal silica solutions uniformly into
liquefiable soil deposits, with subsequent gelation to mitigate the liquefaction
susceptibility. The main goals of the research are: (1) to determine if
colloidal silica grout can be transported through a column of liquefiable soils
in an adequate concentration to stabilize the sand; (2) to determine if the
grout will gel along the entire length of the column after delivery; and (3) to
understand the mechanisms of colloidal silica transport through liquefiable
sands. The research involves laboratory experiments consisting of short and long
column tests to identify the variables that influence colloidal silica grout
transport in liquefiable soils. The parameters to be considered include the
geochemical and physical factors thought to affect grout transport most
strongly, such as pH, ionic strength of the grout solution, flow velocity, and
pore size of the sand formation. The effects on the transport of gelling fluids
with variable density and variable viscosity will also be considered. This
research will set the stage for future development of implementation
technologies and field testing of passive site remediation. The research results
will be widely disseminated among researchers and practitioners in the areas of
geotechnical earthquake engineering, ground improvement, grouting, and
environmental remediation.

Passive site remediation techniques could have broad application for developed
sites susceptible to liquefaction, where traditional ground improvement methods
are difficult or impossible to implement. These techniques could also have
application to urban areas where subsurface contamination is difficult to
remediate.