* 0219875
* ITR:  Beyond the Talking Head and Animated Icon: Behaviorally Situated Avatars for Tutoring
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Francis Quek, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Kukich
* 02/28/2006
* USD 449,662.00

Behaviorally Situated Avatars for Tutoring: Beyond the Talking Head and Animated
Icon Abstract

One-on-one tutoring is a critical component of teaching and learning. This
project investigates technology to deploy an anywhere-tutor anywhere-student
system that permits a tutor to provide instruction via an animated avatar.
Exploiting psycholinguistic information, the system translates time-situated
pointing and communicative gestures performed on a LCD tablet in conjunction
with speech into a stream of behaviorally correct, spatially situated 3D
gestures performed by the avatar tutor. A camera tracks the student,
facilitating socially aware behavior by the avatar. The system exploits the
student's ability to use body motion cues in the embodied avatar to direct her
attention to appropriate locations of projected graphics that serve as artifacts
of instruction. The technology will potentially facilitate a tutoring program in
which students may connect to a pool of tutors for help with a variety of
topics. The approach essentially implements tutoring 'telephone handsets' at
both ends of the interaction. Tutors may be distributed across multiple sites at
their convenience and take calls as they are needed. Widespread access to such
tutoring will facilitate the vision of universally available educational
opportunities. The project will investigate the necessary artificial
intelligence and interaction technologies and evaluate the efficacy of this
tutoring methodology.

