* 0219218
* ITR:  Communication in the Presence of Noise and Algorithms for Error-Correction
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Madhu Sudan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 07/31/2005
* USD 400,000.00

ITR: Communication in the presence of noise &lt;br/&gt; and Algorithms for
error-correction &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Madhu Sudan,
MIT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increased reliance of information technology in
our&lt;br/&gt;day-to-day life has resulted in an explosion in the amount
&lt;br/&gt;of data that is stored in digital media and transmitted
over&lt;br/&gt;the internet. Associated with the increased amount of storage
are&lt;br/&gt;increased expectations: Over communication channels, one hopes to
&lt;br/&gt;be able to transmit more information, faster; and on storage
media&lt;br/&gt;one hopes to store more information, cheaply and for longer
periods &lt;br/&gt;of time. However, all channels introduce noise&lt;br/&gt;over
time and corrupt the stored/transmitted information.&lt;br/&gt;The task of
coping with errors in the new information technology &lt;br/&gt;era leads to new
challenges and a resurgence of some of the&lt;br/&gt;classical ones. This
research project investigates foundational&lt;br/&gt;questions and designs
solutions for some of these challenges,&lt;br/&gt;with special focus on the
following directions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A systematic study of ``list-
decoding'' algorithms&lt;br/&gt; as an approach to push the limits of error-
correction.&lt;br/&gt; A worst-case approach to information theory to capture
&lt;br/&gt; more general models of error.&lt;br/&gt; A reexamination of
classical models of communication from &lt;br/&gt; a new
(algorithmic/asymptotic) perspective.