* 0219282
* ITR/(DMS): A Computational Environment for Multi-scale MHD Turbulence Studies
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Anil Deane, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2006
* USD 430,000.00

Modeling MHD (magneto-hydrodynamic) turbulence has become
increasingly&lt;br/&gt;important both in terrestrial and engineering
applications, such as&lt;br/&gt;fusion devices and plasma propulsion, as well as
in space and&lt;br/&gt;astrophysical environments such as the solar wind and
astrophysical&lt;br/&gt;jets. The magneto-hydrodynamic nature of the plasma
fluid imposes&lt;br/&gt;constraints on the numerical procedures involved.
Likewise, modeling in&lt;br/&gt;the turbulent regime -- for turbulence is
ubiquitous -- also imposes&lt;br/&gt;constraints and challenges on the numerical
procedures employed. The&lt;br/&gt;numerical approach and demands of computation
time and accuracy&lt;br/&gt;translate into algorithmic (or software) advances
which can avail the&lt;br/&gt;hardware -- itself advancing rapidly. In this
project these advances&lt;br/&gt;entail: Adaptively refined grids, where fine
resolution only in regions&lt;br/&gt;of interest reduces overall CPU
requirements; MHD shock capturing&lt;br/&gt;methods, which improve accuracy of
the calculation; parallel computing&lt;br/&gt;techniques, which take advantage
of the availability of multiple&lt;br/&gt;processors and memory and cache
hierarchy; and sub-grid models, which&lt;br/&gt;allow coarser grids than
otherwise for turbulent regimes. The analysis&lt;br/&gt;of the resulting large
multi-block multi-processor data requires&lt;br/&gt;advanced data visualization
tools to examine the physics, the raison&lt;br/&gt;d'etre for the calculations.
The project will develop a computational&lt;br/&gt;environment, consisting of a
3D MHD simulation code with adaptive grid&lt;br/&gt;refinement capabilities,
complex time-dependent boundary conditions and&lt;br/&gt;optimized to run under
MPI on various parallel computers, and a&lt;br/&gt;visualization system that can
handle multi-block multi-processor MHD
AMR&lt;br/&gt;data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this end-to-end modeling and
discovery process, information&lt;br/&gt;technology (IT) plays a critical role.
From software engineering&lt;br/&gt;principles that result in robust codes, and
smarter data structures that&lt;br/&gt;are required for AMR, to single-node
optimization and better&lt;br/&gt;communication strategies on parallel
architectures, to visualization&lt;br/&gt;tool development and implementation,
IT makes possible knowledge&lt;br/&gt;discovery through simulation in a more
efficient and orderly fashion.&lt;br/&gt;The requirements for MHD turbulence
modeling being so considerable, this&lt;br/&gt;efficiency of IT translates into
enabling the science or technology.&lt;br/&gt;I.e. without the application of
these IT principles, physically&lt;br/&gt;important and interesting regimes
would not be analyzed. The results of&lt;br/&gt;this project will significantly
enhance the modeling capabilities of&lt;br/&gt;diverse flows and will
specifically be applied to the problem of&lt;br/&gt;heliospheric magnetic field
configuration and solar wind turbulence. 3D&lt;br/&gt;MHD simulations of the
heliospheric fields and flows that include&lt;br/&gt;rotation, shear, waves,
turbulence, current sheets, pressure-balanced&lt;br/&gt;structures, and
interaction regions, which thus represent most of the&lt;br/&gt;major physical
effects of importance, will be performed. The effort will&lt;br/&gt;enable
future studies on particle propagation and magnetic
field&lt;br/&gt;configuration for "space weather" effects on Earth. The project
will&lt;br/&gt;directly train a post-doctoral scholar and a graduate student
in&lt;br/&gt;relevant physics and computational mathematics; project results
will be&lt;br/&gt;communicated to the community via conference and journal
publications&lt;br/&gt;and the web, and through classes taught by the
PI.&lt;br/&gt;