* 0219205
* ITR:  Industrial Organization of Internet Industries
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Glenn Ellison, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 338,153.00

Proposal 0219205&lt;br/&gt;ITR: Industrial Organization of Internet
Industries&lt;br/&gt;Glenn Ellison, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a number of new
businesses that have been spawned by the growth of the Internet: price search
engines, online retail stores, and online auction sites. Several components of
the project involve the construction and examination of a new dataset which
includes high frequency pricing data from one online retail market, sales data
from one of the firms operating in the market, wholesale cost data, and prices
from traditional retailers which compete with the online firms. One part of the
project will study the demand environment that price search engines create and
whether demand becomes so price sensitive that firms are unable to cover their
fixed costs. It explores practices of online retailers that may help them to
avoid this outcome, including obfuscation in search markets and loss-leader
pricing. A second part of the project will explore the sensitivity of online
purchases to sales taxes and to differences between online prices and prices in
traditional retail stores. This analysis exploits data on the location of
consumers and differences between pre-tax and after-tax ranking of each
retailer. A third part is an examination of how retailers react to cost shocks
and rivals' price changes and how these reactions and the entry of new firms
have combined to produce the observed evolution of price-cost margins. The last
component of the project will study competition between online auction sites. It
will consist primarily of theoretical analyses of the factors that may allow one
site to remain dominant even as the overall market grows.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of these studies should improve understanding
of the emerging internet industries. They are very directly relevant to some
current public policy questions, such as whether taxes should be imposed on
internet transactions and how this might affect both the viability of internet
businesses and traditional retailers. By improving understanding of these
industries they may also enlighten future debates that arise and help private
firms direct investments efficiently. On a more general level the studies can be
seen as using a unique opportunity that the internet provides to improve
understanding of issues that have been and will remain important in many
industries: how search costs affect pricing and market efficiency, how attempts
to sell add-ons and a desire to keep consumers from focusing on price
differences affects competition, and how repetition and the entry of new firms
affects pricing.&lt;br/&gt;