* 0219308
* Excavating a Mississippian Outpost
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Timothy Pauketat, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2002
* USD 25,586.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Timothy Pauketat and an
experienced student crew will undertake in the summer of 2002 the excavation of
a recently discovered "outpost" of pre-Columbian Cahokia, located in the central
Mississippi River valley. Several previous seasons of fieldwork at this and five
other nearby "Mississippian" villages by Pauketat and crew all now point to this
one site for an answer to a critical research question: Did Cahokians, having
constructed the premier religious and political center in North America 950
years ago (@ AD 1050), physically control the farming economy of the region's
rural hinterlands? To date, excavations at other sites have provided suggestive
but not definitive evidence of such control. These other sites have, however,
shown that farmers with diverse cultural backgrounds moved into a rich
agricultural zone coincident with Cahokia's emergence as a regional center.
Discoveries from two previous seasons of work at the Grossmann site include
densely packed non-domestic buildings, exotic artifacts, and a hoard of 70 ax-
heads, all within a suspected four-sided village. Such finds make it unique to
the farming villages of the region. These finds also make it plausible that (1)
this one village was actually a planned outpost established in the midst of
farmers by a group of Cahokians or closely related kin or administrative
functionaries, and (2) that the establishment of the other farming villages in
the vicinity was part of an overall planned transformation of the cultural and
physical landscape. The physical attributes of stone ax-heads from the site
suggest that clearing the woodlands may have been a significant part of the
means whereby Cahokians instituted an agricultural system and obtained the
cooperation of farmers. The 2002 excavations will reveal the spatial plan of the
Grossmann site by mechanically removing the disturbed plowzone in a 2500-square-
meter area, an excavation strategy also necessitated by the imminent destruction
of the site by urban sprawl. The site will be totally excavated recovering data
of a sort seldom retrieved by archaeologists. Excavation will either verify the
planned, high-status hypothesis or prove the site to be lacking a central plan.
In either case, the relationships between Cahokia and the hinterland farmers
will be apparent in the debris left behind from the day-to-day practices of the
residents. In this debris, the team will recover the ultimate answers for a
central question of concern to all that study complex societies: How were such
societies and their agricultural systems instituted? This question is in turn
important to the social sciences and to a broadened understanding global
politics because it is a basis for an improved general understanding of the
extent to which cultural traditions and actions of ordinary people play a part
in larger-scale political changes.