* 0219538
* ITR: E-neighbors: Social Networks and Neighborhood Social Capital in the Internet Age
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Keith Hampton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Katherine Meyer
* 07/31/2005
* USD 299,960.00

Proposal Abstract Proposal 0219538 ITR: E-neighbors: Social Networks and
Neighborhood Social Capital in the Internet Age Keith Hampton, MIT

This research addresses concerns about the impact of Internet and computer use
on community and family life. Through an empirical analysis of four case
studies, this research project examines the current relationship between
Internet use and the size and composition of people's social networks, and ii)
explores the potential for new information and communication technologies to
expand social networks, social capital and community involvement at the local
level. This project is motivated by recent concerns that Americans have became
more cynical; are spending less time with friends, relatives and neighbors; and
have become less involved in clubs and organizations. Past research has
concluded with mixed results as to whether the Internet further dissociates
people from those around them, or if it holds the potential to reconnect the
disaffiliated. The adult residents of four Boston area neighborhoods have been
asked to complete detailed surveys on the composition, structure, and supportive
content of their personal and neighborhood social networks. This project will
analyze the results of those surveys and compare residents based on their level
of technology use and the structure of their social networks. Following the
first wave of surveying three of the four neighborhoods will be given access to
a series of Internet services designed to facilitate communication and the
sharing of information at the neighborhood level. A second and third waves of
surveying will compare the three experimental neighborhoods with a control
group, examining the impact of the provided Internet services on residents'
social networks and their involvement in neighborhood and community activities.

It is vital to address concerns about declining of social capital in America,
and any role that the Internet and home computing might have in continuing or
reversing this decline. While the existing trend of reduced community
participation originates to early to be associated with new information and
communication technologies, the fear is that home computing will further
accelerate this trend. The project investigators expect that this is not the
case. Previous research in this area often privileges the Internet as a social
system removed from the other ways people communicate. Peering into cyberspace
and ignoring the network of social relations that extended to other social
settings, fails to consider the crosscutting nature of community, including the
many ways and the many places people interact. By embracing a social network
perspective this project will demonstrate that Internet users have larger, more
diverse social networks, and that they are more active communicators both on and
off line. This research will also demonstrate that the growth of home computing
and Internet use has the potential to reverse the existing trend of community
noninvolvement. This study will show that the introduction of Internet services
designed for use at the neighborhood level can increase the size and diversity
of local social networks. Previous research points to the role of this type of
social capital in facilitating a number of positive community outcomes,
including; increased housing values and the prevention of neighborhood decline;
helping youth find job contacts and avoiding social problems including, drugs,
crime and teen pregnancy; increased neighborhood safety and reducing crime; and
increases overall health.