* 0219687
* ITR:    Evaluation and Personalization of Synthetic Voices
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2002,11/30/2005
* Alan Black, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 11/30/2005
* USD 394,312.00

&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation and Personalization of Synthetic
Voices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
two key issues in the generation of natural sounding spoken output by computer.
The first aspect provides an evaluation strategy for synthetic voices. With no
clear objective measure for speech synthesis quality, it is hard to show
improvement in systems and compare techniques. This work provides a detailed
list of evaluation techniques for sub-parts of the synthesis process including:
text analysis, lexical pronunciation, prosody, and phonetic quality. The
techniques are designed to act on existing and newly developed voices in other
languages, where measures are often harder to come by. Appropriate human
experimentation is used to justify the given metrics.&lt;br/&gt;The second
aspect of this work is to improve modeling of speaker-specific acoustic
phonetics. In unit selection synthesis techniques, matching the lexicon with the
actual spoken form of a particular speaker can introduce significant noise in
the selection process. Speakers will have particular idiolects for their dialect
and style. Using data-driven techniques, within knowledge-based frameworks, we
derive appropriate segmentation types for unit selection
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;Results are released through CMU's http://festvox.org
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;