* 0219110
* ITR:   Scalable Edge Router for Differentiated Services Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Bharat Bhargava, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2008
* USD 429,680.00

This research studies and designs coordinated trafficconditioning, network
monitoring, flow control, and provisions the networkproperly to meet the demands
for data and multimedia traffic&lt;br/&gt;in various applications. An edge
router component to monitor a large network for service level agreement (SLA)
violations and bandwidth theft attacks is developed. This network monitoring
scheme involves only edge routers. The conditioner and flow control components
alleviate the congestion and unfairness in resource allocation. The edge routers
share the congestion information with upstream routers to save resource wastage
in the downstream domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuous monitoring of
network activity is required to maintain confidence in the security of networks
with quality of service (QoS) support. These solutions have to be scalable in
order to&lt;br/&gt;deploy them in the heterogeneous Internet. A scalable edge
router cannot use excessive per-flow information and cannot involve core
routers. The researchers follow this principle in designing edge routers to
achievescalability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following is a list of
contributions that are obtainedthrough experiments, simulation, and
collaboration with industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. For the edge router, we
determine the optimal traffic assignment rate for each traffic class and weight
assignments at the queue to maximize the profit for the service provider of a
network&lt;br/&gt;domain. Proper provisioning provides service level agreement
bounds, such as throughput, delay, and loss for each
user.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. To ensure all flows are getting their share of
SLA, the flows of a network domain is monitored for possible SLA violation and
bandwidth theft attack. We define and employ throughput,&lt;br/&gt;delay, packet
loss, and security as QoS parameters for the design of an edge-to-edge SLA
monitoring scheme. This contributes to detecting service violations and attacks,
especially denial of service (DoS) attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. The traffic
conditioners at the edge routers intelligently mark and shape packets
differentially based on the class parameters and according to network state.
Through experimental studies,&lt;br/&gt;we show that the flow characteristics
provide better resource utilization and improve the application level quality of
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. The edge routers detect and regulate
unresponsive flows that cause poor performance for adaptive flows, such as TCP,
which retreats during congestion. The ingress (entry) edge
routers&lt;br/&gt;propagate the congestion information to the egress (exit)
routers of a previous upstream network domain. This reduces the resource wastage
at the downstream network due to undelivered&lt;br/&gt;packets.&lt;br/&gt;