* 0219546
* SGER: New Approach to Revolutionize a Photovoltaic Detector Performance Using Electron Injection-Induced Effects in AlGaN
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2004
* Leonid Chernyak, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 05/31/2004
* USD 68,000.00

Wide band gap GaN-based semiconductors are attracting increasing attention due
to their importance in modern electronics. The applications of GaN necessitate
the controlled modification of its fundamental electronic properties, in
addition to the availability of high quality material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
spectral response of the GaN-based photovoltaic detectors is generally limited
by the large absorption coefficient at high energies and the small minority
carrier diffusion length. Recent design changes, to overcome these limitations,
include the use of p-i-n instead of p-n junction [1-4], substitution of GaN by
AlxGa1-xN [1-3] or semitransparent recessed windows [2], and a back-illuminated
detector configuration [3]. However, a tuning of fundamental (Al)GaN properties,
to boost the performance of III-Nitride devices, was never directly considered.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovation in this proposal is to significantly
enhance a photovoltaic detector performance by tailoring the minority carrier
diffusion length in (Al)GaN. The diffusion length is a crucial parameter for the
detector quantum efficiency and photoresponse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
underlying concept is defined by the PI.s recent findings [5-8] that electron
injection into p-(Al)GaN from the application of an external voltage in a solid
state device--p-n junction or Schottky barrier-increases the critical minority
carrier diffusion length and lifetime. Consistent changes were observed in other
material properties, including luminescence and spectral photoresponse, and were
attributed to charging of deep metastable Mg-acceptor-related centers [6].
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The practical significance of this research is a long-term
(days), revolutionary (up to an order of magnitude!) performance enhancement for
(Al)GaN-based photovoltaic detectors, achieved through short time (at most 1500
sec) electron injection. This is because the increased diffusion length improves
minority carrier collection and eliminates the "dead space", where carriers
recombine before they are collected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
is of high risk, since it must be determined whether the novel electron
injection-induced effects in p-(Al)GaN [5-8] are universal in nature and
represent a fundamental property of the p-type material, or if instead they
depend on the material's quality, growth, and processing conditions. If, indeed,
the effects are universal, a high pay off will be manifested in a development of
this novel and simple approach to revolutionize photovoltaic detector
performance by manipulating the material.s transport properties, which will
likely be used in combination with design and technology improvements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success in this SGER application will lead to the
implementation of this approach in commercial detectors, and will advance the
frontiers of this technology for use in other bipolar devices for which the
diffusion length is critical (transistors, thyristors) [6]. It is planned to
submit a GOALI proposal (with Corning) based on success of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research will be a dipper
understanding of electron transport in GaN and related compounds, the
integration of research with education, and partnership with industry.
&lt;br/&gt;