* 0219332
* ITR:  Development of Computational Time-Dependent Density-Functional Theory Methods for the Study of Electronic Excitations in Correlated Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Adolfo Eguiluz, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2006
* USD 373,000.00

This award under the Information Technology Research initiative supports
fundamental computational and theoretical research, including algorithm
development, on dynamical correlations in materials. Methods to be explored
include time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) and Baym-Kadanoff
conserving approximations.

An aim of this work is to establish a synergy between novel computational
methods and insight into the dynamical electronic correlations in non-trivial
solid-state archetypes involving insulators, transition metals, rare-earth metal
hydrides, and transition-metal oxides. Dynamical charge-density and spin density
response functions will be calculated; these quantities map directly into
experimental loss functions, and contain unique signatures of correlation. The
time-dependent optimized-potential method will be implemented. This method,
which relies on a representation of the exchange-correlation potential as a
functional of one-electron orbitals, is self-interaction free. So, it represents
a promising approach for the study of correlated materials. "Hybrid
functionals," which have proved successful in the description of the ground
state of antiferromagnetic insulators will also be explored. TDDFT will also be
implemented without invoking the linear-response regime, by explicitly solving
the time-dependent Kohn-Sham equation on a real-space grid, propagating the
states on a time grid. Baym-Kadanoff conserving approximations will also be
implemented and explored. The proposed theoretical and computational will
contribute to the education of graduate students and postdocs in modern
computational materials physics. College students from disadvantaged backgrounds
will be actively recruited for research participation during the summers through
the Ronald McNair program at UTK. %%% This award under the Information
Technology Research initiative supports fundamental computational and
theoretical research, including algorithm development on dynamical electronic
correlations in insulators, transition metals, rare-earth metal hydrides, and
transition-metal oxides. The work involves the development of new computational
methods and the exploration of sophisticated theoretical formalism with an aim
to forge a quantitative theory of electron dynamics and transport in real
materials. The work will also contribute theoretical guidance to concurrent
experimental investigations of materials using inelastic x-ray scattering. While
this is fundamental research, the computational methods developed may support
future advances in materials and optoelectronic device technologies. ***



