* 0219780
* ITR:    Protocol Coordination for Multistream Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Ketan Mayer-Patel, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Wu
* 09/30/2007
* USD 368,047.00

The world is rapidly being populated by a wide array of information appliances
such as computers, personal digital assistants, video cameras, digital light
projectors, and cable set-top boxes. These&lt;br/&gt;appliances are no longer
simply islands of technology, but have the ability to communicate with other
devices in their environment. Future Internet applications will increasingly
make use of these&lt;br/&gt;devices by organizing them in a distributed fashion.
Examples of these applications include distributed sensor arrays, tele-
immersion, computer-supported collaborative workspaces (CSCW), ubiquitous
computing environments, and complex multistream, multimedia presentations. In
these applications, no one device or computational resource produces or manages
all of the data streams&lt;br/&gt;transmitted. Instead, these applications will
be distributed over a collection of devices in an environment. These types of
applications are called "cluster-to-cluster" (C-to-C)
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a C-to-C application, a set of processes
distributed on a cluster of devices or computers communicates with another set
of processes on a remote cluster of devices or computers. Processes are
distributed on the device clusters at either end to manage the data streams and
control the application. Unfortunately, traditional network technologies and
protocols are ill-equipped to support these kinds of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental problem is that current
transport-level protocols operate in isolation from other traffic flows and
within a strict understanding of "end-to-end." The transport-level protocols
used by multiple, related, data streams that share a common path have no
coordination mechanism. As a result, each process in a C-to-C application
competes with other processes within the same application for network resources.
Also, each transport-level protocol must make independent assessments of current
network conditions (e.g., delay, congestion, etc.) which can lead to
inconsistent and adversarial protocol dynamics. Furthermore, the numerous data
streams produced by a C-to-C application will have semantic relationships known
only to the application. These relationships affect how the data should be
transmitted and the operation of transport-level protocols. A C-to-C application
needs a global view of performance across all of its flows&lt;br/&gt;in order to
make adaptations to dynamic network conditions. Independent adaptation of the
separate flows uninformed of aggregate application performance is
insufficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key characteristic of C-to-C applications
is that a large portion of the communication path is shared among all data
flows. Although no two data flows may share an entire end-to-end path, all data
flows share the path between the two clusters. Furthermore, this shared common
path is likely to be where network conditions vary the most and the source of
congestion due to outside traffic. Exploiting this characteristic, our general
approach to the problem is to introduce mechanisms at the points of aggregation
for data streams in a cluster application that determine network conditions
along the shared common path and provide a consistent and coordinated view of
available network resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, a major
contribution of our work will be to introduce an additional protocol between the
network level (IP) and the transport level (TCP, UDP, etc.). We call this
protocol the "Coordination Protocol" (CP). This additional protocol will be used
to communicate information between forwarding mechanisms within the cluster
infrastructure on either end of the application. The information exchanged by
these mechanisms is used to estimate the dynamic network conditions along the
shared path (i.e., congestion, latency, jitter, etc.). Because a single
mechanism is charged with estimating network conditions across all flows of a
multistream application, all individual transport-level protocols involved in a
C-to-C application receive a consistent and coordinated view of current network
conditions. The application can then react to congestion, loss, and other
network events in a manner that incorporates application-level knowledge and
achieves global objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major features of the
researchers approach are:&lt;br/&gt; - Provides a consistent measurement of
network conditions across all application flows.&lt;br/&gt; - Preserves end-to-
end semantics of transport-level protocols.&lt;br/&gt; - Locally
deployable.&lt;br/&gt; - Independence from application architecture.&lt;br/&gt;
- Serves as a framework for other types of coordination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
a whole, the aggregate network behavior of all the flows of a C-to-C application
should respond appropriately to congestion and other network conditions. How
each individual stream responds,&lt;br/&gt;however, can only be determined at
the application level because only the application has an understanding of how
the streams are related. The coordination protocol we will develop provides
cluster applications with the ability to apply application-level knowledge about
these interstream semantic relationships and coordinate the use of network
resources. The protocol will help us explore coordination mechanisms and make
possible a wide range of new application types&lt;br/&gt;that do not currently
exist, but are envisioned by researchers and industry as the future of the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;