* 0219970
* ITR:  Intelligent Joint Evolution of Data and Information:An Integrated Framework for Drought Monitoring and Mitigation
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Donald Wilhite, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2005
* USD 214,000.00

Water is a strategic resource in the U.S. and impacts the sustainability and
livability of both rural and urban communities. It is therefore critical to
build monitoring and early warning systems for hydrologic events that inventory
water resources and accurately model its usage and its impact on communities
across multiple scales. Droughts have long been associated with Great Plain's
environments from the "Dust Bowl" years. Many drought indicators such as the
Palmer Drought Severity Index and Standardized Precipitation Index have been
developed to model the intensity (severity) of meteorological drought. However,
drought is a complex process that also has hydrological, agricultural, and
socioeconomic components. Hydrological drought indicators are often treated as
point observations in watersheds, reservoirs, lakes, and streams and these
indicators have not been extended to spatio-temporal drought regions, reflecting
the natural landscape. We propose an integrated framework that views droughts
through various windows that can provide higher resolution, better detect
emergence and closure of events, as well as their spatio-temporal impacts. The
framework is based on an innovative methodology called the Intelligent Joint
Evolution of Data and Information (IJEDI) that evolves data and information at
multiple temporal (windows) and spatial scales to derive support decisions. In
this methodology, data and information are considered as raw materials and
products, respectively, with which the concepts of Quality of Data (QoD) and
Quality of Information (QoI) are computed. This research will develop an
information science-based framework to model droughts as they evolve from
meteorological episodes to agricultural and hydrologic events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;