* 0219594
* ITR: Making 3D Visibility Practical
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* John Hart, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 08/31/2006
* USD 499,923.00

Efficient reasoning about three-dimensional visibility is a challenging problem
in many research areas and applications, including computer graphics (radiosity,
virtual reality walkthroughs), robotics (sensor-based navigation, visual
surveillance), computer vision (recognition, model building), architecture,
urban planning, and visualization in computational biology. Visibility issues
have been considered for four decades in these areas however, most early work
has focused on computing visibility from a single viewpoint, while modern
techniques require more global visibility information. Global visibility
describes the visibility relationships etween objects that are more complex than
points: visibility from a volumetric region of space, limits of umbra and
penumbra with respect to an extended light source, mutual visibility etween
pairs of objects, and loci of structural changes of
visibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although great strides have een made in
understanding visibility through the introduction of visibility space partitions
and the visibility complex, they have so far had little impact on applications.
This is due to several reasons: 1) worst-case theoretical complexity bounds are
discouraging 2) there are many degenerate cases that must be handled, making it
difficult to make robust implementations 3) equivalences in visibility lead to a
four-dimensional cell decomposition, which is difficult to visualize 4) cells
can be extremely complicated (some include holes).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work will make 3D visibility computations practical by approaching the problem
in two parallel, integrated tracks. One involves the investigation of several
key issues that will make 3D visibility algorithms more attractive and practical
in applications: 1) performing practical complexity analysis that captures the
expected performance for models that are typically used in applications, as
opposed to theoretical worst-case ounds derived from uncommon pathological cases
2) rather than taking a generic "precompute and return everything" approach, we
would like the amount of precomputation, information stored in data structures,
and extraction algorithms to be nicely tailored to the number of queries and the
type of information arises in a particular application 3) traversal through the
space of visibility rays will be facilitated through the development of
decomposition algorithms based on critical events and Morse theory 4) we will
develop techniques for reasoning about the evolving shadow space (set of points
not visible), which is required for many problems that involve moving
viewpoints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second track involves the development of a
3D visibility library ased on robust visibility primitives. We expect to make an
immediate impact on applications by making this library available for free to
other researchers. The library will serve both as a helpful visualization and
evaluation tool during the development of the research, and as a way to
stimulate other interest and applications of 3D visibility after the work is
completed. This effort, combined with the understanding gained from
investigating the key visibility issues, is expected to make a broad impact on a
wide array of applications that depend on efficient processing of visibility
information.