* 0219233
* ITR:    Collaborative Research:   Accurate Representations of Signals in a Coarse-Grained Environment
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Ingrid Daubechies, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 214,970.00

The aim is to provide a better mathematical framework and&lt;br/&gt;alternative
design methodologies for coarse quantization of signals in&lt;br/&gt;a highly
oversampled setting. The central themes is "sigma-delta&lt;br/&gt;quantization"
in analog-to-digital conversion of audio signals and its&lt;br/&gt;counterpart
"error-diffusion" in digital halftoning of images. In both&lt;br/&gt;cases, a
given target analog signal is represented by a judiciously&lt;br/&gt;chosen one-
bit (or few-bit) sequence which approximates the signal in a&lt;br/&gt;suitable
low-pass subspace. A wide range of different schemes exist for&lt;br/&gt;this
purpose, each corresponding to a different implementation
and&lt;br/&gt;approximation order. As our primary mathematical objective, we
expect&lt;br/&gt;to better understand the law of error decay of the existing
schemes as&lt;br/&gt;well as to improve on these by new designs. On the
algorithmic side, we&lt;br/&gt;aim to extend this analysis to settings with
computational and other&lt;br/&gt;implementational
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fact that digital signals and data sets
can be processed, stored&lt;br/&gt;and retrieved with great precision and speed
places high demands of&lt;br/&gt;accuracy on the conversion process from and to
the analog world.&lt;br/&gt;However, the devices used in the translation process
(such as in the&lt;br/&gt;case of analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog
conversion circuits in&lt;br/&gt;audio applications, and printers in image
reproduction) are of&lt;br/&gt;necessity analog devices, which have physical
limitations that, at&lt;br/&gt;first sight, conflict with those accuracy
demands. To cope with this&lt;br/&gt;problem, engineers have empirically
developed special signal processing&lt;br/&gt;techniques leading to alternative
signal and number representations&lt;br/&gt;that are quite different from
standard decimal or binary&lt;br/&gt;representations. Typical techniques take
advantage of the highly&lt;br/&gt;accurate performance of the analog devices in
sampling very densely in&lt;br/&gt;time or space to compensate for the lack of
amplitude precision of&lt;br/&gt;those devices. Interestingly, while these
empirical schemes have proved&lt;br/&gt;efficient and have been used in consumer
products for a long time, the&lt;br/&gt;corresponding framework of signal
processing has little mathematical&lt;br/&gt;support. We aim to study these
schemes in more detail, with the&lt;br/&gt;goals of improving the mathematical
theory as well as proposing&lt;br/&gt;variants that outperform those used
presently, and to identify a wider&lt;br/&gt;range of applications.