* 0219269
* ITR: Parallel and Grid Computing for Ecological Multimodeling
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Louis Gross, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 497,729.00

Environmental problems that span regional geographic extent require multiple
approaches to the modelling of natural system responses at various spatial,
temporal and organismal scales. Analyzing responses of natural systems to
alternative human actions requires mathematical and computer models for several
physical and trophic scales. Computer modeling efforts require large spatio-
temporal data sets, often derived from remote sensing, linked to complex models
for abiotic factors such as rainfall and hydrology. Due to the large spatial
data sets and heavy computational demands associated with such models, serial
computing methods on workstation platforms are barely appropriate for analysis.
The investigators will develop algorithms and software for linked ecological and
physical models appropriate for both multiple-processor computers and clusters
of machines across a computational grid. Included will be a comparison of the
performance of alternative methods and algorithms for parallelization of
ecological multimodels on a variety of platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research has potentially very broad impacts on the ability of managers
of natural systems to effectively utilize the extensive remote sensing data
currently being collected and archived, link these data with realistic
ecological and physical models of natural systems, and provide assessments of
the effectiveness of management scenarios. Given the costs and potential long-
term impacts of alternative harvesting, water scheduling, and land-use designs,
it is important to optimize decision making and monitor the effectiveness of the
actions taken. Achieving effective use, however, also requires the development
of a cadre of managers able to make use of new technologies. The investigators
will initiate the development of educational materials through which
environmental scientists can learn about the use of multimodels to address
regional environmental problems. An objective is to formulate an explicit
educational program that will lead to computational grid methods being accepted
as part of the toolkit applied in regional planning for management of natural
systems.&lt;br/&gt;