* 0219587
* ITR:    Intrusion Detection and Intrusion Prevention Through Dynamic Binary Translation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Darko Stefanovic, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 138,243.00

Malicious code poses a significant threat to our society, which is becoming
increasingly reliant on networked computer systems for commerce and
communication. Malicious software, including viruses, worms, and Trojan Horses,
has the potential to disrupt communications and threaten the stability of the
Internet as a whole. Therefore the objective of this research is analysis,
detection, and mitigation of malicious code. The many types of malicious code
are being investigated and grouped by exploited vulnerability and effect. This
makes it possible selectively to target each exploit class separately. Previous
approaches to the analysis of malicious code relied on static reverse
engineering, confined execution (via program language sandboxing), or network
traces. These approaches are often inadequate for increasingly complex malicious
code that may be self-modifying, using run-time encryption or dynamic
polymorphism. Dynamic malicious code requires dynamic tools for analysis,
detection, and mitigation. Therefore new dynamic tools to permit such analysis
are being developed, together with security enhancements to allow detection and
mitigation of known malicious code types. The research approach is to use run-
time binary translation to achieve transparent code monitoring and rewriting. A
prototype implementation of a system for software assurance and security based
on binary translation is being developed, and the effectiveness of the solution
and its potential deployment cost are being investigated.