* 0219925
* ITR:  Fine-Grain Data Management in Computational Grids and Applications in Network-Enabled Medical Imaging for Early Cancer Detection
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Renato Figueiredo, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2007
* USD 349,967.00

In the past few decades, high-performance computing has driven the development
of practical medical applications that are now widely available, such as
magnetic resonance imaging and computerized tomography. In recent years,
information processing is undergoing rapid advances driven by the use of
distributed computing systems connected by world-wide networks. Analogous to
power grids, "computational grids" have the potential to provide seamless access
to high-performance computers from ubiquitous, network-enabled devices. The
unprecedent levels of computation enabled by this model may foster the
development of new medical applications that can substantially improve
healthcare. An example is found in a class of emerging medical applications that
use Light-Scattering Spectroscopy (LSS) imaging to allow in-vivo detection of
pre-cancerous changes in human epithelium. Effective deployments of LSS imaging
will depend on the availability of high levels of performance and require access
to remote resources. This project aims to improve the state-of-the-art in data
management techniques for grids to allow seamless and high-performance
integration of data generated by medical instrumentation devices with
distributed computers. The long-term objective is to enable deployments of
network-computing based medical applications for early cancer detection that
require processing capabilities beyond those available in healthcare facilities.
In particular, this project will develop computing techniques to enable accurate
and fast analyses of LSS images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end, this project
will focus on three specific aims. The first aim is the development
of&lt;br/&gt;high-performance, parallel implementations of LSS analysis
algorithms. The second aim is the development of data management techniques that
allow on-demand access to data generated by a network-enabled instrumentation
device from off-site computing resources; these techniques are based on the
notion of per-user virtual file system proxies that are controlled by grid
middleware and allow latencyhiding performance enhancements to be decoupled from
operating system and application implementations. The third aim consists of the
integration of the proposed solutions with computational grid infrastructures to
enable dissemination to the research community. The results of this project will
be used and lead to the development and implementation of such LSS imaging
system for clinical use in collaboration with the Northwestern University
Medical School and Northwestern Memorial
Hospital.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;