* 0219345
* ITR:   Atomic-Scale Models in Two Year Colleges: Bridging Science and Technology with Atomic-Scale Models
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Marcia Linn, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2004
* USD 448,243.00

This project addresses using technology to teach science in an effective and
agile manner at the Community College level. As jobs requiring science and math
increase in numbers, the burgeoning bio-technologies being only one example,
future workers will be asked to learn new skills rapidly. The NSF-funded
Molecular Workbench Project (REC 9980620), now in its final year of research and
testing, has developed several powerful atomic-level models. These models,
together called the Molecular Workbench, when combined with a scripting language
that 'talks with" our model, and with Berkeley's WISE program that delivers on-
line projects in inquiry science, can illuminate some of the hardest-to-teach
concepts in chemistry, biology and physics.

Community Colleges are a critical gateway not only to career training but also,
for many, to college itself. Infusing science courses with the powerful
interactivity of models will allow students not only to master science, but
facilitate their transfer to specialty courses. The overall goal of this project
is to develop and evaluate the use of complex, interactive computational models
in the real-world situations encountered in two-year college technical programs.
The project will develop and evaluate flexible atomic-scale modeling software as
well as the software architecture that supports the rapid development and
deployment of educational materials that utilize this model. The Molecular
Workbench software is capable of underpinning key physics and some chemistry
concepts. It is situated between the rigor of professional science and the
simplifications required by good teaching. This project proposes to develop the
modeling software's capacity to model chemical bonds, and photon interactions as
well as new computational and visualization algorithms needed to model different
features of larger biomolecules (e.g. steric ligand-receptor interactions at
active sites). Working together with science advisors and a set of community
college educators, this project will not only enhance the Molecular Workbench
software, but will also develop classroom activities using the models, and
carefully evaluate their use and efficacy. This technology will be pilot tested
in two-year college courses by providing a range of hypermodels, or scaffolded
models, that use atomic-scale models to illustrate key science topics in the
context of typical technical specialties. The principle investigators will
identify a set of key science topics typically taught in biology, chemistry, and
physics courses at this level and generate hypermodels for each that are based
on technologies and processes used in specialty programs. They will capitalize
on an existing platform for inquiry science projects that has been developed at
the University of California, Berkeley. The Web-based Inquiry Science
Environment (WISE) supports students as they work collaboratively on inquiry
projects. Using WISE, the hypermodels will be integrated into complete online
instructional units that faculty can adapt to their needs without significant
changes in the organization or learning objectives of current instruction. They
will all, however, have a consistent, atomic-scale approach that could be the
basis of a new, interdisciplinary approach to the core sciences. The materials
will be developed in collaboration with faculty at two-year colleges and
curriculum experts, including Springfield (MA) Technical Community College
(STCC) and others throughout the US recruited through the Center for
Occupational Research and Development (CORD) and their Community College
Presidents Council. The PIs will make all grant-supported code available as open
source as part of their Open Source Library of Educational Technology (OSLET)
initiative.