* 0219330
* Bacterial Thermodynamics for Modeling Biodegradation of Anthropogenic Compounds
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Jeanne VanBriesen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Marshall M. Lih
* 03/31/2007
* USD 329,800.00

0219330 VanBriesen The goal of the proposed research is to improve biological
models for prediction of microbiological growth yield and stoichiometry in
systems involving in situ bioremediation or ex situ biotreatment of
anthropogenic compounds. A series of hypothesis-driven tasks are designed to
evaluate current available yield, thermodynamic, and quantitative pathway
information for anthropogenic compounds and to develop improved microbiological
models for these compounds.&lt;br/&gt;The crux of the work depends upon the
hypothesis that maximum theoretical bacterial yield is a fundamental parameter
of cell growth that controls the removal&lt;br/&gt;of anthropogenic compounds by
biodegradation pathways in natural and engineered systems. Further, bacterial
yield, coupled with the principle of mass balance, specifies the stoichiometry
of biodegradation, thus allowing prediction of the formation of intermediates,
the requirement of co-substrates and nutrients, and the utilization or
generation of inorganic species (e.g., O2, NH4 + ) that can affect the system
biogeochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;Specific research objectives are to:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Evaluate the available yield data for microbiological systems growing under a
wide range of environmental conditions and using a wide variety of natural and
anthropogenic compounds. Compile these data into a searchable, web-enabled
database for microbiological stoichiometric and kinetic data.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Modify an existing thermodynamic efficiency-based yield and stoichiometry
prediction methodology to account for biodegradation mechanisms observed for
anthropogenic compounds.&lt;br/&gt;3. Evaluate the predictive ability of the
newly developed model for multiple microbial systems using the database
generated in objective 1.&lt;br/&gt;The improved model structures developed on
this project will have widespread utility in biological ecosystem modeling,
bioremediation and microbial ecology modeling, and biotechnology and engineered
bioprocess modeling. Modeling in all these fields will improve our understanding
of the complexity of living systems and will enhance our ability to control this
complexity to our benefit.&lt;br/&gt;