* 0219025
* ITR: Ontologies in Action: An Information Architecture to Support Investigation of Linked Health-Environment Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Eric Post, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2006
* USD 299,994.00

Communities of scientists develop a specialized understanding of their specific
domain of expertise, which manifests as differences in mental conceptualization.
Within such information communities there may be quite high levels of agreement
regarding conceptualization, in that members can communicate and share ideas,
but insurmountable problems arise when data and knowledge must be shared between
communities. But many emerging problems in science require that such disparate
perspectives indeed be merged. For example, relationships between climate, land
use, and ecology can have far-reaching impacts on human health via ailments such
as West Nile Virus and Lyme Disease. Building predictive models that span
communities and lead to proactive mitigation is only possible when the
conceptual differences imbued in the data can be resolved, enabling a free
exchange. Through this research project, the investigators propose an
ontological approach to mediate the sharing of data resources among different
information communities across the environmental sciences, ranging from human
health exposures and outcomes to climate forecasts and climate-change
predictions. Aside from the benefits arising from a deeper understanding of the
conceptual similarities and differences among these information communities,
several major outcomes are envisaged in terms of computational infrastructure.
Specifically, the investigators will conduct research and development leading to
(1) computational tools to mediate the interoperation (sharing) of data among
disparate communities of scientists, focusing broadly on geospatial disciplines;
(2) computational tools with which to construct, represent, store, and exchange
ontologies generated from disparate information communities; (3) computational
tools to visualize and explore ontologies and to support the human-centered
sharing of understanding between information communities; and (4) measures to
quantify ontological differences between specific entities and categories, and
between entire ontologies, as a measure of the complexity and likely success of
interoperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project tackles a common
problem that pervades the geospatial sciences - how to share information and
results of analyses among communities of scientists in a way that takes account
of the different ways in which those communities conceptualize the world (or
parts thereof). The specific focus of this project is on better sharing of
information and computational models among environmental scientists, ecologists
and epidemiologists, with a specific focus on human health outcomes. Certain
infectious diseases have a complex relationship with the environment. Changes in
climate and land cover offer new habitats for disease-carrying organisms and
their hosts that can cause harm to humans (exemplified by West Nile Virus and
Lyme Disease). By improving the sharing of models and data relating to climate
and climate change, host and vector life cycles, land use and land-use change,
human demographics, and human health, scientists and policy makers will be
better able to understand the problem in greater detail, plan for future
outbreaks based on changes to the status quo, develop mitigation strategies more
effectively, and inform and educate health practitioners and the general public
to increase awareness.&lt;br/&gt;