* 0219582
* ITR:    Information-Theoretic Limits in Data Storage Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Jack Wolf, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 07/31/2005
* USD 400,000.00

Data storage systems represent one of the pillars supporting&lt;br/&gt;the
modern information age. Advances in computing and
communication&lt;br/&gt;technologies, and the networks that incorporate them,
have increased&lt;br/&gt;the demand for high capacity data storage devices in
applications&lt;br/&gt;ranging from biological research (e.g., the visualization
and analysis&lt;br/&gt;of massive multimedia data-sets) to consumer electronics
(e.g., the&lt;br/&gt;storage of high-resolution image, audio, and video data in
digital cameras).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses&lt;br/&gt;analytic
and numerical methods for determining the information-theoretic&lt;br/&gt;limits
on achievable storage densities and data transfer rates in&lt;br/&gt;recording
channels. It also develops and evaluates modulation, coding,&lt;br/&gt;and
signal processing techniques that can approach or achieve these
limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research considers both one-dimensional channel
models applicable&lt;br/&gt;to "track-oriented" storage devices, such as disks
and tapes, as well as&lt;br/&gt;higher-dimensional models relevant to
exploratory page-oriented and&lt;br/&gt;volumetric storage technologies, such as
holographic recording and&lt;br/&gt;thermomechanical recording based upon atomic
force microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, new information-
theoretic and algorithmic methods are&lt;br/&gt;being used to study lower and
upper bounds on the capacity of recording&lt;br/&gt;channels, using analytical
and empirically-based models for both longitudinal&lt;br/&gt;and perpendicular
recording systems. Bounds on the information rates of&lt;br/&gt;channels in two
and higher dimensions are also being developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
achieve performance approaching the theoretical limits, new&lt;br/&gt;signal
processing and coding methods are required. In the area&lt;br/&gt;of constrained
modulation coding, the project is exploring the analysis&lt;br/&gt;and design of
one-dimensional constrained codes that more efficiently&lt;br/&gt;combine the
functions of modulation and error-correction. The nascent&lt;br/&gt;theory of
constrained coding in two and higher dimensions is also
being&lt;br/&gt;investigated, with a focus on fundamental problems, such as
representation&lt;br/&gt;of multi-dimensional constrained systems, determination
of constraint&lt;br/&gt;capacity, and efficient encoding and decoding
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Channel coding techniques based upon
concatenation architectures,&lt;br/&gt;graphical code models, and iterative
decoding have been shown to effectively&lt;br/&gt;achieve capacity on certain
memoryless channels. The channel coding&lt;br/&gt;component of this project
addresses theoretical and algorithmic problems&lt;br/&gt;associated with the
application of these new and powerful coding concepts&lt;br/&gt;to data storage
channels. In particular, the research considers the design&lt;br/&gt;and
performance analysis of turbo-like and low-density parity-check
codes&lt;br/&gt;for channels with intersymbol-interference, the trade-offs
between latency&lt;br/&gt;and complexity in message-passing decoder
architectures, and new approaches&lt;br/&gt;to combining coding, equalization,
and detection that can more closely&lt;br/&gt;approach the recording channel
capacity. The project also addresses&lt;br/&gt;fundamental problems of channel
coding and detection in two-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;recording systems.&lt;br/&gt;