* 0219801
* ITR:    Architecture for Surviving Denial-of-Service Attacks on Battery-powered Mobile Computers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Dong Ha, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2006
* USD 444,154.00

The ongoing proliferation of battery-powered computing devices has created a new
type of "denial of service" attack: If an attacker can drain a device's battery,
for example, by having it repeatedly execute a energy-hungry program, the device
will be rendered inoperable. Unlike other denial-of-service attacks where the
attacker must keep up the attack in order to continue to deny the service, the
attacker can quit attacking a battery-powered device once she has fully
discharged the&lt;br/&gt;battery, and move on to attack another device. Just as
the advent of computer networks enabled an increase in the number of computer
viruses, Trojan horses, and other computer security breaches, the rising
availability of and increasing dependence on mobile computing devices will lead
to the creation and spread of "power-related security attacks." The battery in a
mobile computing device is thus a point of vulnerability and must be protected.
The purpose of this research is to defend against attacks on the
battery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a typical mobile computer, the battery is
expected to give a certain battery life under a set of usage conditions where
the user is actively using the device for a small fractionof the time, and the
device is idle the rest of the time. When the device is idle, power management
software puts the&lt;br/&gt;device into low power standby and sleep modes,
extending the device's battery life. If an attacker can prevent the device from
entering low power modes by keeping it active, the battery life can be
drastically shortened. There are three main methods for an attacker to drain the
battery: (1)&lt;br/&gt;Service request attacks, where repeated requests are made
to the victim for services, typically over a network--even if the service is not
provided, the victim must expend energy deciding whether or not to honor the
request; (2) benign power viruses, where the victim is made to execute a valid
but energy-hungry task repeatedly, and (3) malignant power viruses, where an
attacker modifies a program to make it consume more energy than it would
otherwise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ongoing research defends against these
attacks by defining (1) a power-secure architecture for mobile computing devices
that guarantees a minimum battery life, and (2) a design flow for identifying
power-related security vulnerabilities. This work guarantees a minimum battery
life by guarding against attacks on the device's battery, including service
request attacks, benign power viruses, and malignant power viruses. The overall
power-secure architecture employs two&lt;br/&gt;fundamental security features in
the system, multi-layer authentication and energy signature monitor: The multi-
layer authentication ensures that all untrusted services rendered consume less
than a certain amount of energy. Additional resources are committed only to
those requesters who have obtained further levels of trust. The energy signature
monitor catches those intrusions that have entered the system to execute an
energy-hungry application or service. The research&lt;br/&gt;consists of the
following tasks:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Classification of services to guarantee
minimum mission time&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Generation, capture, and validation
of energy signatures&lt;br/&gt;for trusted service
requests&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Validation of the architecture by implementing
power-related&lt;br/&gt;security attacks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has a
number of direct benefits to the stateof the art in information technology.
First, it protects battery-powered mobile computing systems, an increasingly
important portion of the information technology infrastructure, from a
potentially devastating form of security attack. Second, it explores a new
problem and attracts attention to an areathat should be studied by a large
community of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the this
research is to ensure that mobile computing continues to be attractive to a
growing community. By protecting against battery-based security attacks, this
work ensures the ongoing adoption of mobile computing by a wider segment of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;