* 0219798
* A Quantitative Framework for Long-term Performance Assessment of Waste Management Infrastructure using Hazard Analysis Method
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Hilary Inyang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing grant
* Edward John Jaselskis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 421,861.00

Abstract - A Quantitative Framework for Long-term Performance Assessment of
Waste Management Infrastructure Using Hazard Analysis Method

The current and proposed Natural Hazard Loss Estimation Methodology (HAZUS)
focuses on traditional structures such as buildings, utilities and
transportation structures, e.g., roads and bridges. This project focuses on the
development of methodologies to address damages to waste containment systems due
to extreme events (human-induced or natural) for linkage with HAZUS. Damage to
waste management facilities can result in the release of highly toxic
contaminants into the environment. These issues here become even more important
since the events of September 11, 2001. The design service lives of these
facilities range from about 10 to 200 years, which is significant enough to
warrant consideration of vulnerability when the facility is located in areas of
significant seismic activity. Ironically, high population densities characterize
most of the earthquake-prone areas and generate high volumes of waste through
domestic and industrial activities. This may lead to high concentrations of
waste management facilities nearby, which when damaged may pose health and
environmental risks to residents of disaster-prone areas.

In this project, quantitative methodologies will be developed to enable
integration into HAZUS the capability to assess potential damage to waste
containment facilities in the United States. The overriding objective is to
enable the estimation of the vulnerabilities of such system to intentional and
natural threats. Performance, described in terms of probable release volumes of
contaminants and, in some cases, system structural stability, will be indexed
using Weibull shape and scale parameters. Research elements include analyses of
containment system configurations to establish the ranges of series and parallel
linkages among components with respect to functions; development of a
methodology for representing deterioration-time functions for materials that
constitute the transport media within containment systems; coupling the
occurrence and damage from earthquakes and other transient events; development
of a screening system for significant stressors; formulation of a transport
assessment sub-module with an architecture open enough to accommodate existing
submodels; and establishment of quantitative linkages between probable release
volumes of contaminants and ecosystem/human health exposure/risk assessment
methods.

The broader impacts of this research includes the planned use of its results in
technical assistance to local, state and federal agencies, and private firms on
the design, siting, and operation of waste management facilities in sensitive
environments. This project involves research, training of three students
including women and minorities, development and engagement of practicing
personnel in this composite natural disaster/environmental security program.