* 0219559
* ITR: Bandwidth Efficient Techniques for Ensuring Mobile Code Integrity and Authentication
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Lori Pollock, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 08/31/2006
* USD 334,173.00

Existing methods to validate mobile code integrity and author authentication
include using certificates, encrypting the code, and using digital signatures to
sign applications. This proposal addresses the challenge of providing users with
a system that can overcome the weaknesses of certificates (which require
additional bandwidth) and conventional signatures (which can be removed) without
becoming as obtrusive as encrypted code. This research proposes a novel approach
in which the code serves as its own authentication device. The overall goal of
this proposed research is to develop both the foundations and a unifying
framework for ensuring integrity and authentication of mobile code, and then to
build a prototype environment consisting of a set of automatic tools that embody
the developed techniques.&lt;br/&gt;The results will be:&lt;br/&gt;(1)
techniques for statically analyzing mobile code representations to efficiently
compute a tamper detection mark and to embed, extract, and validate the mark,
&lt;br/&gt;(2) static analysis techniques for generating a unique program
fingerprint to be used as a less stringent form of tamper detection and for
intellectual property protection, &lt;br/&gt;(3) a suite of platform-independent
tools that automate the process of ensuring integrity and authentication for
mobile code, &lt;br/&gt;(4) thorough experimental evaluation of the developed
techniques, and &lt;br/&gt;(5) increased participation of undergraduates in
experimental computer&lt;br/&gt;science research, with particular attention to
encouraging &lt;br/&gt;the pursuit of graduate education and women in
computer&lt;br/&gt;science.&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research represents a
significant step towards ensuring high confidence in the integrity of mobile
code, which is becoming a major component of software systems exploiting the
Internet.