* 0219292
* ITR:  Statistical Physics and Computational Complexity
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Cristina Marchetti, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2007
* USD 480,250.00

This award under the Information Technology Research initiative explores and
strengthens connections between computer science and the physics of complex
systems, addressing the important examples of membranes and disordered materials
from condensed matter physics. The proposed research brings these disciplines
closer together by recognizing that not only are novel algorithmic tools crucial
for modeling complex physical systems, but that there are fundamental links
between the physical properties of the system and the computational complexity
of the simulation. This project will also train students and researchers in this
area at the interface between condensed matter theory and information technology
and provide simulation software components for the research community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the challenges in sciences such as physics and
biology are problems in understanding the behavior of a very large number of
strongly interacting degrees of freedom, where the macroscopic behavior is
determined by the competition between local ordering and disordering effects,
including temperature, heterogeneities, and geometry. Examples abound in the
both the classical and quantum world, including vortex lines in superconductors,
strongly correlated electrons in disordered solids, and fluctuating membranes,
as seen in cells and artificial colloidal structures. Describing the phases and
transitions in these systems relies upon being able to build up the large-scale
behavior from microscopic models. This is quite challenging for conventional
simulations. The intent here is to draw on ideas from computer science to
develop new algorithms and to identify universal features using extensive
simulations. In turn these features will be used to develop new simulation
methods and analytical understanding. This project will focus on specific areas
in condensed matter physics that are of direct experimental relevance and raise
general algorithmic questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will study the phase
diagram of realistic models of physical membranes, with important applications
to biological membranes.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will explore the defect structure of
crystals on topographies of fixed curvature, such as a crystal on the surface of
a sphere, and more complex geometries. This work has direct relevance to the
rich physics of colloidosomes, spherical viruses and other systems currently
studied in many laboratories. This work will rely on combining knowledge about
small-scale defects and long wavelength elasticity and exploring optimization
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will investigate the phases of a class of
disordered classical (e.g., vortex lines in superconductors) and quantum
(interacting electrons in disordered solids) disordered systems that can be
studied simultaneously by the same numerical algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will
explore the connection between polynomial time optimization algorithm and
physical theories of disordered materials. This includes the development of new
approaches to explain the timing of algorithms by adapting physical concepts of
phases and correlation lengths to their nonphysical
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The achievement of the scientific goals for
specific physical systems and algorithmic studies will be closely linked with
more general benefits:&lt;br/&gt;The training of undergraduate and graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers who will have the expertise and
inclination to work at the bridge between statistical physics and computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;Building a common expertise and suggesting potential
collaborations in the computer science and physics
communities.&lt;br/&gt;Software development, in three parts (problem generators,
solvers, and data analyzers), that can be adopted by researchers to solve
related problems and for testing alternate computational
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award under the Information Technology
Research initiative explores and strengthens connections between computer
science and the physics of complex systems. The research enhances and builds
connections between these disciplines by recognizing that not only are novel
algorithmic tools crucial for modeling complex physical systems, but that there
are fundamental links between the physical properties of the system and the
computational complexity of the simulation. This project will also train
students and researchers in this area at the interface between condensed matter
theory and information technology and provide simulation software components for
the research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the challenges in sciences
such as physics and biology are problems in understanding the behavior of a very
large number of strongly interacting degrees of freedom, where the macroscopic
behavior is determined by the competition between local ordering and disordering
effects, including temperature, heterogeneities, and geometry. Examples abound
in the both the classical and quantum world, including vortex lines in
superconductors, strongly correlated electrons in disordered solids, and
fluctuating membranes, as seen in cells and artificial colloidal structures.
Describing the phases and transitions in these systems relies upon being able to
build up the large-scale behavior from microscopic models. This is quite
challenging for conventional simulations. The intent here is to draw on ideas
from computer science to develop new algorithms and to identify universal
features using extensive simulations. In turn these features will be used to
develop new simulation methods and analytical understanding. This project will
focus on specific areas in condensed matter physics that are of direct
experimental relevance and raise general algorithmic
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will study the phase diagram of
realistic models of physical membranes, with important applications to
biological membranes.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will explore the defect structure of
crystals on topographies of fixed curvature, such as a crystal on the surface of
a sphere, and more complex geometries. This work has direct relevance to the
rich physics of colloidosomes, spherical viruses and other systems currently
studied in many laboratories. This work will rely on combining knowledge about
small-scale defects and long wavelength elasticity and exploring optimization
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will investigate the phases of a class of
disordered classical (e.g., vortex lines in superconductors) and quantum
(interacting electrons in disordered solids) disordered systems that can be
studied simultaneously by the same numerical algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will
explore the connection between polynomial time optimization algorithm and
physical theories of disordered materials. This includes the development of new
approaches to explain the timing of algorithms by adapting physical concepts of
phases and correlation lengths to their nonphysical
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The achievement of the scientific goals for
specific physical systems and algorithmic studies will be closely linked with
more general benefits:&lt;br/&gt;The training of undergraduate and graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers who will have the expertise and
inclination to work at the bridge between statistical physics and computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;Building a common expertise and suggesting potential
collaborations in the computer science and physics
communities.&lt;br/&gt;Software development, in three parts (problem generators,
solvers, and data analyzers), that can be adopted by researchers to solve
related problems and for testing alternate computational approaches.&lt;br/&gt;*
**&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;