* 0219266
* ITR: Advanced Computational Environment for Molecular and Mesoscale Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* David Kofke, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2007
* USD 499,117.00

This Information Technology Research (ITR) project aims to apply state-of-the-
art software tools and methods to develop an advanced computational environment
for molecular and mesoscale modeling. This work is performed to address
specific, well-documented needs that block the broader adoption of molecular and
multiscale modeling tools to solve practical problems. The environment is
designed to be extensible (accommodates easily new methods and models),
computationally efficient, and easy to use. It aims to be platform independent
yet configurable to exploit features of different computing environments,
including parallel and grid architectures. It is developed using the Java
programming language, and consists of two distinct parts. First is an
Application Programming Interface (API) that can be used to construct a wide
variety of simulations from a common set of building blocks; the API can be
used, for example, by programming in a text editor. Second is an Integrated
Development Environment (IDE), which provides an alternative graphical
environment for the development and application of complex molecular
simulations. The work performed here consists of designing, developing and
testing the API and IDE, researching how they can be best implemented on a wide
variety of single and multiprocessor computing architectures, disseminating
them, and conducting activities to promote understanding and use of them. A
range of experts are consulted to assist in the detailed implementation of the
best simulation methods and models in current use; this practice serves the dual
purpose of speeding the development as well as broadening the interest in it.
The focus of the development is to facilitate use in research applications, but
there are significant educational components to the activity: (1) the tools are
used to produce aids for teaching molecular phenomena and its role in producing
macroscopic behaviors; (2) the development environment is used as a basis to
teach ideas about molecular simulation to students from Buffalo-area high
schools and freshman- through senior-level undergraduates at the University; (3)
undergraduates contribute through tightly-focused development activities.
Further, the object-oriented structure of the API provides a sound pedagogical
basis for teaching molecular simulation in a way that promotes broader use.
Accordingly the codes and concepts developed in this work are used as a central
component in a regular series of national workshops in molecular simulation
offered by the newly created Nanomaterials Theory Institute at Oak Ridge
National Laboratory.