* 0219754
* ITR Collaborative Proposal:    Subgroup Fault Lines in Distributed International Teams:    The Impact on Cross-National Learning and Team Effectiveness
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* Catherine Cramton, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2008
* USD 205,000.00

This research project explores the extent to which the proliferation of
technology-enabled, international distributed teams can serve a social as well
as an economic good by promoting cross-national understanding and the competence
of members. Two issues of theoretical and practical significance are examined in
depth, subgroup dynamics and cross-national learning processes. Understanding
these processes in such teams and the impact of the use of communication
technologies on them are important objectives. Moreover, the research will
consider the role that each process plays in team effectiveness. Psychological
processes and behavior at the team and individual levels will be examined by
means of an ethnographic field study in a large, internationally distributed
company. Particular attention will be given to patterns of communication, use of
communication technologies, and the sharing of contextual information. The
research seeks to advance science through the development of theory and evidence
concerning subgroup polarization and collaboration in distributed groups, cross-
national learning processes in moderately heterogeneous international groups,
and the impact of these processes on team effectiveness. Envisioned advances
also include recommendations &lt;br/&gt;for the design of supporting
collaborative technologies.