* 0219176
* ITR:  Representation and Design of Heterogeneous Structures
* ENG,DMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Wei Sun, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 09/30/2005
* USD 506,605.00

This grant provides funding for the development of modeling data structures for
representation and design of three-dimensional heterogeneous objects, with
special application to tissue engineered structures. Representation of three-
dimensional solid models is accomplished with a novel constructive heterogeneous
solid geometry algebra and a heterogeneous boundary representation data
structure. Heterogeneous structure design is accomplished by an adaptation of
discrete optimization techniques that, when given a set of unit cellular
structure primitives, determines the optimal (or satisfying) internal
configuration of the three-dimensional solid that achieves engineering
requirements. The approach introduces a graph theoretic optimization framework
that exploits properties of heterogeneous representation elements to create
structures that satisfy multiple criteria of anatomical fitting, structural
integrity, biological function, and manufacturability.

If successful, this research will deliver new techniques and tools to represent,
design and develop heterogeneous tissue scaffolds. It will lead to fundamental
and integrative computer science and engineering advances that span engineering
design, solid modeling, computational geometry and algorithms, computer-aided
design and manufacturing, and tissue engineering. This project actively engages
industry and government, including collaborations with the developers of
international standards and the data transfer protocols for heterogeneous
structures, a major computer-aided design software vendor, a leading
biopharmaceutical manufacturer, and a major medical center with expertise in
tissue scaffold and replacement application. This research links the state-of-
the-art in geometric computing and commercial computer-aided design and
manufacturing software with the needs of the non-traditional materials found in
biomedical tissue engineering. Therefore, it will enable new applications. This
research also produces joint curricula, spanning mathematics, computer science
and engineering to educate future generations of students who will design,
manufacture and develop software for heterogeneous material applications.