* 0219338
* Collaborative Research:   Low Power CMOS Circuits and Systems for Next Generation Wireless Information Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Eugene John, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/2006
* USD 175,602.00

There is a rapidly growing trend toward embedding wireless capability into a
wide variety of information technology products; recently in the form of single
chip transceivers, and in the future perhaps integrated on-chip with the main
product function. These devices must have low power consumption to satisfy
battery conservation and thermal considerations. Good receiver sensitivity and
signal handling are also essential in a crowded radio frequency (RF) spectrum;
however, this requirement conflicts with low power circuit design. We propose to
develop low power CMOS circuits that improve the trade-off between power
consumption and RF performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current CMOS low noise
amplifiers (LNA) have noise figures as low as 0.8 dB, input intercept points up
to +18dBm, and power as low as 1.5 mW; however, these specifications cannot be
obtained simultaneously. Likewise, CMOS mixers can meet demanding CDMA
communications standards for linearity and noise figure, but only at high power
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these problems we propose a number of
strategies for (a) reducing power consumption for a given level of performance,
and (b) allowing a dynamic trade-off of power versus RF performance. These
trategies include: (1) reuse of amplifier stages at two different frequencies
through reflex arrangements, thus reducing the number of high performance, high
current stages required in receivers, (2) dynamically controlled positive
feedback and bias in LNA stages, to allow power, signal handling, and noise
figure to be traded off based on signal strength and interference, and (3)
integration of charge pumps into individual drain supplies, to optimize the
voltage for RF-critical stages while allowing the non-critical portions of a
CMOS chip to operate at low voltage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful
implementation will lead to improved range and life for wireless sensors, more
reliable communications under adverse interference conditions, and ultimately to
wider application of information technology in industry and science.&lt;br/&gt;