* 0219272
* ITR:  Advancing Digital Imagery Technologies for Asian Art and Cultural Heritages
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Jia Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Griffin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 214,000.00

This collaborative research project aims at advancing
information&lt;br/&gt;technologies related to the preservation, retrieval, and
dissemination&lt;br/&gt;of digital imagery for Asian art and cultural heritages.
Researchers&lt;br/&gt;in the US, China, and South Korea will collectively
investigate and&lt;br/&gt;develop technologies for acquiring, browsing,
managing, and searching&lt;br/&gt;large collections of high quality art images.
This project will&lt;br/&gt;contribute to the fundamental knowledge and
technologies required to&lt;br/&gt;create and maintain information systems that
can operate in multiple&lt;br/&gt;languages, formats, media, and social and
organizational contexts.&lt;br/&gt;The US research team will focus on (1)
multimodal media management,&lt;br/&gt;(2) distributed data mining, and (3)
image storage and display. The team&lt;br/&gt;will develop theoretical
foundations to associate linguistic terms&lt;br/&gt;with image features. The
testbed databases of art images for this&lt;br/&gt;research project consist of
high quality scans, with metadata&lt;br/&gt;information and detailed keyword
information, as well as comprehensive&lt;br/&gt;textual descriptions. The
research work will show that (1) modern&lt;br/&gt;machine learning and
statistical data mining tools are capable of&lt;br/&gt;learning from non-
structured or semi-structured input data such as&lt;br/&gt;human annotations,
(2) statistical image modeling techniques can be&lt;br/&gt;used in automatic
linguistic indexing and concept dictionary
building.&lt;br/&gt;------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;