* 0219382
* ITR:  Twin Photons with Angular Momentum: Extending Entanglement for Quantum Information
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Prem Kumar, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* C.  Caldwell
* 07/31/2005
* USD 417,000.00

Twin photons have provided quantum optics with one of its most powerful tools to
explore phenomena such as particle entanglement and the idea of teleportation of
information, with additional glimpses of possible applications to quantum
computation. Addition of angular momentum (AM) entanglement to the conjugated
photon system in the parametric down conversion (PDC) process could extend
entanglement to an unprecedented degree. It is the aim of this work to extend
the fundamental knowledge on twin photons with angular momentum, which is in its
early stages, and to determine the possibility of applications of these new
ideas to Quantum Information Science. The specific plans include the following.
1) A coincidence experiment to confirm the angular correlations of entangled
photons with angular momentum that have been predicted theoretically will be
performed. 2) A second coincidence experiment will be done as a test for a
possible application in optical fibers. 3) Light states entangled both in
angular momentum and polarization will be created by a combination of path
indistinguishability to produce multi-entanglement between entangled
polarization states and entangled angular momentum states. The experimental
efforts will be accompanied by theoretical studies.