* 0219379
* GOALI: High Permeability Ferrite Cores for Micro-Inductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Linda Meichle, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 12/31/2005
* USD 300,000.00

Magnetic materials have unique properties that are driving their integration
with microelectronic and micro-electro-mechanical (MEM) devices. Various
microfabrication technologies are being pursued aggressively. In this proposal,
it is proposed to develop a novel technique to deposit oxide magnetic material
films applicable to micro magnetic devices. The magnetic materials chosen for
the proposed study are low coercivity soft ferrites (manganese zinc and nickel
zinc ferrites) with initial permeability ranging from 1,000-10,000. The films
will find extensive applications in micro inductors, micro transformers and
other on chip magnetic devices. These films will be deposited by electrophoresis
i.e electrodeposition from nano to micron size ferrite particles suspended in a
solution. The ferrite powders will be prepared by jet milling technique in
conjunction with a ferrite company Ferronics and the Center for Advanced Ceramic
Technology (CACT) at Alfred University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An electrochemical
process will be developed to get uniform deposition of magnetic films on silicon
wafers. The films will be characterized for their magnetic properties, thickness
uniformity and adhesion. Subsequently, a lithographic technique will be
developed to pattern ferrite films to form the cores of micro inductors.
Fundamental investigations will be made to understand the effect of particle
size distribution and electrodeposition in confined regions on the film
morphology by modeling the deposition process. The magnetic properties will be
measured on these films and structures. These film structures will be integrated
with copper micro-inductors on semiconductor substrates. Inductors will be
designed and modeled analytically and using an electromagnetic software. The
fabrication will be carried out utilizing the IC fabrication facility at
Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT). Electrical measurements such as
inductance and Q-factor will be done using network analyzer and impedance
meters. The optimized structures will then be fabricated with circuitry on
silicon wafers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be a multidisciplinary
experimental and theoretical research program between Microelectronic
Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Physics and Electrochemistry. In addition,
there is support from industry and the CACT center. The project will enable
fabrication of on-chip magnetic components for micro-inductors and micro
magnetics. The proposed process can also be utilized to integrate other magnetic
materials such as hard ferrites and microwave ferrites.&lt;br/&gt;