* 0219709
* GLOBEC-01: Zooplankton Population Dynamics on Georges Bank: Model and Data Synthesis
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2007
* James Pringle, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/2007
* USD 337,391.00

The goal of this project is to gain a mechanistic understanding of the
influences of&lt;br/&gt;climate variation on the population dynamics and
production of target zooplankton species on Georges Bank (Calanus finmarchicus,
Pseudocalanus moultoni, P. newmani, and Oithona similis) through its effects on
advective transport, temperature, food availability, and predator fields. Using
data analysis and models as tools, results acquired during the first three
phases of GLOBEC are being incorporated into a new synthesis of the physical and
biological processes regulating zooplankton abundance on the Bank. Physical
models will be forced with measured daily, interannually variable data, and
coupled to biological models synthesizing the detailed observations collected
during the GLOBEC program.&lt;br/&gt;To understand the role of advection, and to
disentangle the effects of physical and biological processes, a hierarchy of
physical and biological models are being developed. These include 1-, 2-, and 3-
D physical models, ecosystem models, and individual-based models (IBMs) for the
target species. The IBMs are being coupled to 1D physical models designed to
represent the characteristic environments of the different Gulf of Maine and
Georges Bank subregions. Ultimately, the IBMs will be coupled to the full 3D
physical/ecosystem model through particle tracking. This will provide a physical
and biological milieu in which to develop and probe hypotheses regarding the
combined influences of physical and biological factors on the copepod population
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;Although the population dynamics in all broadscale survey
years will be studied, initial&lt;br/&gt;investigations are concentrating on
1995, 1998 and 1999. The data sets are the most complete for these years, and
SeaWiFS data are available for 1998 and 1999. These years also represent a wide
range of environmental conditions: an extensive winter bloom in the Gulf of
Maine in 1999 related to Scotian Shelf inflow and increased stratification; a
slightly warmer year in 1995; and stronger storm activity in 1998 than 1999. In
addition 1998, and to a lesser extent 1999, gave the indication of being strong
years for haddock recruitment but apparently not for cod.&lt;br/&gt;Specific
issues that are being investigated include: wind control of the advective supply
of the target zooplankton species to Georges Bank during January-April;
interannual and/or event-level variations in the advective flux of Calanus
finmarchicus to Gulf of Maine basin diapausing populations during June-April;
interannual and/or event-level variations in advective losses of copepods from
Georges Bank and bank subregions; the influence of stratification on the
planktonic ecosystem, and how this affects the population dynamics of the target
zooplankton species through food and predation. As a link to Phase IV synthesis
studies on target ichthyoplankton, this investigation provides mechanistic
insight into the factors determining production of copepod prey for larval cod
and haddock on the Bank.&lt;br/&gt;A number of students will be trained over the
course of the Phase IV research. These students are being trained as broadly
educated researchers adept at combining techniques from a variety of disciplines
in their work. In addition, this is the first major independent funding source
since graduation for two young investigators (Pringle, Gentleman).&lt;br/&gt;