* 0219480
* Collaborative Research: International Development of Non-Destructive Tools to Quantify Sample Disturbance and Its Correlation to Measured Behavior
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Don DeGroot, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 08/31/2006
* USD 191,763.00

CMS-0219463 PI: Jean-Pierre Bardet Institution: University of Southern
California Title: "ITR SOLUTIONS FOR EXCHANGE AND UTILIZATION OF GEOTECHNICAL
INFORMATION" Geotechnical information describes the characteristics of upper
soil deposits (typically down to a 50 m depth) on which rest most of our civil
infrastructure (e.g., buildings, roads, bridges, airports, harbors, and
factories). Each year, a large amount of geotechnical information is generated
with great efforts and expense during the conduct of projects, including those
sponsored by the National Science Foundation (NSF), and many other local, state,
and federal agencies. The data and results of these projects are usually
published as hardcopy reports, without digital data. In addition, the steps in
data collection and processing are documented with conventional methods, making
it often difficult even impossible to scrutinize, revise and apply data. An NSF
workshop, held at the University of Southern California (USC) in 1998, clearly
established a unanimous consensus among researchers and practitioners for a
better exchange of geotechnical information. Nowadays Information Technologies
(IT) unleashes new powerful opportunities for collecting, exchanging, and
utilizing geotechnical information, which should be explored for the sake of our
civil infrastructures.

Capitalizing on the benefits from recent experiences gained during several IT
projects carried out at USC since 1998, our research creates ITR methods for
resolving major issues associated with the collection, exchange and utilization
of geotechnical information. The research integrates different IT methods to
produce a comprehensive and complete description and utilization of geotechnical
information starting from the data generation in the laboratory and field to its
end usage by engineers and planners involved in civil infrastructure systems.
The specific objectives of the research are: 1. Define versatile data structures
based on the knowledge of domain experts on selected geotechnical information.
2. Define metadata by geotechnical domain experts describing the processes
generating geotechnical information, including development of automated metadata
collection for facilitating user input. 3. Develop data mining tools for
geotechnical information, and creating QA/QC algorithms integrating data and
metadata.

The research is concerned with the development of IT methods for rendering
geotechnical information usable to those involved with planning, designing,
building, and maintaining our civil infrastructure systems. The tools and
methods developed during the research will be tested in the realistic work
environments of five research collaborators, namely the California Department of
Transportation (Caltrans), the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power
(LADWP), the California Geological Survey (CGS), the Bureau of Research in
Geology and Mines (BRGM) in France, and Kobe University in Japan. It is
anticipated that the IT concepts developed in this research will contribute to
pave the way to the creation of a virtual repository of geotechnical information
to be operated in the future by a consortium of local, state and federal
agencies.

The research will benefit the public in many ways. It will disseminate
geotechnical information to the students, researchers and practitioners. It will
organize geotechnical information, and improve its archival and retrieval for
local, state and federal agencies, universities, and companies. It will generate
an information platform for the development of large-scale geographic
information systems of natural hazards such as liquefaction-induced lateral
spreads during earthquakes. It will promote education and research in
engineering, and stimulate data exchange and collaboration among researchers and
practitioners.