* 0219262
* ITR:    Characterization and Linearization of Nonlinear Memory Effects in RF Power Amplifiers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Guotong Zhou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 08/31/2006
* USD 255,000.00

Modern mobile communication systems strive to maximize capacity within the
system. The capacity of the system to handle multiple subscribers is adversely
affected by adjacent channel interference (ACI). ACI results from nonlinear
distortion created by the transmitter power amplifier (PA). This is especially
problematic for high power base station PAs within the cellular infrastructure.
Such distortion produces out-of-band signals that interfere with other
subscribers' reception. Thus ACI, effectively raises the noise floor forcing
lower bit rates and/or increased transmit power for those subscribers. As medium
rate data services for internet access are being introduced into the cellular
systems, higher demands are being placed on both capacity and quality of
service. For these reasons, minimization of ACI, which requires PA linearization
in basestation infrastructure, is of great importance.

Commercially available state-of-the-art base station PAs use feed-forward
linearization. While this method is effective in improving ACI, the architecture
needs additional components as well as a high power combining. These added
components, and the losses they introduce in both DC and RF power, tend to make
PAs based on the feed-forward method both costly and inefficient.

Predistortion linearization is another method of linearization. This approach is
more cost effective than feed-forward linearization, because the signal
processing is done digitally, and there are no components following the PA that
waste power. However, the performance of predistortion is generally not as good
as feed-forward linearization, because a near perfect model of the amplifier
must be extracted and a predistorter model formulated to counteract the
distortion mechanisms. One area in which current models are deficient is in
characterizing memory effects. Memoryless predistortion has been thoroughly
investigated in the literature, but for high peak-to-average signals, such as
multicarrier CDMA or OFDM signals, self-heating effects arise, creating delay
responses in the distortion that manifest themselves as memory effects. In
general, higher power amplifiers, such as those used in basestations, are more
susceptible to memory effects than those used in lower power mobile equipment.

This proposal will outline a research program that will investigate modeling of
PA memory effects, as well as linearization of PAs that exhibit such effects.
The authors propose a research program that will develop new methods in PA
characterization and modeling, as well as advance the state-of-the-art in
predistortion linearization to achieve or exceed performance levels previously
seen only using costly and inefficient feed-forward techniques.