* 0219722
* ITR Collaborative Research: Energy-efficiency and Reliability in Dense Sensor Networks: A Distributed Signal Processing Perspective
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Kannan Ramchandran, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2006
* USD 210,000.00

Kannan Ramchandran U of Cal Berkeley

This proposal addresses some important components in the theoretical and
algorithmic signal processing machinery needed to make low-power, ubiquitous
sensor networks a reality. The physical and hardware attributes as well as the
computing and communication capabilities of these low-power, low-cost sensors,
particularly those based on high-density MEMS devices, have the potential to
revolutionize next-generation information technology. Indeed, next-generation
MEMs sensors are expected to be very cheap and very small (of the order of one
millimeter cube) with a communication range of several hundred meters and a
bandwidth of tens to hundreds of kilobits per second. The challenge is to build
a pervasive, reliable, mas-sively distributed, dynamically self-conguring dense
sensor network system out of these low-cost, ubiquitous devices. While the
hardware and computational infrastructure are following Moore's law, the system-
level expertise in terms of both theoretical and algorithmic knowledge-base
needed to fully harness the potential of this infrastructure is sadly lagging
behind. The challenges presented by these networks are far beyond existing
theories and algorithms, and in many cases require a fundamental paradigm shift
from centralized to distributed architectures. This proposal is accordingly
motivated at developing some important components of the signal processing and
communication system machinery needed to make this dream a reality.