* 0219366
* ITR: Display of High-Dimensional Metabolic Networks in the C6 Immersive Virtual Reality System
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Carolina Cruz-Neira, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 08/31/2006
* USD 325,132.00

Multidimensional genome-wide gene expression profiling datasets are being
generated for bacterial, plant and animal systems. This complex data reveals the
interacting metabolic pathways that control cell metabolism. Ultimately,
understanding these pathways will increase our ability to predict the effects of
a given drug on human metabolism, the consequences of changes in a single gene
on the composition of a seed, or the effect of a given mutation in a pre-cancer
cell. The goal of this project is to develop a unique integrated information
workspace that displays heterogeneous biological information using three-
dimensional graphs, physical cell models, and wireless handheld devices for
detailed textual information. This project will use a variety of levels of
immersion, from desktop settings to the C6 immersive virtual environment.
&lt;br/&gt;Two experimental applications will be developed. First, a prototype
interactive visualization of a metabolic network, the Calvin cycle of
photosynthesis, will be used to create a living dynamic example of a biochemical
pathway for K-12 students to explore. The pathway will be brought alive by a
computer game that students explore at their own pace, with rewards for
particular achievements such as combining the proper molecules. Complex concepts
such as the conversion of chemical, light and heat energy, metabolic flux, use
and synthesis of chemical constituents of living organisms can all be
illustrated through this pathway. Secondly, three-dimensional visualization will
be applied to the analysis of the acetyl-CoA metabolic network in the genetic
model-plant Arabidopsis. This visualization will be integrated with complex
datasets taken from a group of genetic mutants in specific steps in this
pathway. &lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this project are to explore
methods for interaction with three-dimensional graphs and the integration of
different models for data exploration. The project will be performed by an
interdisciplinary group of investigators with expertise in biology,
bioinformatics, and computer engineering, who will apply elements of graph
theory, immersive software visualization, and fuzzy logic to the problem of
metabolic network visualization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;