* 0219794
* Subsistence in marginal environments and its correlations to environmental fluctuation and changing societal complexity: A case study in south central Inner Mongolia
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2002,09/30/2004
* Katheryn Linduff, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2004
* USD 11,978.00

With National Science foundation support, Mr. Gregory Indrisano and a team of
Chinese and American archaeologists will conduct an intensive archaeological
surface survey of Liangcheng County, Inner Mongolian Autonomous Region (IMAR),
People's Republic of China. This project, which will record the size and
location of archaeological sites in a 200 square kilometer survey region, will
bring together archaeologists from the Institute of Archaeology IMAR, Jilin
University and the University of Pittsburgh. The survey region is located 100 km
east of the Yellow River and 300 km south of the great steppe regions of Asia,
in an area marginal for both agriculture and herding. The environmental
attributes of this area make Liangcheng County an ideal geographic location to
study the development of subsistence strategies that combine agriculture and
animal husbandry. Liangcheng's position, 400 km north of the dynastic capitals
at present day Xi'an and just south of the earliest of the Great Walls of China,
makes this region appropriate for the study of the development of relations
between the core of ancient China and its periphery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Liangcheng County archaeological survey will include the lowland alluvial plains
appropriate for farming, highland mountain plateaus used for herding and the
intervening zones that allow access to both resource zones. Interviews with
local herders and farmers, as well as analysis of satellite imagery will add to
these preliminary subjective impressions of land use and allow the accurate
delineation of this region's ecological zones. The information from the
archaeological survey and the modern ecological map will facilitate the
construction of a geographic database (GIS) to reconstruct how prehistoric
peoples made use of their landscapes in response to local and regional level
political processes, allowing a better understanding of the development of agro-
pastoral adaptations on the periphery of China as well as a better understanding
of how such subsistence adaptations develop world wide. In addition, data
collected by other studies of the paleo environment of the region will be
analyzed to better understand how ancient environmental fluctuations affected
subsistence strategies in this region. Mr. Indrisano and his collaborators will
concentrate on three main questions: 1. How did the known developments from the
center of China affect the development of political and subsistence systems in
this peripheral region? 2. Did indigenous political development have a different
effect on subsistence strategies? 3. How do ancient environmental fluctuations
affect the local subsistence systems of this region? This research is important
for several reasons. It will continue the fruitful cooperation between Chinese
and American archaeologists, in an area of the world that sees indigenous
development of ancient empires. Marginal environs, like those found in
Liangcheng County, existed on the borders of many of the world great ancient
empires, but the subsistence strategies and political development of these
peoples have rarely been a foci of anthropology; this project will provide a
data set which will allow a better understanding of subsistence strategies and
political development in north China but will also facilitate the comparison of
these processes with other marginal regions around the world. &lt;br/&gt;