* 0219466
* ITR:    High Performance "Signal Processing" Antenna Array Systems for Wireless Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Tatsuo Itoh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 08/31/2005
* USD 252,000.00

A new design methodology for multi-antenna wireless system is proposed. The
essential idea is based on the fusion of technologies and concepts in the
antenna design, RF circuit and device technology, real-time DSP technology and
communication theory. To embody this idea, novel designs of high-performance
"signal processing" array front-ends and the associated communication processing
research are proposed. The proposed array front-ends cover a broad range of
hardware from the antenna array, RF circuits all the way to IF or baseband
outputs. As a testbed, we propose a receiving antenna array with a single RF-
channel and Spatial MultIplexing of Local Elements (SMILE). The communication
processing research is focused on the study of space-time propagation channels
and the applications of Continuous Phase Modulation (CPM) coding scheme in a
Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) system based on the proposed front-end.
Studies of system level issues in merging the hardware architectures and
communication algorithms are also proposed. The interdisciplinary nature of this
project ensures close interactions among faculty members and students from
different disciplines. Hence, the project will benefit the curriculums and
graduate research subjects in multiple areas such as microwave and RF
technology, real-time signal processing and wireless communication.