* 0219736
* ITR/SMALL/Scientific Frontiers:  Task-Specific Data Reduction and Mining in Spatial-Temporal Domains
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Zoran Obradovic, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2006
* USD 216,120.00

Advances in earth sciences have spurred a large growth in
spatial-&lt;br/&gt;temporal databases with multidimensional attributes.
Unfortunately, the&lt;br/&gt;improvement in data collection techniques has not
been accompanied&lt;br/&gt;with the efficient methods that analyze large
databases, which currently&lt;br/&gt;limits their use. To address the need for
facilitating large-scale&lt;br/&gt;knowledge discovery at a wide range of
spatial-temporal datasets the&lt;br/&gt;objective of the proposed project is
development of novel techniques&lt;br/&gt;for (1) task-specific data reduction
in spatial-temporal databases; and&lt;br/&gt;(2) efficient knowledge discovery
on reduced spatial-temporal data.&lt;br/&gt;The first task builds on the
observation that the amount of collected data&lt;br/&gt;is not necessarily
correlated with specific knowledge discovery tasks,&lt;br/&gt;and that real-life
datasets are often highly redundant. The second task&lt;br/&gt;addresses a
number of open questions for more efficient mining of&lt;br/&gt;reduced spatial-
temporal datasets including exploring trade-offs&lt;br/&gt;between model
complexity and data reduction for efficient learning,&lt;br/&gt;exploiting
residual correlations for prediction, and task-specific&lt;br/&gt;partitioning
of nonstationary spatial-temporal data. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;techniques will
be evaluated on multi-source datasets with various&lt;br/&gt;complexities. This
project will result in guidelines for effective&lt;br/&gt;dissemination of
spatial-temporal data sets to wider research audience&lt;br/&gt;and algorithmic
tools for more successful knowledge discovery from
such&lt;br/&gt;data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;