* 0219322
* ITR: Understanding Stress Resistance Mechanisms in Plants:  Multimodal Models Integrating Experimental Data, Databases, and the Literature
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Naren Ramakrishnan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 12/31/2006
* USD 580,678.00

Plants have evolved to cope with a variety of environmental stresses, including
drought, heat, cold, salt, pathogens, and insects. The imposition of stress on a
plant results in the marshaling of genomic defense mechanisms. Some defense
mechanisms are common to the response to multiple stresses (e.g., drought and
salt), while others are more specific. Defense mechanisms may interact
collaboratively to combat a stress or may work independently to repair multiple
kinds of damage inflicted by stress. This research proceeds on the premise that
functional genomic and bioinformatics approaches together with data from drought
stress experiments and information from multiple biological information sources
can elucidate relationships among and within stress mechanisms. This project
will capture these relationships in representations or models called multimodal
models. Sources of biological information that will be utilized include (1) data
from drought-stress experiments, especially gene expression data from microarray
hybridizations; (2) sequence, protein, and other databases; and (3) the
biological literature. Multimodal models will represent these multiple aspects
of biological knowledge and of biological systems themselves: responses over
time; response variation by subcellular compartments; uncertainty (our lack of
complete knowledge of cell state); and the dynamic changes in biological
information due to the boom in biological data and knowledge. These models are
readily visualized, explored, analyzed, and extended via computational means.
Current models for drought stress response will be available via the project web
site.&lt;br/&gt;The microarray experiments for studying drought stress in
loblolly pine and Arabidopsis thaliana (a model plant for biological research)
will be designed, managed, and analyzed by the Expresso system, a microarray
experiment management system for experimental design, data capture, and data
analysis. The experimental and computational methods used in this research will
have an impact on the ability of biologists to address additional complex,
interrelated hypotheses using microarray technology and other tools of modern
genomics. The multimodal networks will have predictive power that will enable
biologists to explore hypotheses computationally in advance of experiments, to
obtain estimates of probabilities associated with various drought response
mechanisms given hypothesized drought stress conditions, to decide on future
experiments based on the estimated likelihood of a large yield of information
from the experiments, and to serve as the basis for mathematical models that
have more quantitative predictive power. Enhanced understanding of responses to
drought and other stresses in plants will ultimately benefit agriculture and
forestry in the form of hardier crops and trees. &lt;br/&gt;