* 0220425
* Interactions in Yeast Pre-mRNA Splicing
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Stephanie Ruby, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center
* Continuing Grant
* Vicki B. Vance
* 08/31/2005
* USD 335,000.00

Gene expression in nearly all eukaryotes requires the excision of introns from
nuclear precursor messenger RNAs (pre-mRNAs) to produce functional mRNAs. The
introns are excised by the spliceosome, which is a very large, macromolecular
complex composed of five small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) and many
proteins. Each snRNP is itself composed of a small nuclear RNA (snRNA) and
several proteins. A fundamental question regarding pre-mRNA splicing is how the
active catalytic site of the spliceosome is formed. The focus of this project is
on interactions between two spliceosomal components (Snp1p and Prp8p) that may
contribute to the formation and activation of the pre-catalytic spliceosome. The
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is an ideal organism for these studies because
genetics and biochemistry can be used in tandem to study dynamic and transient
interactions. &lt;br/&gt;An interaction between Snp1p (a protein of the U1
snRNP) and Prp8p (a protein of the U5 snRNP), which was discovered in the
previous grant period, is hypothesized to be important for association of the U1
and U5 snRNPs in the spliceosome. It may help dock the U5 snRNP onto the
developing spliceosome, and promote rearrangements leading to formation of the
spliceosome's catalytic site. One such rearrangement is the 5' splice site (SS)
switch when the pre-mRNA's 5' SS switches from pairing with U1 snRNA to U6
snRNA. Preliminary results suggest that the Prp8/Snp1 interaction is important
in destabilizing the U1/5'SS duplex as part of this switch. Mutations or
inhibitors will be assayed to correlate functional changes with physical changes
in the association of Prp8p with Snp1p. To map the region(s) of Prp8p required
for interaction with Snp1p, a library of random prp8 mutations will be screened
for those altering the interaction via a novel, high-throughput assay. Candidate
mutations will be further assessed by a combination of in vivo and in vitro
assays.&lt;br/&gt;A notable percentage of human genetic diseases including some
types of retinitis and thalassemias are due to defects in pre-mRNA splicing.
Furthermore, alternative splicing contributes to the development and life cycles
of many organisms as well as to biodiversity. Thus understanding the basic
mechanism of splicing will contribute to our understanding of several biological
systems and, in the long-term, contribute to improving human health. The
proposed research will also make several contributions to other areas of science
and society. The development of a high-throughput assay will be a collaborative
effort using instrumentation invented at the host institution. Results generated
by this assay will be disseminated both by traditional scientific publication
and by a website specifically designed as a database for yeast spliceosomal
components and their interactions. The research will be conducted at an EPSCoR
and designated minority institution. Thus it is likely that some of the students
participating in the proposed research will be from minority groups.