* 0220354
* Investigation and Documentation of Three Endangered Languages in China
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Graham Thurgood, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2008
* USD 188,340.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Fengxiang Li and Graham Thurgood
will conduct two years of linguistic research on three endangered languages in
China: Tsat, an Austronesian language of Hainan Province; Anong, a Tibeto-Burman
language of Yunnan Province; and Oroqen, a Tungusic language of Inner Mongolia
and Heilongjiang Province in northeast China. Although these languages are
undergoing rapid change because of their close contact with Chinese, they are
geographically separated, typologically different, and genetically distinct.
Comparison of them is a rare opportunity to study how very different languages
change under intense contact, not with a variety of different languages, but
with the same language. American scholars will work with Chinese specialists in
these languages whose detailed but unpublished records predate the most intense
contact and continue to the modern era. The PIs will translate the existing
Chinese descriptions, incorporating new material to fill gaps. In collaboration
with Chinese linguists, the PIs will then update analyses based on the data
collected in summer fieldwork trips. A comprehensive reference grammar for each
language will be produced at the end of the project period.

This research is significant for three inter-related areas of linguistics:
language change, typology, and history. In terms of language change, the project
investigates effects of dialectal variation, patterns of bilingualism, intense
contact of three distinct languages with the same superstratum language, and
language obsolescence on structural shift. Typological studies are often based
on well-known and better studied languages. This project will address that
imbalance with typological information about minority languages in China. In all
three cases, but especially for Anong and Oroqen, this project will provide more
accurate assessment of the genetic affiliations within their respective language
families. In addition, this documentation is urgent because the speakers of
these languages are beginning to disappear and the Chinese linguists who worked
on their earlier stages have begun to retire. Every time another language dies,
aspects of culture are lost. For example, thousands of years of the history of a
people can only be accessed through study of their language. The project also
brings American and Chinese linguists together to save part of their mutual
heritage.