* 0220264
* ITR Collaborative Research:  Complexity-Theoretic Applications of Fourier Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Alexander Russell, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen M. O'Hara
* 08/31/2005
* USD 120,454.00

ourier analysis appears in many of the celebrated cornerstones
of&lt;br/&gt;theoretical computer science. It plays essential roles in
expander&lt;br/&gt;graph construction and derandomization, complexity lower
bounds,&lt;br/&gt;probabilistically checkable proof systems, quantum computing,
lower&lt;br/&gt;bounds for distributed computation, and traditional applications
to&lt;br/&gt;computer algebra. The majority of these applications involve
the&lt;br/&gt;familiar framework of commutative Fourier analysis. The
proposed&lt;br/&gt;project brings together a multidisciplinary research team to
apply the&lt;br/&gt;beautiful tools of non-Abelian (that is, noncommutative)
Fourier&lt;br/&gt;analysis to investigate open questions in two areas where non-
Abelian&lt;br/&gt;groups have recently become very important: lower bounds for
parallel&lt;br/&gt;computation and quantum algorithms. The program also further
develops&lt;br/&gt;efficient algorithms for the discrete Fourier transform over
finite&lt;br/&gt;non-Abelian groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on developing tools for separating the complexity&lt;br/&gt;classes ACC^0 and
NC^1, in order to demonstrate that there are natural&lt;br/&gt;(polynomial-time
computable) problems which simply cannot be&lt;br/&gt;parallelized in the sense
of ACC^0. The project applies a new family&lt;br/&gt;of tools for separating
such circuit classes, using non-Abelian&lt;br/&gt;Fourier analysis to bound
their computational power. These tools apply&lt;br/&gt;also to the problem of
solving equations over finite groups, and the&lt;br/&gt;development of new
probabilistically checkable proof systems based on&lt;br/&gt;non-Abelian groups.
In addition, the project applies non-Abelian&lt;br/&gt;Fourier analysis to
develop improved lower bounds on the standard&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Fourier
Transform approach to Graph Isomorphism and study&lt;br/&gt;quantum Monte Carlo
algorithms. Finally, the project focuses on&lt;br/&gt;adaptations of Bratelli
diagrams and quivers to develop classical and&lt;br/&gt;quantum algorithms for
the non-Abelian Fourier transform itself.&lt;br/&gt;