* 0220147
* ITR:    An Interactive Visual Anomaly Detection System for Faults and Intrusions on Network Protocols
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Kwan-Liu Ma, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Gurudatta M. Parulkar
* 08/31/2005
* USD 400,171.00

With the growing use of the Internet technology, unintentional faults and
intentional intrusions directly on network protocols, such as routing protocols
(e.g., BGP, OSPF), have become a serious threat to our Internet-connected
society. Over the past few years, the researchers have seen many fault or
security related instances happening to our Internet and, because of these
problems, significant losses occurred one way or the other. In the research
communities, such as fault tolerant networking, network security, and intrusion
detection, many new ideas have been explored to enhance the existing network
protocols or, more drastically, to propose a completely new Internet
architecture. Some vulnerabilities have been reduced or removed, but yet the
researchers expect many more new vulnerabilities and problems to be discovered.

The researchers believe that, to effectively monitor and control a large system,
they need not only a well-designed and implemented system but also, equally
important, a good human interface to know the system after it is deployed and
operated. The researchers also believe that, in the foreseeable future, human
intelligence will play a critical role in managing and maintaining large
distributed systems such as the Internet. But, surprisingly few research efforts
are currently toward this direction.

The main contribution in this project is a human-interactive approach to handle
faults and security attacks on the Internet routing protocols such as BGP
(Border Gateway Protocol) and OSPF (Open Shortest Path First). We will
investigate several critical but very difficult (difficult in the sense if we
would rely completely on machine intelligence) issues and offer solutions based
on an interactive visual-based analysis process. For example, anomaly detection
systems for unknown/novel attacks are hard to build due to the consideration of
effectiveness, coverage, and false positive. Also, network event correlation is
very difficult because this task normally involves very complicated potential
relations among various events on the Internet and the amount of resources to
complete the task is prohibitively expensive.

This research addresses two very fundamental problems. One is the formulation of
typical visual-based anomaly detection processes. The other is the mapping of
not only the protocol data but also the analysis process to appropriate
visualization representations and associated operations. The resulting visual-
based process would allow a human network operator quickly navigate to the right
level of details to discover critical facts about the Internet. For the network
routing protocol management, we study the "optimal" boundary between the machine
intelligence and the human intelligence on detecting and tracking anomaly that
was previously impossible to understand.