* 0220407
* DBE Synthesis Supplement:   Deep Circulation in the Tropical and Subtropical South Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Kevin Speer, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2004
* USD 105,964.00

0220407 Speer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the course of the Deep Basin Experiment
under the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) a new hydrographic and
tracer climatology of the tropical and subtropical South Atlantic was
constructed and a re-analysis of hydrographic sections was carried out. The
meridional density gradients observed in hydrographic sections west of the Mid-
Atlantic Ridge (in the Brazil Basin) indicate a strikingly regular pattern of
persistent zonal flows coherent over large spatial scales, consistent with the
isopycnal distributions of several tracers in the new climatology. This pattern
of alternating zonal flows is also apparent in the output from a state-of-the-
art numerical model. While the observations (as well as the model) indicate that
the notion of a mean deep circulation is sensible they also show that it is not
possible to determine the time-averaged geostrophic flows from synoptic
observations by simply determining a reference velocity (barotropic adjustment).
The difference between the synoptic and the time-averaged geostrophic zonal
velocity fields in the Brazil Basin is baroclinic and varies both in time and
space. The excellent agreement between the hydrographically observed and the
numerical zonal flows in the South Atlantic suggests that it possible to use the
numerical results to separate the observations into long-term mean and low-
frequency time-varying components. The current analysis will be extended and
applied it to a larger region of the South Atlantic with the overriding goal to
quantitatively describe the deep circulation in the tropical and subtropical
South Atlantic during the WOCE period. The first step will consist of analyzing
the spatio-temporal structure of the time-varying model flow to guide the
separation of the time-varying from the mean geostrophic flows determined from
the hydrographic sections. The fact that the model appears to simulate the mean
zonal flows in the Brazil Basin realistically does not imply that the time-
varying flows are as well represented, of course. While it is not possible to
directly estimate the time-varying flow component from available hydrographic
sections analysis of individual profiles as well as differences between two
hydrographic sections will allow the PI's to compare important aspects of the
time-variable flow field, such as spatial scales and baroclinic structure to the
model output. Furthermore, the results of a recent analysis of the time-varying
flows derived from ?oat data (Hogg et al. , 2002) will be used for comparison.
In addition to revealing new aspects of the deep circulation (with implications
for climate, tracer dispersal, biogeography, etc.), the results of the proposed
project will significantly improve the analysis of synoptic hydrographic
sections with important implications for inverse models and, therefore, for
determining the mean circulation from the WOCE data sets. Direct comparison of
numerical-model output and oceanic data is an intrinsic part of the proposed
project and will reveal strengths and, more importantly, weaknesses of current
numerical models. These insights will be useful for improving the
models.&lt;br/&gt;