* 0220037
* ITR:  Large-Scale Simulations of Emulsions
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Chandrajit Bajaj, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2006
* USD 400,001.00

Emulsions, or suspensions of droplets of one liquid phase in another, occur in a
wide variety of chemical, biological and materials processes. Some examples
include liquid-liquid extraction, the flow of blood cells, thermal induced phase
separation for the formation of microporous membranes and the formation of the
immiscible polymer blends with superior mechanical, thermal and electrical
properties. In these and many other applications the emulsion is processed so
that drops can undergo large &lt;br/&gt;deformations, break-up, and coalesce.
The proposed project is an interdisciplinary collaboration concerned with large-
scale micromechanical simulations of low-Reynolds-number or Stokesian emulsions.
To deal with numerous challenges associated with this class of problems, the
project brings together three researchers with expertise in geometrical modeling
and visualization, fluid mechanical modeling and computations, and fast boundary
element methods. The principal objectives of the project are twofold. First,
explore, develop and implement various tightly integrated computational methods
that will significantly advance existing computer simulation capabilities for
Stokesian emulsions. Second, conduct simulations critical to the better
qualitative understanding of the coalescence-induced-coalescence phenomenon and
sheared emulsions containing highly deformable second-phase droplets capable of
coalescence and break-up. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;