* 0220027
* An Interdigitated PVDF Guided Wave Transducer for Large Array Condition Monitoring of Steel Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* ming wang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/2005
* USD 269,451.00

To place the problem of condition monitoring in structures into an overall
perspective and to highlight the growing need for guided wave condition
monitoring strategies, it is important to note that the past decade of
theoretical and applied experience in structural health monitoring has yielded
two overarching conclusions. First, from a theoretical perspective, it has
become accepted that transducer design must focus on distributed, localized
measurements at critical members and attachment points. This is because of the
low sensitivity of global measurements, such as mode shapes and natural
frequencies, to degradation of any kind. Secondly, extensive experience from
applied research and demonstration projects has indicated that a successful
transducer must incorporate all following requirements: low unit cost, easy
installation and wide applicability; high sensitivity and high S/N ratios; low
power consumption; capability for wireless operation or remote interrogation;
and long-term durability&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transducers for condition
monitoring of structures based on guided wave interrogation principles, such as
Rayleigh-Lamb wave transducers, address in principle both sets of concerns.
However, transducers based on conventional piezoceramics do not meet all the
necessary requirements. To address this need, it is proposed to develop an
interdigitated Rayleigh-Lamb wave transducer based on polyvinyldine fluoride
(PVDF) piezoelectric polymer films. The successful demonstration of such a
transducer will combine the attractive approaches of ultrasonic guided wave
testing and the highly evolved capabilities of interdigitated electrodes (IDEs)
developed for RF SAW devices or high field, high force pizeoceramic actuators,
with the highly desirable properties of PVDF films for structural monitoring.
This will significantly enlarge the choice of piezoelectric materials available
for maintaining the performance of the nation's infrastructure
components.&lt;br/&gt;