* 0220973
* Collaborative Research:  Pathways to Closing the Gaps in North Texas
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Theresa Maldonado, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2006
* USD 398,750.00

The goal of this collaborative proposal is to increase the number of high
achieving, but financially challenged, students graduating with a four-year
degree in computer science, engineering, or mathematics. The approach is to
create a formal link between the University of Texas at Arlington and two local
community colleges (Tarrant County College-Southeast Campus and Mountain View
College) to tap a rich pool of academically talented students who lack the
financial resources to complete their studies on a full-time basis. First
generation students, in particular, tend to fall into this category, and they
often lack the visibility or knowledge to seek needed resources and career
guidance effectively. Many of these students begin their higher education at
community colleges, while working full- or part-time. Lack of funds negatively
affects the retention rate of this group, thus shortchanging the technical
workforce of much-needed potential talent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, UTA
and its CC partners formed a CSEMS collaborative partnership that could have a
tremendous impact on the Dallas/Fort Worth (DFW) technical workforce. Eighty-
nine scholarships are awarded annually with priority given to eligible first
generation students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives to support the goal
include establishing a structured pipeline from the CCs to&lt;br/&gt;UTA;
developing retention strategies and adapting existing academic support
resources&lt;br/&gt;to target this pool of students in CSEM disciplines;
formalizing an optional research component or industry internship experience to
the Scholars' degree plan; and developing CSEM specific programs to prepare the
students for professional experiences beyond graduation. Faculty and industry
mentors are available, and a Peer Bridge Group of CC alumni, who are now
attending UTA, assist CC students through the transfer
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A formal CSEM Articulation Agreement was developed
to create seamless curricula and concurrent enrollment opportunities in these
fields by which to transition CC students to UTA. This collaborative encompasses
a significant portion of North Texas, and it builds capacity and critical mass
for the technical workforce in this leading high tech region.&lt;br/&gt;