* 0220643
* Engineering and Computer Science Scholarships at the University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2009
* Farhad Azadivar, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2009
* USD 392,000.00

The project provides a unique opportunity for talented but
financially&lt;br/&gt;disadvantaged high school students from Southeastern
Massachusetts to enter and complete &lt;br/&gt;an innovative education program
in computer science, civil, mechanical, electrical, and &lt;br/&gt;computer
engineering disciplines at the University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth (UMD).
&lt;br/&gt;Residents of Southeastern Massachusetts are going through a major
economic transition &lt;br/&gt;that resulted from almost total loss of textile
industry in the United States. This region was &lt;br/&gt;once one of the
richest communities in the nation, but it is now home for mostly working
&lt;br/&gt;class population with first generation college attendees. UMD is well
known for providing &lt;br/&gt;one of the best undergraduate engineering
programs in northeast United States. However, &lt;br/&gt;it still loses the
battle for attracting highly qualified students who cannot afford college
&lt;br/&gt;on their own.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UMD has developed a strategic plan
to play a major role in the economic revival of the &lt;br/&gt;region. As part
of this plan, the University has established an Advanced Technology and
&lt;br/&gt;Manufacturing Center (ATMC). ATMC assists technology based companies
in the region &lt;br/&gt;to develop new products and processes and helps them
commercialize university-&lt;br/&gt;developed technologies. While ATMC has a
staff of professionals, it also employs a good &lt;br/&gt;number of student
interns who function as junior engineers on its
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines internship opportunities
available at the ATMC with an NSF&lt;br/&gt;supported Foundation Coalition
program that has been established for freshmen and &lt;br/&gt;sophomores in the
College of Engineering at UMD. This combination provides a unique
&lt;br/&gt;educational opportunity for students with financial needs. Students
admitted through &lt;br/&gt;CSEMS spend their first two years in the College of
Engineering's integrated math/&lt;br/&gt;science/engineering curriculum and are
supported by NSF scholarships. In their last &lt;br/&gt;two years, they join the
ATMC as interns. During their ten hours a week internship at &lt;br/&gt;the
ATMC, CSEMS students are not only gain invaluable experience, they also earn
&lt;br/&gt;internship salaries that are higher than what they receive during the
first two years &lt;br/&gt;work study program. With this plan, CSEMS students
are trained similar to that of &lt;br/&gt;medical school students who get
experience in teaching hospitals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to take maximum
advantage of this scholarship program, we plan for a project &lt;br/&gt;cycle of
six years funded by a combination of NSF and private industry. During the first
&lt;br/&gt;three years we admit three cohorts of twenty students each. By the
end of the four-year &lt;br/&gt;NSF project period, each student is supported by
NSF funds for the first two years of &lt;br/&gt;his/her education. During the
last two years, each student is supported by industry &lt;br/&gt;projects at
ATMC. To accomplish the objectives of this project a partnership has been
&lt;br/&gt;developed with eighteen of the area high schools, and a contact
person has been &lt;br/&gt;identified for each school. All schools have
expressed their enthusiasm to identify &lt;br/&gt;qualified students for this
program. In addition, a set of programs and activities has &lt;br/&gt;been
planned to add to the exceptional features of this project.