* 0220047
* ITR: Accurate and Robust Operations on Curved Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* John Keyser, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2008
* USD 497,705.00

Curved geometry plays an important role in many applications, including
manufacturing, robotics, and graphics. In many cases, highly accurate and robust
operations and representations are desired, but the perceived implementation
difficulties and inefficiencies (e.g. from exact computation) prevent
application. Compared to the linear and combinatorial problems traditionally
associated with computational geometry, problems involving curved solids are far
more complicated. In practical terms, problems with accuracy, efficiency, and
robustness are all significantly worse when dealing with curved geometry, and
significant work remains in addressing these three areas. With further
development, efficient implementations, and demonstrated applications, however,
accurate and robust operations will find greater acceptance, giving a potential
benefit to several application areas. This proposal outlines a plan of research
that addresses accuracy, efficiency, and robustness of operations on curved
geometry. Overall, it is a topic that is both challenging and promising in terms
of potential impact and future research opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research addresses fundamental areas needed for further development of
precise operations with curved solids. Theoretical issues are addressed, but a
primary focus of the proposed research is on implementation. Most of the areas
of proposed research are geared toward finding highly accurate or exact
implementations that still achieve reasonable efficiency. Software will be
released to support dissemination of the results. Specific areas of research
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Filtered Sequences of Computations&lt;br/&gt;-
Incorporating Root-Finding into Expression Trees&lt;br/&gt;- Filtered Geometric
Representations&lt;br/&gt;- Resultant Computations&lt;br/&gt;- Evaluating
Combinations of Efficiency Improvements&lt;br/&gt;- Handling
Degeneracies&lt;br/&gt;- Computing with Transcendental Functions&lt;br/&gt;-
Exact Geometric Representations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Application will be a major
goal for all of the research areas. Application will serve both to drive new
research ideas, and to allow testing and evaluation of research results. The
primary application that will be used is solid modeling, from a traditional CAD
perspective. The need for accurate and efficient representations in solid
modeling is well recognized, making this research particularly relevant. In
addition, solid modeling applications present a wide range of problems of
varying complexity that allow thorough evaluation of the new methods. Besides
solid modeling, we will also investigate application to geometric modeling of
other objects, such as neurons, plants, and other naturally occurring objects.
Application to neuron modeling will be in conjunction with an ongoing project on
mapping brain microstructure, an exciting new interdisciplinary problem area
with enormous potential that Texas A&amp;M is in a unique position to
address.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be integrated into
educational activities. A new course in practical computer algebra will be
developed that supports the research areas. Undergraduate student research will
be encouraged through direct involvement in projects, coursework, and
interaction through service activities.