* 0220362
* Ocean Energetics, Tidal Conversion and Baroclinic Instability
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* William Young, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2008
* USD 853,966.00

Ocean energetics, tidal conversion and baroclinic instability&lt;br/&gt;William
Young&lt;br/&gt;Scripps Institute of Oceanography&lt;br/&gt;The project is
directed at understanding ocean energetics, mixing, baroclinic instability,
tidal conversion, and the formation of the thermocline. The first part of the
project is understanding the ramifications and extensions of constraints on the
ocean energetics. Because there are no deep sources of buoyancy in the ocean
(apart from small geothermal heating), one can show that in a statistically
steady state there is no exchange between the reservoirs of kinetic and
potential energy at every depth. The viscous dissipation of kinetic energy is
balanced totally by tidal and wind forcing; there is essentially no net
transformation o f potential into kinetic energy in the ocean. Theory will be
developed and directed at analyzing Boussinesq energetics and the balances of
available and background potential energies in the ocean. A second goal will be
use primitive equation simulations and theory to examine the role of baroclinic
eddies in forming the ocean thermocline. This will test the hypothesis that
buoyancy flux associated with breaking internal gravity waves is balanced by
baroclinic eddies. An extension of the quasi-geostrophic approximation, in which
the background stratification is self-consistently determined, rather than
simply prescribed, will also be developed and implemented numerically. The third
goal will be an improved calculation of the generation of the internal tide by
realistically large topography in an ocean with strongly variable buoyancy
frequency. A new boundary-integral representation of the solution leads to an
integral equation that enables efficient calculation of the internal gravity
waves generated by topography. These goals relate to establishing the critical
role of ocean mixing and turbulence in determining long-term changes in the
Earth's climate via physical arguments based on energy
balances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;