* 0220841
* 21st Century Scholars for 21st Century Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2011
* Herman Turner, Jones County Junior College
* Standard Grant
* Zhanjing Yu
* 08/31/2011
* USD 380,168.00

This project is developing a scholarship program for students entering the
degree programs developed through the activities of The Southeast Consortium for
Advanced Network Technology Education (SCANTE). The level of intensity of these
advanced network technology degree programs dictates that students in these
programs devote a great deal of time to their studies. In addition, work-based
learning experiences give students the necessary job experience to enter into
the workforce and/or further their education. Full time faculty educated and
trained by the SCANTE activities direct this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project objectives are to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Increase the numbers of well educated
and skilled employees in technical areas of national need by targeting
recruitment efforts toward females, minorities, nontraditional students, and
first-generation college students;&lt;br/&gt;2. Improve educational
opportunities for students in the following disciplines: Advanced Computer
Network Technology --- Local Area Networking, Wide Area Networking; Computer
Programming; Internet Development Technologies; Computer Servicing Technology;
and Telecommunications Technology;&lt;br/&gt;3. Increase retention of students
to degree achievement (A.A.S. or an A.A. degree) by providing mentoring and
work-based learning experiences;&lt;br/&gt;4. Increase success in transfer of
students into baccalaureate degree programs by increasing the initial
communication between the student and the faculty in the baccalaureate degree
program;&lt;br/&gt;5. Improve student support programs through faculty,
industry, and peer mentoring of students; successful student participation in
work-based learning opportunities; on campus student seminars focusing on
workplace behaviors, attitudes, and dress; and&lt;br/&gt;6. Strengthen
partnerships between Jones County Junior College and the industries in the
southeastern United States through participation of the industries in JCJC job
fairs, work-based learning opportunities, mentoring of students, and the hiring
of graduates; participation of industries in student field trips and
presentations to student organizations.&lt;br/&gt;