* 0220580
* Pan American Advanced Studies Institute on Partial Differential Equations, Inverse Problems and Nonlinear Analysis
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Gunther Uhlmann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/2003
* USD 98,372.00

0220580&lt;br/&gt;Uhlmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pan America Advanced Studies
Institute (PASI) award on inverse problems, organized by Gunther Uhlmann of the
University of Washington in collaboration with Dr. Raul Manasevich of the Centro
de Modelamiento Matematico (CMM) in Santiago, Chile, will take place at the CMM
from July 22 to August 2, 2002. The event will bring together leading experts in
the areas of partial differential equations, inverse problems and non-linear
analysis. The proposed activities will consist of intensive mini-courses
followed by complementary lectures and further
discussion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction between partial differential
equations, inverse problems and non-linear analysis has produced remarkable
developments in the last couple of decades. These developments have implications
for different fields, including geophysics, medical imaging, and the non-
destructive evaluations of materials. One of the main objectives of this PASI is
to bring many of these developments to advanced graduate students, postdocs and
other scientists in the Americas interested in these fields and their
applications. It is expected that the PASI will bring about increased
collaboration between United States researchers and researchers in the rest of
the hemisphere. &lt;br/&gt;