* 0220651
* Tufts-CSEMS Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Diane Souvaine, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 385,000.00

The objective of Tuft's CSEMS program is to improve the recruitment, retention,
and graduation of students with demonstrated financial need, especially women,
and underrepresented minorities, who pursue studies in computer science,
engineering, and mathematics. Two-year scholarships are going to be awarded each
year to a cohort of entering freshmen and community college transfers to Tufts.
The program is going to support 28 students per year over a four-year period.
Four scholarships are going to be allocated to students who transfer from
community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program also aims to relieve
students of the necessity to work, so that they have more time to concentrate on
their academic program. Yet, as important as this additional study time is,
experience indicates that students with demonstrated financial need confront
several other obstacles to succeeding at college as well. They are, for example,
less likely to have parents who graduated from a four-year college, and are,
therefore, less familiar with many of the expectations, and protocols of an
academic environment. The absence of role models, such as older siblings or
friends, who have experienced academic success, also denies to them
opportunities to map out the expectations they will confront in college.
Together with the substantial demands that the regimens of computer science,
engineering, and mathematics make on them, these students can become
discouraged, and eventually seek out other fields, or leave school
entirely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through early intervention, the CSEMS Scholars
program at Tufts expects to provide participants with an integrated set of
support services that is going to both monitor their progress and address
problems, both academic and non-academic, as they occur. By doing so, students
are going to be afforded the maximum opportunity to succeed academically. The
program offers them close contact with a specially designated CSEMS faculty
advisor, peer mentoring, graduate student mentors, accelerated access to
academic and other university support services, and a series of seminars that
brings together faculty, graduate students, and support staff to form an
integrative experience for CSEMS Scholars across the two years they are in the
program.&lt;br/&gt;