* 0220430
* Scholarships for Undergraduate Mathematics Majors:  A High-Technology Workforce Development Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2010
* Gertrude Levine, Fairleigh Dickinson University
* Standard Grant
* Bert Holmes
* 09/30/2010
* USD 400,000.00

This project supports students in Fairleigh Dickinson University's (FDU) new
program in applied mathematics. FDU's current undergraduate enrollment in the
mathematical and computer sciences is 135 fulltime students. Approximately one
half of these undergraduates are academically talented, but financially needy
(as per the criteria defined by the U.S. Department of Education). FDU actively
recruits in the New York City metropolitan area, an area of high population
density near inner city secondary schools. Students who participate in the new
mathematics program come from the current FDU population, from regional high
schools and from community colleges as transfer students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the mathematics program are to encourage
and enable qualified students to enter the high technology workforce following
completion of their BS degrees. This emphasis was selected by an FDU university
committee because of several intersecting factors: 1) The northern NJ/NYC
metropolitan area contains dozens of medium-to-large potential industrial
partners who have a documented need for this type &lt;br/&gt;of workforce. These
organizations include Merck, Pfizer, Bristol-Meyers Squibb (pharmaceuticals),
and ISO, Aetna, Prudential and other casualty and life insurance firms; 2) The
U.S. demographics strongly indicate a growing need for such a national
technology workforce to keep pace with foreign competition in medical,
pharmaceutical and actuarial research and production; 3) There has been an
ongoing national decline in numbers of students entering the mathematical
sciences. The possible high-technology workforce shortfall in this strong growth
area appears to be increasing. A survey of schools in the region revealed there
are few applied and computational mathematics programs currently offered by
regional universities. There are none that specifically train students to enter
the high-technology workforce as statisticians or actuaries immediately
following receipt of an undergraduate mathematics degree. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;