* 0220669
* The Chicago Math Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* David Rutschman, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 09/30/2007
* USD 144,375.00

The goal of this program is to increase the number of economically
disadvantaged&lt;br/&gt;students entering the technological workforce through
the achievement of two specific&lt;br/&gt;objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1) increase the
number of economically disadvantaged students graduating
with&lt;br/&gt;mathematics degrees from Northeastern Illinois University (NEIU)
and&lt;br/&gt;2) increase the number of Northeastern Illinois University
mathematics graduates&lt;br/&gt;going on to Ph.D. programs in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These objectives will be accomplished by
creating a program at NEIU that&lt;br/&gt;supports, motivates and monitors
student progress through their undergraduate or masters&lt;br/&gt;degree and by
providing a bridge program to the doctoral degree in mathematics at
the&lt;br/&gt;University of Illinois at Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twelve
students, ten undergraduate and two graduate students, have been selected
as&lt;br/&gt;Chicago Math Scholars. Undergraduate scholars were recruited from
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;mathematics majors, from promising incoming high school
students and from targeted&lt;br/&gt;community college transfer students.
Scholars had GPA of 3.0 and were&lt;br/&gt;economically disadvantaged as
determined by their eligibility for Pell grant awards.&lt;br/&gt;Graduate
Chicago Math Scholars were selected from among those students admitted
to&lt;br/&gt;the masters degree programs in mathematics at NEIU. Students were
economically&lt;br/&gt;disadvantaged by virtue of their eligibility for Graduate
Assistance in Areas of National&lt;br/&gt;Need (GANN) and express an interest in
pursuing a Ph.D. degree in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;Key strategies for achieving
the program objectives include: the provision of&lt;br/&gt;tuition waivers and
monetary stipends; mentoring of students by both undergraduate
and&lt;br/&gt;graduate faculty; academic and personal support; career guidance
and enrichment;&lt;br/&gt;technology training; professional development through
activities such as membership in&lt;br/&gt;professional associations and
conference attendance; job placement assistance;&lt;br/&gt;interaction with
Ph.D. program faculty and students; GRE preparation courses;
graduate&lt;br/&gt;seminars and orientation programs; and research
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northeastern Illinois University is an
urban, comprehensive university, serving&lt;br/&gt;the northwest side of
metropolitan Chicago. Seventy nine percent of its enrollment
is&lt;br/&gt;comprised of first generation college students. Sixty four percent
are female, 75.6%&lt;br/&gt;work full or part-time, and 60% receive some form of
financial aid. NEIU is the only&lt;br/&gt;four year, federally designated,
Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) in the Midwest. By&lt;br/&gt;virtue of its
demographics, the students most likely to benefit from this program
are&lt;br/&gt;under-represented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;The National Science
Foundation's report "Science and Engineering Indicators&lt;br/&gt;2000l" notes
that only 2.2% of all graduate students in mathematics and computer
science&lt;br/&gt;are Hispanic. In 1997, only 34 Ph.D. degrees were awarded to
Hispanics in math or&lt;br/&gt;computer science. By facilitating student
retention, graduation and transfer to Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;programs in mathematics,
this program has the potential to significantly impact the&lt;br/&gt;number of
under-represented minorities attaining advanced degrees in mathematics
and&lt;br/&gt;who are prepared to enter the U. S. technological workforce at the
highest levels.