* 0220558
* US-Bangladesh Cooperative Research: Modeling Motorized and Non-Motorized Vehicular Traffic Flow to Estimate Vehicular Emissions and their Impacts
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Sarosh Khan, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/29/2004
* USD 19,700.00

0220558&lt;br/&gt;Khan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description:&lt;br/&gt;This award is
to support a joint research project by Dr. Sarosh I. Khan, Department of Civil
Engineering, University of Colorado, Denver, Colorado; Dr.Jobair Bin Alam, Civil
Engineering Department, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology,
Dhaka, Bangladesh; and Dr. Lars Persson, Centre for Health and Population
Research (ICDDR,B), Dhaka, Bangladesh. The investigators will develop a traffic
flow model to represent the interaction between motorized and nonmotorized
vehicles. The model will provide microscopic and macroscopic measures of traffic
flow, and generate emission estimates for transportation networks. The broader
goal of this grant is to estimate the impact of traffic flow on pollutant
concentrations near roadways, and how those pollutants affect the children in
Dhaka. The researchers will use an integrated model development approach based
on field data. Dr. Khan will develop a traffic interaction model for two-and
three-wheeled motorized and nonmotorized vehicles that travel in the same right-
of-way, but which is not lane-based due to significant lateral movement
primarily by smaller sized vehicles. The information from the model will then be
incorporated into a dispersion model to be developed by Dr. Alam to estimate air
pollutant concentrations. Dr. Persson and other ICDDR,B epidemiologists will
examine the impact on children exposed to vehicular
emmisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:&lt;br/&gt;Dhaka, Bangladesh, experiences
air pollution that is more severe than in many larger cities, and the degraded
air quality can have a significant negative impact on children. In part this
pollution is caused by emissions from the increased number of motorized vehicles
on Dhaka's roads. The current models for predicting emission impacts were
created for the lane-based, homogeneous traffic found in developing countries.
These models are much less reliable when used in developing countries, where the
vehicles are heterogeneous, and driver behavior patterns and traffic regulation
and enforcement are different. This research initiates a new partnership with
international counterparts to develop and test integrated models for a problem
that plagues several megacities in developing countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;