* 0220259
* ITR:   Software-Hardware-Technology Co-Optimization for Ultra Low Power Architectures Via Delay Considerations
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Abhijit Chatterjee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2006
* USD 264,915.00

Recently there has been considerable interest in the design of power/energy-
aware electronics seeking to reduce the power consumption of military and
consumer applications by over two orders of magnitude. This interest is driven
by the power demands of today's high-speed, high-density, (portable) integrated
electronics. Unless new power-efficient design methods are developed, there will
be stringent limitations on the levels of electronics integration possible in
the future as well as limitations on the speeds at which hardware can operate.
Hardware portability will also be affected by battery size and weight. Simple
calculations reveal that future microprocessors will dissipate several hundred
watts of power unless drastic power reduction features are implemented. High
power consumption and the associated high temperatures can also lead to
reliability problems leading to early failure. If the trends in reduction of
feature sizes and the increase in the levels of integration in silicon are to
continue well into the future, the power consumption problem must be handled
effectively and solved urgently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves the
study of hardware-software co-optimization methods to achieve ultra low
power/energy consumption over a range of applications. Such co-optimization has
been difficult in the past due to the complexity of the optimization problem and
the fact that the optimization parameters stretch across software, hardware and
technology parameters. While factors of energy savings up to 5X are possible
using software, hardware and technology optimization individually, much larger
savings are possible if a vertically integrated power optimization approach
across software, hardware and technology boundaries is undertaken. To handle the
complexity problem of such a vertically integrated power/energy minimization
approach, a very simple optimization metric is proposed. This metric seeks to
allocate delay to software and hardware modules in such a way that the delay of
the module is proportional to the energy consumed by the module. Using such a
metric, the problem of technology optimization (Vdd, Vt, device sizing) can be
decoupled from that of system-level optimization without compromising the
quality of the solution obtained. As long as the above metric is satisfied,
software/hardware and technology optimizations can be done independently with
high confidence that the resulting solution will be close to the optimum. Note
that the proposed metric relies on the knowledge of the energy consumption of
each module relative to other modules than on the absolute values of energy
consumption of each module. The energy consumed by a hardware or software module
relative to that of other modules is computed easily using simulation. It is
conjectured that the use of the proposed power metric will simplify the
complexity of the optimization problem to a degree that will allow much bigger,
vertical optimizations to be performed across the software, hardware and
technology boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;