* 0220179
* Practical and Performance Oriented Nonlinear Adaptive Robust Control -- Theory and Applications to Precision Control of Modern Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Bin Yao, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/2005
* USD 250,000.00

Principle Investigator: Bin Yao Institution: Purdue University Proposal Number:
0220179

Title: Practical and Performance Oriented Nonlinear Adaptive Robust Control --
Theory and Applications to Precision Control of Modern Mechanical Systems

Abstract:

The goals of this project are to (i) develop a general framework for the design
of practical and performance oriented nonlinear adaptive robust controllers
(PARC) that explicitly take into account the effects of typical implementation
constraints while without sacrificing achievable implementation performance much
and being structurally simple to facilitate design and implementation, (ii)
determine practically meaningful criteria and appropriate optimization
algorithms that can be used to systematically determine PARC parameters for an
optimized control performance, and (iii) apply the integrated PARC design to the
precision control of high-speed mechanical systems driven by either electro-
magnetic motors or electro-hydraulic actuators as well as the coordinated
control of high-speed robot manipulators. A fundamentally different new design
philosophy on synthesizing nonlinear robust feedback is adopted to solve the
structural complexity of existing adaptive robust controllers-proper nonlinear
robust feedback with fixed structures is used so that the effects of typical
implementation constraints such as the control input saturation, measurement
noise, and neglected high frequency dynamics can be explicitly analyzed and
quantified through a combination of global nonlinear synthesis and local quasi-
linear analysis. The research emphasizes both general theory development and the
integration of the proposed PARC with the particular characteristics of the
application. The education plan focuses on the in-depth re-examination of
current undergraduate and graduate control curriculum to set the right control
design philosophy for students during their early stage of control education, as
well as developing innovative course on performance-oriented nonlinear adaptive
and robust controls. The proposed research is motivated by the lack of advanced
and yet practical performance-oriented nonlinear adaptive robust control designs
that are needed in engineering control curriculum to meet industry needs for
high productivity and quality products. Once successfully completed, the results
will have a lasting impact on future control curriculum, at both the
undergraduate and the graduate level. The results also have a direct impact on
industry as they directly address the common concerns of practicing engineers in
applying advanced nonlinear controls.