* 0220480
* Collaborative Research: Developmental Patterning of the Cephalopod Euprymna Scolopes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Heinz de Couet, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/2004
* USD 64,482.00

0220480&lt;br/&gt;de Couet&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. de Couet and Callaerts are
trying to understand the molecular and developmental mechanisms underlying the
invention of morphological novelty. Much of the progress in this area of
evolutionary biology has been derived from comparing the developmental modes and
the causative genes of model organisms such as Drosophila with those of
representatives from other phyla. The identification of genes involved in
pattern formation and their conserved structure highlight the importance of
developmental events for the evolution of new form and function, and provides
new directions for evolutionary biology. Whilst arthropod and vertebrate
development have been studied in great detail, the development of Mollusks is
poorly understood at the molecular and cellular levels. The phylum Mollusca
comprises several classes of highly diverse invertebrates without overt
segmentation and metameric organization. Mollusks are characterized by an
external shell, a muscular foot and a rasping organ, and are commonly elongated
along the dorsoventral axis. Among the Mollusks, the cephalopods have achieved
the highest morphological and physiological complexity. It is proposed to
investigate developmental processes and molecular parameters that give rise to
the adult characteristics of the cephalopod Euprymna scolopes, a small sepiolid
squid endemic to Hawaiian waters. Cephalopods are highly specialized Mollusks
with a complex nervous system and powerful sensory organs. A subset of homeobox-
containing genes, the Hox-genes, are commonly considered pivotal determinants in
anteroposterior patterning. The expression patterns of these genes have been
extensively used as molecular markers for judging evolutionary relationships,
such as homologies of structures along the anteroposterior axis. In preliminary
studies they isolated sequences of a family of Hox genes and of other homeobox-
containing regulatory genes from Euprymna. Extensive phylogenetic analyses led
to the conclusion that cephalopods have a set of at least nine Hox-like genes
most closely resembling those isolated from polychaetes and ribbonworms.
Specifically, this study aims to (1) To establish techniques for experimental
and molecular-genetic manipulation of Euprymna scolopes arm development, and (2)
To isolate and characterize Euprymna genes homologous to Dll/Dlx,
apterous/Lhx2/Lmx1, Tbx genes, BMP2, hh, and Wnt, and to initiate the study of
their expression patterns. The detailed molecular analysis of cephalopod axial
patterning genes and their developmental expression patterns may hold important
cues to explaining the diversification of appendage number and appearance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;