* 0220562
* MII:   Infrastructure for Research and Training in Database Management for Web-based Geospatial Data Visualization with Applications to Aviation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2009
* Naphtali Rishe, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,614,000.00

EIA 02-20562 Rishe, Naphtali Wongsaroj, Ben Florida International University
(FIU) and Florida Memorial College (FMC)

Title: MII Consortium: Infrastructure for Research and Training in Database
Management for Web-based Geospatial Data Visualization with Applications to
Aviation

This proposal, facilitating research on high-performance database management
and Internet dissemination of geospatial data, aims at attracting, recruiting,
and retaining minority students while engaging these in research. The project
enables the creation of a consortium between Florida International University
(FIU) and Florida Memorial College (FMC). A pipeline of students from FMC, a
four year HBCU, to FIU, a Carnegie-I HSI will be formed, encouraging FMC's
students and others to enter FIU's masters or doctoral program in computer
science. The consortium will focus on research necessary to enhance TerraFly, a
web-based geospatial data viewer stemming from research performed at FIU's High
Performance Database Research Center (HPDRC) under grants from NSF and other
agencies. Researchers will work in Affinity Groups that consist of undergraduate
and graduate students, post-docs, and faculty members. These groups provide the
framework that enables deepening knowledge of a field by procuring a physical
setting in a cooperative research-engaging environment. The project enhances
TerraFly's underlying data storage mechanism, client-server interaction, user
interface, its ability to overlay additional information layers, and its
ergonomics of use and maintenance. The following specific research issues are
addressed. Efficient and ergonomic dissemination of imagery with spatio-temporal
data overlays,

Data storage and querying methods for spatio-temporal data, Integration of
heterogeneous data sources including relational and semantic databases and web
sources with the spatial data, Testbed applications using geospatial data
dissemination for aviation needs. Thus, the requested infrastructure will be
used to perform this research, as well as the training of students at both
institutions. Showing TerraFly's potential applications, FMC's knowledge of the
aviation industry will be leveraged as the test beds are developed and tailored.
The deployment of infrastructure at FMC will enable FIU's distributed database
research to be incorporated into TerraFly research, as FMC students gain
valuable hands-on experience with the requested infrastructure on a daily basis.

