* 0220827
* Plastics Engineering Technology Scholarships
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Michael Jensen, Wake Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2007
* USD 335,500.00

This project is increasing the pool of well-trained plastics technicians in
eastern North Carolina by implementing a program at six community colleges that
is improving educational opportunities for economically disadvantaged students,
increasing retention of students transitioning from high school to the Plastics
Engineering Technology (PET) associate degree level, and improving student
services programs designed to recruit and assist PET students in the six county
area. By involving plastics industry personnel and services, this project is
also strengthening the partnerships of the consortium and helping to stimulate
the depressed economy of the region. This project assists the Eastern North
Carolina Plastics Technology Consortium, or ENCPTC (NSF grant DUE 0101468), in
its efforts to provide well-trained plastics technicians.

To achieve the above goals, the specific objective of this project is to expand,
refine, and refocus recruitment efforts to develop a target pool of 350
"interested" high school students; from which, 20% or 70 students are being
selected to receive student support services, including financial assistance.
This population of 70 economically disadvantaged or under-represented first year
students are being provided student services and economic support in order to
maintain an 80% retention rate for second year students. Ultimately, a 90%
employment rate (in plastics technology) of all program completers will be
achieved.

The PETS Project Director, (who also serves as ENCPTC Site Director) and the
Recruiter/Mentor work with the Financial Aid Directors of the six colleges to
provide approximately 295 students with scholarships or stipends over a 4-year
grant period. This program enables students to progressively increase their
amount of assistance as they prove their potential and reach certain milestones.