* 0220016
* ITR:  First Aid For Computer Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Herbert Schorr, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Wu
* 01/31/2006
* USD 383,725.00

Intrusion detection systems, as their name suggests, are designed simply to
detect intrusions. They may, at most, recommend courses of response, and for
good reason. Attacks are not always detected when and where they occur. It makes
good design sense to separate the detection facility&lt;br/&gt;from the response
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Response systems to date have focused primarily
on backup and recovery. Comparatively little effort has been spent on immediate
response, or "first-aid" services; and what effort there has been is mainly in
the area of network filtering and blocking. FACS is designed to fill the need
for further services, such as suspending or disabling services and user
accounts, and sequestering files for forensic
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FACS will integrate these responses with local
system policy, so that the system administrator's knowledge of the resources and
users available on the system is taken properly into account. In this way, more
important data and accounts can be given higher priority; careful attention
is&lt;br/&gt;paid to services that have more dangerous failure modes; trust is
appropriately accorded (or not) to various outside domains providing information
about attacks and responses; and so forth. Note that these are not attributes
accessible to the operating system, but personal knowledge that the
administrator would have as a matter of course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FACS
system will be constructed at multiple levels, enabling local host responses,
responses across a local network, as well as responses between networks. FACS
will design and incorporate a response prescription language enabling uniform
and machine-independent specification of&lt;br/&gt;appropriate responses to
attacks as they occur in real time. This language will also facilitate
verification against the local system policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FACS will
enable systems to present a more complete defense against attacks, by bridging
the gap between attack detection and complete restoration. And from a scientific
perspective, it will give us insight into the complex small-scale interactions
between attacks and recovery efforts.&lt;br/&gt;