* 0220143
* A Symposium on Structural and Earthquake Engineering:  Fundamental and Emerging Technologies
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Armen Der Kiureghian, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Peter Chang
* 05/31/2003
* USD 30,000.00

The University of California at Berkeley together with CUREE (the Consortium of
Universities for Research in Earthquake Engineering) have planned a symposium in
honor of Emeritus Professors Ray Clough and Joseph Penzien to be held on the
Berkeley campus on May 9-11, 2002. The event recognizes the notable
contributions made by two of the most influential researchers and educators in
structural and earthquake engineering. The wide-ranging careers of Professors
Ray Clough and Joseph Penzien at UC Berkeley included teaching, research and
consulting on topics such as the finite element method; shake table testing;
seismic analysis and design of dams, bridges, water tanks, offshore structures,
power plants, and buildings; analysis of strong ground motion records; and
development of seismic design criteria.

The Symposium features a technical program having broad appeal for practicing
engineers, researchers, teachers and students. The program combines historical
perspectives of structural and earthquake engineering with state-of-the-art
discussions on topics represented by the seminal works of the honorees.
Attention is given to emerging technologies, including those related to the
Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) and to protective devices
and sensors.

The program is particularly valuable to junior faculty starting careers in
structural and earthquake engineering, as it provides them an opportunity to
have a four-decade perspective of the field as well as an appreciation of the
contributions of the two noted pioneers. They also have an opportunity to hear
about emerging technologies and the future directions in the fields of
structural and earthquake engineering. The opportunity to mingle with the giants
of the field in an inviting technical environment is one that will make a
lasting impression on the junior faculty in particular.

