* 0220590
* MII:  Frameworks for the Development of Efficient and Scalable Knowledge-based Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2009
* Roger Hartley, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2009
* USD 1,880,248.00

EIA 02-20590&lt;br/&gt;Hartley, Roger T.&lt;br/&gt;Leung, Hing Pontelli,
&lt;br/&gt;Enrico Ranjan, Desh&lt;br/&gt; Tran, Son&lt;br/&gt;New Mexico State
University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Frameworks for the Development of
Efficient and Scalable Knowledge-Based Systems&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
proposal, expanding activities geared to attract and retain Native American
students, aims at developing a solid collaborative research backbone, enhancing
its educational program, and improving participation of a diverse student
population in computer-related disciplines. The backbone, enabling a cooperative
research efforts in the Computer Science Department, fosters research and
educational collaborations with other departments (specifically Biology and
Psychology) and with other research institutions. The proposed research backbone
is articulated in four inter-dependent threads: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data
structures and methodologies for efficient parallel execution of logic and
constraint programming languages &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Languages and
methodologies for the design of knowledge based systems
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Application of knowledge-based technology in Semantic Web,
Universal Accessibility, and Computational Biology
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automated debugging and component-based programming for
knowledge-based applications&lt;br/&gt;Enhancement of the educational program is
expected to lead to improved recruitment and retention, increased transition
towards graduate programs, and a stronger integration between research and
education at the graduate&lt;br/&gt; and undergraduate level. These goals will
be accomplished through the introduction of a pathways system throughout the
undergraduate curriculum, where different pathways will accommodate the diverse
student backgrounds. Focusing on an educational model for the training of Native
American students in Computer Science, the institution expects to improve
participation of a diverse student population in computer-related disciplines,
with particular focus on the creation of an educational model for the training
of Native American students in Computer Science. The proposed infrastructure
provides research support, in the form of computing equipment (e.g., a
64-processor Beowulf platform, HP shared memory platform, robotic equipment) and
human resources support (for faculty, students, and visiting scientists). The
educational infrastructure includes the creation of a new computing classroom
and provides human resources for the development of the new educational
programs. A research team, consisting of 14 investigators, will benefit from
this infrastructure by strengthening their interdisciplinary research through
cross-fertilization of new ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;