* 0220450
* Step Ahead: Fontbonne Scholarship Program in Mathematics and Computer Science
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Elizabeth Newton, Fontbonne University
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 08/31/2007
* USD 137,500.00

PROJECT SUMMARY This scholarship program is designed to provide increased
financial assistance to qualified students pursuing a baccalaureate program in
mathematics or computer science in preparation for successful entry into a
career field or graduate study related to these disciplines. The objectives of
this scholarship program are: 1) to increase the number of academically
qualified low income students obtaining undergraduate degrees in mathematics or
computer science, with special encouragement given to women, under-represented
minorities and persons with disabilities; 2) to collaborate with the St. Louis
corporate community in its efforts to attract, retain and develop a qualified
talent pool of employees; and 3) to increase the number of qualified students
who enroll and persevere in the mathematics and computer science programs at
Fontbonne College. A total of ten students will be chosen as scholarship
recipients. Seven students will be selected as entering freshmen, and will
continue to receive a scholarship of $3,125 throughout their four-year program
provided they meet the published academic standards of the department. Three
transfer students, preferably from the St. Louis Community College system, will
be selected in year one and three in year three. Each will receive the $3,125
per year scholarship for the two years they are at Fontbonne College.

A Principle Investigator and two Co-PIs will direct the program. A review
committee composed of the three directors, with appropriate input from the
Directors of Admission and Financial Aid, will make the final selection of
participants. Selection will be made based on criteria including U.S.
citizenship status, financial need, published admission and department
requirements, evidence of the candidate's ability demonstrated through
transcripts, a written essay and personal interview, and the expressed desire to
pursue a career or graduate study in an area related to mathematics or computer
science. All students will agree to complete a baccalaureate degree as full-time
students during the two or four year duration of the program.

The CSEMS scholars will have access to all student support services available as
needed through the Kinkel Center for Academic Resources, the Office of
Multicultural Affairs and the Career and Counseling Center. In addition to their
academic program, scholarship recipients will participate in department
sponsored programs designed to optimize their chances for successful program
completion and entry into the career of their choice. The PI and Co-PIs will
serve as academic advisers to the scholars, closely monitoring each scholar's
progress. They will participate in the career center's four year Professional
Development Certificate Program for entering freshmen; the two-year Career
Advancement Program will be recommended for the transfer scholars. Five
graduates from the department will serve as mentors for these scholars
throughout their academic program. A one hour supplemental instruction/problem
solving session will be scheduled weekly during each semester. Scholars will
also have the option for Co-op which will be coordinated through the Director of
Cooperative Education and internship placement coordinated through the academic
department. All scholars will present a poster session on their research prior
to graduation in addition to the regular presentation of their portfolio which
is required of all graduates from the department.