* 0220709
* Millennium Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Carol Poucher, SUNY College of Technology Alfred
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2007
* USD 363,000.00

The National Science Foundation Scholars' Program is targeting seven academic
programs. All seven are associate degree programs and two offer baccalaureate
degrees. Based on a 1998 mission review, the college implemented a process
calling for a broader, polytechnic baccalaureate mission. This is reflected in
the expanding number of baccalaureate offerings.

The goals of the NSF Scholars Program are to: 1. Enroll academically talent and
financially needy students in computer and engineering technology degree
programs by the end of the four-year period. 2. Increase the diversity of
students who matriculate into the college's computer science, engineering, and
engineering technology degree programs. 3. Retain 100% of the NSF Scholars
through graduation (AAS or BS). 4. Evaluate the outcomes of the NSF Scholars
Program. 5. Disseminate the results of the NSF Scholars Program.

Associated Objectives and Specific Activities are designed to achieve these
goals. Among these are to: (a) increase the proportion of students who are
African-American and/or Hispanic by producing advertising material in English
and Spanish, and recruiting in the Syracuse, Rochester, and Buffalo city school
districts; (b) increase the proportion of students who are female by
highlighting current support for women in non-traditional programs at the
college, and designing advertising material specifically addressing the needs of
women; (c) increase the number of students who are financially needy by
targeting the 25 poorest rural school districts as identified by the New York
State Education Department; and (d) increase the retention rate of all students
enrolled in targeted programs by tapping the power of peer support in a variety
of ways.

The selection process is based on an essay, letters of recommendation, academic
performance, extra-curricular activities, and financial-eligibility. Evaluation
is designed to determine whether the quantitative goals of the project are met.
The outcomes of the NSF Scholars Program are being disseminated in academic,
student affairs, enrollment management, and financial aid outlets nationally and
regionally.