* 0220826
* Marine Synechococcus Ecotypes:  Seasonal and Spatial Distributions of Physiological and Genetic Diversity
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Gabrielle Rocap, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2006
* USD 330,957.00

This project will explore the genetic and physiological diversity of the marine
cyanobacteria Synechococcus, which are major contributors to primary production
in the world's oligotrophic oceans. In addition to its role in the oligotrophic
oceans, Synechococcus can also be found in mesotrophic and eutrophic waters.
This is in sharp contrast to the members of the closely related genus
Prochlorococcus that are restricted to the subtropical open oceans. At present
it is not clear if the increased range of Synechococcus reflects a broader
physiological tolerance by all the strains of this genus, or the existence of
ecotypes that are specifically adapted to higher nutrient and colder temperature
conditions. These alternate scenarios have very different implications in terms
of how the Synechococcus community may respond to changes in environmental
conditions such as global climate change or eutrophication of coastal waters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, this question is being addressed two
ways, by characterizing the physiology of multiple genotypes of Synechococcus,
and by determining the seasonal abundances of these genotypes in water samples
from around the globe. It has been established that marine Synechococcus
consists of a number (seven or more) of genetically distinct lineages. Three of
these lineages are specifically associated with a characteristic physiology
(motility, chromatic adaptation and lack of phycourobilin), and a fourth
consists of a single strain which is incapable of utilizing nitrate as a
nitrogen source. However, the physiologies associated with the other three
genotypes have not yet been determined. To begin to understand physiological
responses of all of the genotypes of Synechococcus to factors that are likely to
influence their growth and distributions, in this project, several
representative strains of each genetic clade are being grown in a range of light
levels, temperatures and nitrogen sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several lines
of evidence suggest that additional genetic lineages exist in nature but have
not yet been cultivated. To explore this further, the genetic diversity in open
ocean Synechococcus populations in the Atlantic and Pacific and coastal
populations in Puget Sound, Washington are being examined by terminal
Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism and sequencing analyses of the 16S-23S
ribosomal RNA internal transcribed spacer (ITS). Using these sequences and those
already determined from Synechococcus isolates, primers will be designed that
are specific for each of the genetic clades. These primers will be used in real-
time quantitative PCR in a set of monthly samples from the same three
environments to quantify the abundance of each genetic type over two annual
cycles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will directly involve a graduate
student and one or more undergraduate students. Establishing a research program
in Puget Sound is providing opportunities for additional undergraduate
involvement through the UW School of Oceanography senior field course. In
addition, data on Synechococcus distributions and dynamics in Puget Sound will
be shared with the Washington State Department of Ecology and incorporated into
a Puget Sound food web model. Ultimately, examining the global distribution and
population dynamics of Synechococcus in conjunction with experiments measuring
the growth of each genotype under a suite of physical conditions will provide
insights into the relative importance of ecotypic differentiation and
physiological plasticity in determining these distributions. &lt;br/&gt;