* 0220001
* ITR:    A Formal Framework for Systematic Protocol Assessment
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Andras Farago, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Wu
* 09/30/2007
* USD 431,086.00

A fundamental challenge in network design is how to choose the right protocol,
with the right parameter settings, for some given circumstances. A key problem
that lacks a systematic formal framework is the scalability issue in the design
space: networks rapidly grow not only in size and heterogeneity, but also in the
number of available design choices, such as the right protocol to select, or
just setting the right parameters for a given protocol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
help remedy this situation we propose MERIT, a formal framework for
systematically assessing protocols in dynamic scenarios. The key novelty of the
researcher's solution is its inherent scalability: rather than comparing the
different protocols directly, the researchers compute an inherent measure of the
protocol. Using this measure the researchers define a spectrum,&lt;br/&gt;called
a MERIT spectrum, for the protocol that characterizes it in a way that ensures
comparability with other protocols without porting them to the same platform. In
addition, we develop a systematic way of analyzing these
spectra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the traditional qualitative and quantitative
measures areinformative, they do not provide a satisfactory framework for a
systematic and unified comparison of protocols. For example, as shown in the
literature, the resulting ranking often strongly depends on the chosen
simulation model. The researchers take a new, orthogonal direction in the
assessment of routing protocols in MERIT. Specifically, the MERITframework
provides a systematic and general way to rank any given routing protocol by
comparing it to a theoretical, yet efficiently computable, optimum in its own
system, rather than to a competing protocol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the
problem of routing in a mobile ad hoc network, the researchers show that the
theoretical optimum can be meaningfully defined and computed. The basis of the
researchers approach is a characterization based on the ratio of the MEan
``Real'' to the ``Ideal'' cosT, or MERIT, of the protocol, and the researchers
call the measure the MERIT ratio. The MERIT ratio as a function
of&lt;br/&gt;some parameters defines the MERIT spectrum of the protocol,
yielding a multi-faceted representation of protocol
effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful preliminary theoretical and
experimental results of the MERIT framework have encouraged the researchers to
develop three primary research directions: (1) Further development of the
mathematical model in the MERIT framework, with special emphasis on creating
formal methods to analyze MERIT spectra. (2) Creating a software tool for the
systematic study of routing protocols using the MERIT framework. (3) Extensive
experimentation with real routing protocols to capture and systematically
compare their behaviour through analyzing their
MERITspectra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regarding the broader impact of the project,
the contributions combine to impact the research in the field of dynamic
networks. For mobile ad hoc networks, there is an impact in both theoretical
model development and also simulation based performance analysis. The three
primary research directions of the project are appropriate to help train
graduate students to become highly skilled to conduct both theoretical work with
strong mathematical foundations, as well as experimental&lt;br/&gt;work using
realistic network models in simulation. The methodologies will also be
introduced into the graduate curriculum as well as research seminars that may
also involve students from underrepresented groups. While the original
motivation for MERIT was to assess routing&lt;br/&gt;protocols in mobile ad hoc
networks, the methods are also applicable to other dynamic scenarios. Thus, the
benefit to society, in addition to the production of well educated and skilled
rofessionals, is that networks will run more efficiently since MERIT provides a
methodology&lt;br/&gt;to select the right protocol for the job. The results will
be broadly disseminated in conference and journal papers, as well as book
chapters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;