* 0220655
* Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program (CSEMS)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Jack Donato, Jefferson Community College
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2007
* USD 399,000.00

This project is creating a comprehensive scholars program for students whose
goals are to pursue degrees and careers in high technology fields. The program
provides $3,000 scholarships annually to 30 students who have academic ability
and documented financial need, and who enroll full-time in our computer science,
engineering, network technology or computer information systems (CSEM) associate
degree programs. The program particularly targets women and first generation
college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two activities in particular contribute
to the overall success of the scholarship recipients, as well as other students
enrolled in these high technology curricula. The activities are:&lt;br/&gt;(a)
intensive instructional support for historically difficult classes. A
supplemental instruction program assists students in the targeted curricula who
are enrolled in classes that have high attrition rates. Each of the five courses
identified as historically difficult is a requirement for at least one of the
CSEMS degree programs.&lt;br/&gt;(b) creation of a community of scholars to
engage students receiving the CSEMS scholarships, faculty, alumni, local high
school faculty, and local industry representatives in developing relationships
and fostering an environment that supports and inspires students to achieve.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on existing relationships between high
school faculty and guidance counselors to recruit and enroll academically gifted
students. Student development events include annual scholars' reception, open
house and a high technologies career forum. Opportunities for student enrichment
activities, including internships with local industry, faculty mentoring, and
field trips are being developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the program
are to increase the number of :&lt;br/&gt;(1) educated workers prepared for
placement in the high technology careers, especially in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;(2) students recruited, enrolled, retained, graduated and
transferring in the CSEMS disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;(3) underrepresented
populations (women and first generation college students) enrolled and graduated
in CSEMS majors.&lt;br/&gt;(4) quality of support services and educational
opportunities available to students enrolled in the targeted
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These goals are being assessed and evaluated by
measuring annual rates of retention, graduation and transfer; subsequent success
of transfer students at baccalaureate institutions; and employer satisfaction
with our graduates.