* 0220796
*  University Mathematics Engineering and Computer Science Scholarships
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Mark Pickett, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 08/31/2007
* USD 316,352.00

The goal of the University Mathematics, Engineering and Computer Science
Scholarships (UMECSS) program is to increase the number of low-income, and
underrepresented students able to enroll in, successfully matriculate, and
graduate from the University of Toledo in the fields of Engineering and
Mathematics. This is accomplished by utilizing numerous individuals and
organizations from various departments at the University that have an interest
and proven history in preparing students from these groups for success in
college and beyond. Furthermore, the UMECSS project builds on numerous already-
established programs, many of which have successfully collaborated on similar
projects in the past. After identifying and selecting students with an interest
and potential for success in Engineering and Mathematics fields of study,
services help these students to complete their degree programs and secure
professional positions. These services include a "bridging" program to assist
recipients with the transition from high school to college, tutoring, mentoring,
and establishing cohort groups that utilize Supplemental Instructors to assist
students (by sitting in on classes, helping with note taking, and providing
Supplemental Instruction). This comprehensive set of support services, which is
designed to augment their course work and help them adjust to the University
setting, improve recipients' chances of successfully completing their degree
programs and securing professional positions. The primary components of UMECSS
focus on creating small learning communities, which enable students to form
closer relationships with each other and University faculty and staff.
Clustering or grouping students in core Math and Science classes with the same
instructor in the same courses also allows for closer relationships, and allows
for students to review the materials more effectively. Field trips and job
shadowing activities with industry and faculty mentors help students begin to
the make the transition from an academic setting to that of the workplace, and
they familiarize students with a professional environment. Co-op assignments
with industry and business partners, job fairs, help with resume preparation,
interview skills, and professional etiquette are gradually incorporated as the
students progress in their degree programs.