* 0220945
* Development &amp; Application of Molecular Diagnostics for Fe &amp; P Limitation of Trichodesmium Nitrogen Fixation &amp; Productivity
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Eric Webb, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2005
* USD 398,129.00

Photosynthetic fixation of CO2 in the oceans accounts for approximately half of
total primary production. A significant component of this primary production is
due to the growth of oceanic cyanobacteria, such as the diazotroph
Trichodesmium. For example, in the tropical and subtropical North Atlantic,
Trichodesmium spp. are thought to be the most significant primary producers.
Additionally, in this region Trichodesmium introduces the largest fraction of
new nitrogen to the euphotic zone (~30mg N/m2/day), a value that exceeds the
estimated flux of nitrate across the thermocline. Although there are many
biogeochemical factors that may impact Trichodesmium productivity and N2
fixation (e.g. nutrients, light, temperature), recent studies have emphasized
the critical importance of P and Fe bioavailability. To increase our
understanding of how the bioavailability of these elements may constrain primary
production and N2 fixation, these PIs developed specific molecular diagnostics
for Fe and P limitation in Trichodesmium. The PIs have determined that axenic
cultures of P-stressed Trichodesmium colonies induce the enzyme PhoA and Fe-
stressed colonies express the protein IdiA. The PIs have also demonstrated that
they can detect PhoA activity and IdiA expression in field populations. In this
project, laboratory studies will be used to determine how these diagnostics
correlate with decreases in both Trichodesmium productivity and N2 fixation.
This work will result in the development and application of two well-tested
molecular diagnostics for determining if P, Fe, or both, limit Trichodesmium C
and N2 fixation. The assay for species-specific PhoA activity, called Enzyme
Labeled Fluorescence, utilizes commercially available reagents, and as with IdiA
heterologously-expressed in Escherichia coli, the PIs will provide the IdiA
protein or antiserum to others. The impact of this research will be tools that
can be used by investigators to quickly and easily identify P and Fe limitation
in Trichodesmium species from any environment.