* 0220196
* Endocrine Regulation of Stomach Organogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Jennifer Specker, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 07/31/2006
* USD 359,614.00

The stomach is an important organ, both physiologically and ecologically. From a
comparative perspective, the structure and function of the stomach are similar
across vertebrate classes, whereas the timing of its formation in the life cycle
is variable. Little is known about the endocrine regulation of stomach
organogenesis. In vertebrates, corticosteroids and thyroid hormones
significantly regulate development, however their metabolic functions in adults
are more thoroughly studied. The larger idea here is that these are the hormones
that connect metabolism and metabolic state with growth and development. The
proposed project tests the hypothesis that stomach organogenesis is regulated by
sequential action of cortisol and thyroid hormones on cell proliferation and
differentiation. The endocrine regulation of organogenesis is more easily
studied in free-living larval stages than in embryonic/fetal stages because of
the ease of manipulation of hormone levels. The experimental animal used to test
this hypothesis is the marine flatfish summer flounder (Paralichthys dentatus).
In summer flounder, stomach organogenesis occurs at the end of the larval phase
during metamorphosis. Metamorphosing flounder can be staged based on the
translocation of the right eye to the left side of the head (like the hand on a
clock). This permits stage-specific experimentation that is difficult or
impossible otherwise. In the incipient stomach, the developmental progression of
proliferation, morphogenesis, and cell differentiation is closely associated
with sequential amplification of corticosteroid and thyroid hormone signalling.
These hormones act through intracellular receptors that serve as transcription
factors. How do these hormones coordinate the cellular and intercellular
mechanisms of organogenesis? The research plan integrates responses at the
organismal, organ, tissue, and cellular and molecular levels of organization.
End-points are morphogenesis, morphometrics, cell proliferation and
differentiation, hormone concentrations, and quantification and localization of
the receptors for cortisol and thyroid hormones. The broad significance of the
award includes the research training of early scientists, possible contributions
to the development of aquaculture of marine fishes, and basic understanding of
the endocrine regulation of cellular proliferation and differentiation.