* 0220864
* UW-Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* John Steadman, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Linnea A. Fletcher
* 08/31/2008
* USD 379,510.00

The goal of UW-CSEMS is to recruit more high school students to computer
science, engineering, and mathematics careers, and specifically those students
with demonstrated financial need. Since it is well documented that women and
ethnic minority students are particularly underrepresented in technical fields,
these populations are being expressly recruited for UW-CSEMS. In addition, UW-
CSEMS includes initiatives to retain these students in computer science,
engineering, and mathematics once they enroll. The UW-CSEMS support program
involves entering freshmen in a community-building model. UW-CSEMS recipients
participate in a biweekly seminar the first year they hold their scholarship.
The seminar includes presentations on academic success skills (such as time
management and study skills), career options, and research/internship
opportunities. These students are also encouraged to take advantage of on-campus
programs in subsequent years such as career guidance, undergraduate research
opportunities, and industry internships facilitated through the Career Fair.
Each UW-CSEMS student is assigned a Peer Mentor and a Faculty Mentor. These
triads meet biweekly to assist in the student's transition to the university. A
total of 115 students in computer science, engineering, and mathematics are
being supported with $3000 scholarships (25 in year 1, and 30 each in years 2,
3, and 4). A management team of faculty from the three disciplines and a
representative from Student Affairs assist in recruiting and selecting the
scholarship recipients. Students are recruited using resources from the Office
of Admissions, Multicultural Affairs Office, and a network of over 3000 natural
science teachers.