* 0220811
* Longhorn Scholars in Computer Sciences, Engineering and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Alvin Meyer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 08/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

The University of Texas at Austin is partnering with the Hispanic Scholarship
Fund Institute to produce outstanding undergraduates for service and research in
the public sector as part of a unique academic experience for computer science,
mathematics and engineering majors. A total of 32 four-year scholarships are
being awarded to talented students who are entering the University as Longhorn
Scholars with an interest in technology fields. The highly successful Longhorn
Scholars Program, now in its third year of operation, identifies financially
needy students who graduate in the top 10% of their class from 70 historically
underrepresented high schools in the State of Texas. The Colleges of Engineering
and Natural Sciences participates by providing a rigorous curriculum and
associated degrees in the targeted areas. Recognizing the substantial population
of minority students graduating from these high schools, the Hispanic
Scholarship Foundation has offered to assist in devising a collection of
retention strategies including mentoring programs and placement opportunities in
public sector research laboratories, research internships and cooperatives.
Despite its large size, the University of Texas is committed to a personalized
academic experience for its students. In particular, Longhorn Scholars are
evaluated to identify career interests as well as academic strengths and
weaknesses. This information is used to determine the appropriate academic track
for each student. Depending on major and background, students become part of
either the Equal Opportunity in Engineering Program (EOE), the Partnership for
Excellence in the Natural Sciences program (PENS) or the Emerging Scholars
Program (ESP) that serves both Colleges. Each of these programs provides an
intricate support structure that includes strong faculty participation,
personalized academic advising and mentoring and an intensive math and science
curriculum. The Hispanic Scholarship Fund Institute is augmenting these existing
services with external mentoring programs as well as seminars and field
experiences to introduce students to the function and significance of the public
sector in technology advancement. By their junior and senior years, students
will be poised to begin capstone experiences through academic research,
internships and co-ops. It is expected that many will participate in the public
sector opportunities made available as a part of this initiative. The CSEMS
scholarships and the support programs surrounding them contribute directly to
the primary mission of The University of Texas at Austin to effectively serve
all populations of the State of Texas in producing outstanding graduates. The
ability to bring together such a wide array of collaborators speaks to the
importance of this mission in producing a new generation of leaders in
technology fields.