* 0220875
* Increasing Access and Diversity in Engineering and Microelectronics Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Jim Rett, Portland Community College
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 09/30/2008
* USD 399,118.00

Portland Community College's(PCC), along with its contracting community colleges
in Tillamook Bay (TBCC) and Columbia Gorge (CGCC,) project is a scholarship
program called 'Increasing Access and Diversity in Engineering and
Microelectronics Careers'. This CSEMS project serves students in Electronic
Engineering Technology, Computer Software Engineering Technology, Civil and
Mechanical Engineering Technology, and Microelectronics Technology. The
Increasing Access and Diversity program awards a total of 60 two-year
scholarships over four years, with each scholarship worth $3,000 per year. The
scholarships are targeted to students who demonstrate financial need and
academic promise, with special efforts to recruit and retain students who are
underrepresented in technology disciplines, including African Americans,
Hispanics, Native Americans, and women. The Increasing Access and Diversity
scholarship program places special emphasis on recruiting students who have
recently finished high school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this program is
to increase opportunities and access to higher education and employment for
underrepresented minorities and women in engineering and microelectronics
technology by providing scholarships that will cover the cost of tuition, books,
and supplies for full-time students. The objectives that will help the program
achieve this overall goal are:&lt;br/&gt;1. Increase the number of
underrepresented minority students in participating departments by
50%.&lt;br/&gt;2. Increase the number of female students in the targeted
departments by 25%.&lt;br/&gt;3. Increase by 20% the number of students in
targeted departments who enter PCC, TBCC, or CGCC within 12 months of graduating
from high school.&lt;br/&gt;4. 80% of CSEM scholars will complete the two-year
program in which they enroll.&lt;br/&gt;5. 95% of graduating CSEMS scholars will
be employed or enrolled in a four-year program related to their discipline
within 12 months of graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these
objectives, the Increasing Access and Diversity scholarships are publicized
through meetings at area high schools, community organizations, and one-stop
career centers, where eligible people will be encouraged to apply. The
participating departments are committed to recruiting students directly from
high school. The scholarships give motivated high school graduates a chance to
begin their college careers immediately, rather than interrupting their
education due to lack of funds. Once on campus, CSEM scholars benefit from the
existing array of support services designed to help students at PCC, TBCC, and
CGCC achieve academic success. These include student success seminars,
communication skills workshops, academic advising, internships, job placement
workshops, and career counseling. Each CSEM scholar benefits from CSEMS-specific
services and activities, such as monthly workshops and troubleshooting sessions,
an ongoing relationship with an industry mentor, increased access to tutoring,
exposure to area universities and high-tech firms, and job placement assistance.
These activities build&lt;br/&gt;peer and mentoring relationships for scholars
that enhance retention and degree completion.&lt;br/&gt;