* 0220814
* Dissertation Research:  Knowledge and Ethics in the Debate Over Inuit Suicide
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Lawrence Cohen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 10/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00



This is a dissertation improvement grant for a modest $12,000 to cover
transportation, video supplies for a Youth Video Documentary sub-project,
informant honoraria, and a part-time research assistant. Knowledge and Ethics in
the Debate Over Inuit Suicide (Knowledge and Ethics) is a long-term (12 month),
multi-sited (Iqaluit, Pangnirtung, Toronto) ethnographic research project that
seeks to understand how knowledge about suicide is produced in a multi-cultural
and post-colonial milieu. Through semi-structured interviews, conversation,
archival research, and a youth video project, Knowledge and Ethics proposes to
study the social and political implications of western medical, scientific and
journalistic knowledge on the subject of Inuit suicide.

In addition, Knowledge and Ethics identifies and analyzes the dialog between
Inuit ways of knowing and western biomedical knowledge. The divergent responses
of psychiatrists, family members and suicidal individuals to research questions
concerning human life, the preservation of life (ethics), and the self should
provide data about different conceptions of reality and how meaning is created.
Through careful discourse analysis the investigators hope to identify new ways
of conceptualizing human life that are emerging in the Canadian arctic. Through
such analyses, this research proposes to enhance and challenge theoretical
discussions on the cultural construction of knowledge, indigenous identity, and
the meanings of suicide, as well as, contribute to the ongoing debate about the
creation of knowledge amidst upheaval and cultural confrontation.