* 0220802
* Industrial and Engineering Technology Scholarship Project
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Daniel Nance, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 02/28/2005
* USD 82,500.00

The Industry &amp; Engineering Technology (I&amp;ET) Scholarship project is
identifying, recruiting, graduating and placing in jobs related to the degree
discipline 12 students with the Associate of Applied Science degree in I&amp;ET.
The project doubles the number of students who typically graduate from the
program in any given year and enables the college to address a significant local
industrial need, as well as serve a traditionally underserved population of low
income academically talented students. Within the past year, three new light-
manufacturing plants have opened in the college's service area. Data compiled by
local economic development officials indicate that these plants alone create a
need for approximately 1,000 new jobs during the next five years, many of which
require high technology skills. The I&amp;ET program prepares graduates for the
kind of high technology skills these new employers
demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A unique feature of the I&amp;ET Scholarship
Project is that it makes use of existing federally funded outreach and student
support programs already in place at the college that have been operating
successfully since the 1980s and whose target populations are identical to the
target population for I&amp;ET scholarship recipients: low income, traditionally
underrepresented, academically talented students. I&amp;ET faculty collaborate
with the staff of these existing federal programs, Upward Bound (UB) and
Educational Talent Search (ETS), to recruit and select project participants.
Once enrolled, I&amp;ET faculty collaborate with Student
Support&lt;br/&gt;Services (SSS) staff to develop a comprehensive Individual
Education Plan for each student that serves as a blueprint for academic success.
Successful retention and support strategies are then incorporated in the plan so
that students become part of a learning community who succeed in the classroom
and persist to graduation. I&amp;ET faculty and industry representatives then
collaborate with the college's Placement Office staff to ensure that all
graduates receive job search training and are successfully placed within six
months of graduation. Since the inception of the I&amp;ET program, 100% of its
graduates have been successfully placed in jobs related to the discipline.