* 0220104
* ITR:  Computational Theory and Tools for Reduced-Order Modeling of Very Large Dynamical Systems and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Alan Laub, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2006
* USD 317,509.00

The continual and compelling need for accurately and efficiently simulating
dynamical behavior of physical systems arising from a wide variety of
applications has led to increasingly large and complex models. Reduced-order
modeling (ROM), also called model reduction, techniques play an indispensable
role in providing efficient computational prototyping tools to replace such
large-scale models by approximate smaller models. Such reduced-order models must
be capable of capturing critical dynamical behavior and faithfully preserving
essential properties of the larger models they approximate. An accurate and
effiective reduced-order model can be applied for steady-state analysis,
transient analysis, or sensitivity analysis of large-scale models and the
physical systems they emulate. Consequently, scientists and engineers can
significantly reduce design time and pursue more aggressive design strategies.
Designers can try ``what-if" experiments in hours instead of
days.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, we propose a broad range of
synergistic research activities on ROM relating to three interlinking strands:
computational theory, reliable algorithms, and high-performance software tools.
We will also be actively involved with promoting applications of ROM techniques
and testing our methods through existing and new collaborations with researchers
in circuit simulation, structural dynamics, control systems, and
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). Specifically, our proposed research
activities on computational theory and algorithms include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Accuracy estimation in both time and frequency domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Sensitivity analysis of linear systems using the techniques of ROM and
statistical condition estimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Development of ROM
techniques that directly exploit so-called second-order model structures and
generate a reduced-order model in second-order form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Exploration of a framework of ROM techniques for certain types of large-scale
nonlinear systems of technological importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;