* 0220686
* Study of Internal Wave Reflection and Mixing in the Black Sea during Winter
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* Michael Gregg, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2008
* USD 962,693.00

0220686 Gregg&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations suggest there exists a
qualitative difference between deep ocean turbulence and turbulence in lakes and
fjords. The Black Sea may represent an intermediate situation. A study to
characterize the turbulence environment in this large sea, which is devoid of
strong tidal flows, is proposed. An acoustic Doppler current profiler (ADCP)
will be implanted on the slope and a Lagrangian float released in the interior
of the Black Sea to define the context of a series of microstructure
measurements. Microstructure probe drops and a depth-cycling conductivity-
temperature-depth recorder will be deployed around these to:&lt;br/&gt;1)
quantify mixing produce by internal wave scattering at the slope in an
environment where tide contamination is absent, &lt;br/&gt;2) measure and
parameterize the diapycnal diffusivity in the upper 300 m of the Black Sea, and
&lt;br/&gt;3) determine diapycnal diffusivity at the anoxic/oxic interface, when
accompanying chemists are taking measurements to understand the associated
reactions. (The processes have short time scales and appear sensitive to the
choice of diapycnal diffusivity in models.) &lt;br/&gt;Some effort will also be
made to control for three-dimensional effects. Field work will occur during the
energetic winter season. Synergy with EPIC2001, an ongoing field program in the
Pacific Ocean, will improve understanding of high stratification regions.
Seasonal variability will be addressed by leaving the ADCP in place and
collaborating with Steve Riser, who has ONR funding to deploy profiling floats
in the Black Sea.&lt;br/&gt;