* 0220379
* Collaborative Research: Development of a Combined in Situ Particle Imaging Velocimeter /Fluorescence Imaging System
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Jules Jaffe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2007
* USD 638,757.00

The PIs propose to build a new system that will image multiple wavelengths of
fluoresced and scattered light and perform stereo particle image velocimetry (3D
PIV) measurements. These data will enable maps of fluid flow and derived
quantities such as strain rate, vorticity, and the dissipation rate of turbulent
kinetic energy to be produced. Measurements will be made on identical scales (20
x 20 x 0.6 cm with 100 um resolution), nearly simultaneously, allowing in situ
3D mapping of biological distributions to microscale physical flows. It is
proposed that the multiple imaging wavelengths will allow a degree of taxonomic
discrimination among fluorescent particles, while the side-scattered light will
provide images of all particles that scatter the excitation irradiance including
most of the phytoplankton appearing in the fluorescence images, as well as
zooplankton. The 3D PIV-multispectral imaging fluorometer will be mounted on a
free-falling platform with a suite of auxiliary instruments and a water sampler
for image ground-truthing that has already been constructed and shown to provide
undisturbed views of plankton in the water column. Images will be captured in a
plane extending below the platform to obtain distributions unaffected by the
platform. Shipboard epifluorescence microscopy will be used to identify dominant
organisms in the images.&lt;br/&gt;Relating microscale distributions of plankton
to microscale physical dynamics in the ocean has been largely limited by a lack
of technology. The combination of multiple-wavelength imaging and PIV will allow
in situ investigations of fluorescent particle/bulk fluorescence relationships,
microscale distributions of plankton in relation to microscale flows, spatial
relationships of grazers and primary producers, and physical mechanisms
underlying fine- and microscale biological patchiness. This instrument is an
enhancement of an existing 2D imaging fluorometer developed by the PIs that has
only one sensing wavelength, and does not gather simultaneous physical data on
the same scales as the fluorescence images.&lt;br/&gt;