* 0220547
* Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics (CSEM) Scholarships for the 21st Century
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Deborah Hwang, University of Evansville
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 09/30/2005
* USD 205,008.00

The goal of the Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics (CSEM)
Scholarships for the 21st Century Program is to enable talented, economically
challenged students to obtain undergraduate degrees in computer science,
engineering, mathematics, or Internet technology allowing them to enter the
workforce in their chosen field or to enter post-graduate school. The program
has the following objectives: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Recruit talented, economically
challenged students, particularly from our Tri-State region, and especially
minorities and women, into majors in the CSEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Retain
such students in these programs through the sophomore year and beyond.
&lt;br/&gt;(3) Strengthen the current variety of support services for these
students. &lt;br/&gt;(4) Supply ample opportunities for these students to engage
in professional development. By achieving these objectives, more students will
enroll and graduate in the CSEM disciplines at the University of
Evansville.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program offers the incentive of financial
support for economically-challenged students, plus many support services and
professional opportunities that increase the likelihood that these students will
graduate with degrees in the CSEM disciplines. There are 40 scholarships of
$2500 each year for two years being awarded to freshman and sophomore students.
The University is continuing these scholarships to qualified students for their
remaining junior and senior years. Recipients are selected by a Scholarship
committee on the basis of their academic record (high school GPA and class rank,
SAT or ACT score) and potential for success in a CSEM discipline as evidenced by
a written essay and a letter of recommendation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
have access to the University programs and support services currently in place
including the EXCEL Student Academic Success Center, the Office of Career
Services, and various professional student organizations and conferences. In
addition, to provide cameraderie among the CSEM Scholars, the program offers two
activities specifically for the CSEM scholars each semester. &lt;br/&gt;