* 0220500
* Graduate/Undergraduate Engineering Initiative for Development and Enhancement (GUIDE)
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* James Mihelcic, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/2007
* USD 400,000.00

Michigan Technological University's College of Engineering strives to attract
and retain more students from underrepresented groups, specifically women and
minorities. This project supports undergraduate students during their first two
years of college. The goal is for these high-risk students to perform well early
in their college career with the expectation that their strong performance will
help them to obtain alternate funding sources (e.g.: co-op and internship
positions) during the latter two years of study. In addition, the project
provides graduate scholarships for engineering students who are in unfunded
programs so that they can cost effectively complete an advanced degree. The
project builds upon and utilizes pre-existing campus programs, campus Learning
Centers, and peer tutoring programs. To facilitate undergraduate success,
students attend and participate in the engineering seminar series and the Career
Center Workshops associated with this program. They regularly meet with their
mentor and the program advisor. To retain their scholarships, undergraduate
students need to show satisfactory progress towards their degree, become active
in an on-campus professional organization, and work toward obtaining a co-
op/internship position. The graduate scholars serve as academic mentors to the
undergraduate scholars and offer insights regarding student life and the local
community. Two groups of graduate students are targeted for the scholarships:
Peace Corps International Masters students and the Master of Engineering
students. (These graduate students are not typically eligible for traditional
funding sources.) Graduate students in both programs are ideally suited to be
mentors to undergraduate students: they have received a technical undergraduate
degree and are interested in working with and supporting others. The graduate
students receive training in mentoring and advising students. All target group
engineering graduate and undergraduate students entering Michigan Tech are sent
information and a scholarship application in the spring of each year of the
program. Faculty/ staff evaluate the applicants based on need and individual
merit. Each undergraduate scholarship recipient receives $2,500 per year to
assist with college expenses. Each graduate scholarship recipient receives
$3,125 per year to assist with college expenses. The graduate students receive
funding for one year (the amount of time they are on campus for their degree
program), while the undergraduate students are funded for two years. The
interaction of undergraduates and graduate students is one of the most important
components of this program.