* 0220079
* NSF/CONACyT:  Integrated Air Modeling Approach to PM Source Apportionment at the USA/Mexico Border
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2005
* JoAnn Lighty, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Patrick L. Brezonik
* 02/28/2005
* USD 101,069.00

0220079 Lighty The University of Utah (UofU) and the Instituto Tecnologico y de
Estudios Superiores de Monterrey (ITESM) are involved in a collaborative air
quality modeling study of ambient particulate matter (PM) in selected areas of
the Lower Rio Grande Valley (LRGV) section of the USA/Mexico border. Special
attention is being given to the peculiar evening episodes with very high PM
levels observed near several large border cities and reported to be associated
with increased mortality risk in at least one region.&lt;br/&gt;The partners
have recently participated in a comprehensive PM characterization and source
attribution study of the Paso del Norte airshed and propose to use a novel,
integrated approach to PM source apportionment by cross-validating the results
of PM Receptor Modeling (using factor analysis of receptor and source
characterization data to estimate major source contributions) with PM Source
Modeling results (using area emission estimates and geography- plus meteorology-
based dispersion models to predict evening PM concentrations at specific
receptor sites). Successful integration of both methods should permit some
degree of interpolation between the limited sampling locations and time points
afforded by Receptor Modeling alone while enabling calibration of Source
Modeling predictions. Other potential benefits include improved PM exposure risk
assessment opportunities for various population groups and more detailed
evaluation of the widely reported statistical association between 24-hr PM
averages and urban mortality plus morbidity. Most of the PM receptor
characterization and modeling tasks will be carried out by the Uof U team
whereas primary responsibility for the source measurement and modeling tasks
will be undertaken by the ITESM team. Integration of measurement, data fusion,
evaluation, and interpretation tasks will require a highly coordinated effort by
both teams, an International Collaboration being supported by the NSF-CONACyT
Collaborative Research Opportunities Program.&lt;br/&gt;