* 0220745
* Collaborative Research: A Two-Stage Towing System for Swath-Mapping Ocean Turbulence
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Craig Woolsey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 07/31/2005
* USD 199,070.00

P.I. Gargett, Ann (Old Dominion University) Proposal #:
0220504&lt;br/&gt;Collaborating Inst: Woolsey, Craig (VA Tech.) Proposal #:
0220745&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The PIs propose to construct a two-body towing
system to create a stable measurement platform for ocean turbulence
measurements. This work builds on the potential for an effective turbulence
survey tool using acoustic Doppler current measurements in non-standard ways. In
particular, horizontally moving a 5-beam VADCP through the ocean can produce
vertical-plane "swath-maps" of crucial turbulence quantities such as vertical
momentum stresses, turbulent kinetic energy, and its dissipation rate, as well
as standard measurements of mean currents and their vertical shear. These
measurements require a sufficiently stable platform, as proposed here.
Preliminary offshore measurements taken from a prototype towing system suggest
that a two-stage design can provide the required stability. This preliminary
testing also clarified the design modifications needed for continuous mapping in
offshore environments: provision of shipboard controls for (i) the length of
cable between primary and secondary tow bodies and (ii) mean attitude of the
secondary tow body. Specifically, the PIs propose to design the necessary
control systems, build a complete towing system for operation to depths of 200m,
and carry out a coastal offshore test cruise to document the motion
characteristics of the system and collect preliminary data with a 1.2MHz 5-beam
VADCP, deployed in both upward and downward looking modes. During the course of
this work with a shallow system, they will also explore options for
accomplishing cable length adjustments in a subsequent system to operate over
full ocean depths. If successful, this development would have broad impacts on
upper ocean observational capabilities in areas other than turbulence research,
enabling spatial mapping of such features as biological thin layers and the
near-surface bubble clouds that dominate gas transfer between ocean and
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;