* 0220296
* STUDENT PIPELINE - Computer Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Sherri Avent, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 08/31/2007
* USD 399,960.00

The Student Pipeline-Computer Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
(SP-CSMET) Scholarship Program is a student focused, experience-based program.
The SP-CSMET is used to identify incoming freshmen and sophomores that are
interested in computer science, engineering, mathematics, and technology. High
school administrators, the university admissions office, the financial aid
office and faculty members help identify these students. The SP-CSMET provides
enrichment experiences in engineering, mathematics, and technology by utilizing
existing programs and by providing lecture series, workshops, and faculty
mentoring for the students. The SP-CSMET supports 32 new freshmen the first
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second year of funding supports all freshmen that
meet the criteria for their sophomore semester. The scholarship slots that are
open the second year will be used to support new incoming freshmen students.
This process will be repeated the third and fourth year of funding. The new SP-
CSMET Scholarship Program is a feeder (Student Pipeline) to a recent NSF-funded
Computer Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology (CSMET) Scholarship
Program, serving juniors and seniors. &lt;br/&gt;