* 0220287
* ITR: Cooperative Communication Schemes for Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Tan Wong, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2006
* USD 464,998.00

In a wireless network, multiple communications devices in close proximity form a
natural distributed antenna array. If a group of such devices transmit and
receive in some cooperative manner, then the system performance can be
significantly improved. This researchexplores techniques for cooperative
transmission and reception using multiple devices. This cooperative
communication approach is differentfrom traditional array processing because the
distributed nature of&lt;br/&gt;the communication nodes calls for network-
oriented design approaches and processing algorithms. In particular, techniques
that allow distributed and asynchronous processing that utilizes information
provided by other nodes in a cluster will be
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For cooperative transmission, distributed
space-time coding will be employed to take advantage of transmit diversity
provided by the distributed array. One crucial issue for distributed space-time
coding is that only rough synchronization between the nodes can be achieved.
Hence space-time coding in an asynchronous setting needs to be considered. This
leads to research on asynchronous diversity and coding gain analysis, symbol
waveform design, and tradeoff between the complexity of transmitter
synchronization and complexity of the decoding process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
cooperative reception, distributed iterative decoding will be employed to obtain
diversity advantage in reception. In this approach, multiple nodes form a
distributed antenna array by collaboratively processing a received signal. By
exchanging information in a distributed decoding process, the nodes are able to
extract diversity from the channel and decode the message. The main obstacle to
this approach is that there is a vast amount of information that can
be&lt;br/&gt;shared between the nodes. This problem can be solved by using
iterative decoding to extract important information from the received signal at
each node, and only this information is passed to other nodes. Each node will
then utilize the information from other nodes to perform further decoding to
obtain the diversity advantage provided by the additional information. The
objective is to develop distributed processing techniques that allow us to
obtain the maximum degree of&lt;br/&gt;diversity advantage from the signals
received at multiple receiving nodes, while requiring a minimum amount of
information exchange between the nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to make
the above cooperative communication schemes work, a control signaling strategy
has to be designed to allow sharing of information between nodes. More
importantly, the physical-layer communication performance of the proposed system
will be dependent on&lt;br/&gt;the control signaling strategy. Therefore this
signaling design problem will be attacked by a cross-layer design
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analytical guidelines for designing systems
employing the proposed cooperative communication schemes will be developed. The
expected results of this research can be utilized in many different commercial
and military communication networks, such as cellular and sensor
networks.&lt;br/&gt;