* 0220936
* Japan-JSPS Fellowship: Milankovitch and Climate Change in the Cretaceous and Paleogene Period
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Benjamin Cramer, Cramer Benjamin S
* Fellowship
* Myra McAuliffe
* 12/31/2004
* USD 3,000.00

INT-0220936 Cramer

This award supports a twenty-four month Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Benjamin Cramer. He will be
collaborating with Professor Kunio Kaiho at Tohoku University in Japan. They
will be undertaking research on Milankovitch and climate change in the
Cretaceous and Paleogene period. This topic is a major focus of current research
in paleoceanography. Most characterizations of long-term climate change in this
time period rely on low-resolution records that are most likely compromised by
aliasing of the underlying orbital cyclicity. In addition, high-resolution
studies of climatic and biotic perturbations lack a context for evaluating how
the climate response to insolation forcing may have changed during different
events or how insolation forcing may have affected the structure of these
events. The major objectives of the research are 1) to produce a Milankovitch
stratigraphy for the Cenomanian-Turonian, Cretaceous-Tertiary, and Paleocene-
Eocene transitions and 2) using this stratigraphy as a guide, to investigate
climate changes on Milankovitch timescales in discreet intervals during these
transitions.

The researchers hope to produce a reliable Milankovitch-based stratigraphy that
will greatly enhance studies of all three boundaries. Understanding the
relationship between climate proxy records and orbital forcing is a crucial step
in understanding Cretaceous and Paleogene greenhouse climates and will be useful
in understanding isolated perturbations that affected those climates. This
project will offer a good opportunity to join efforts between the two countries.
Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base
of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. The
researchers plan to publish results of the research on the web and report on the
findings at scientific meetings.