* 0220910
* Dissertation Research:  Fighting Engineers: U.S. Navy and Professional Mechanical Engineering, 1842-1900
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* David Mindell, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 06/30/2003
* USD 8,000.00

This dissertation research project, Fighting Engineers: The U.S. Navy and
Professional Mechanical Engineering, 1842-1900, investigates nineteenth century
Navy social hierarchy, engineering style, and engineers. Navy engineers were few
in number before the Civil War, but the engineering corps expanded several fold
during the war. Social conflict developed between combat and engineering
officers, known throughout the second half of the century as the line-staff
dispute. At stake was authority and prestige; line officers were unwilling to
share either with shipboard engineers and fought against any encroachment on
their traditional privileges. For their part, engineers rallied support in
Congress, academia, and industry to gain the respect they felt they deserved.
This dissertation connects to a broader historical theme: government sponsorship
of technology, an American phenomenon that often has a military genesis. From
1865 to 1890, the U.S. Navy created modern mechanical engineering at the Naval
Academy. The formation of this new body of technical knowledge had dramatic and
unforeseen multiplier effects for the nation. By century's end, Navy engineer
veterans directed the largest industrial corporations in the country and taught
at its finest universities. They were one critical but overlooked factor in
nineteenth century American economic development. Funds for this project support
research at the National Archives in Washington, D.C.