* 0220947
* Dissertation Research:  Science and Popular Culture in Traditional China
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Nathan Sivin, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

The plurality of science in China is a large unexplored topic in the world
history of science. Rather than a single narrative of traditional science, the
issue calls for a new framework that acknowledges that many modes for
understanding nature coexisted in pre-modern China. Most of these survived
modernization and nation-building in the early twentieth century. This
dissertation research project will examine the plurality of science in China,
analyzing the relationship between science and popular culture from the
seventeenth through the early twentieth centuries. The approach of this doctoral
dissertation subordinates the investigation of elite intellectual traditions
that has so far dominated the historiography of Chinese science. Historians such
as Margaret Jacob and Larry Stewart have examined the transformation of European
culture through the popularization of science in the eighteenth century; it is
time to study Chinese counterparts. This study will add new perspectives to
themes familiar to historians of western science such as the professionalization
of scientists and the relationship between science and the nation-state,
avoiding the one-dimensional approach. The relationship between science and
popular culture offers a key framework not only for understanding the plurality
of science in traditional China, but for showing in what ways its evolution
differed from that of the European technical enterprise. That will make it
possible to avoid conventionally exaggerating the very limited impact of small
groups of reformist scientists and traditional doctors on Chinese culture.
Popular understandings of nature, intermixed with elite intellectual traditions,
pervaded every aspect of Chinese society from the imperial court to the peasant
village. Despite the great diversity of customs and language within China,
everyone shared an understanding of gods, ghosts, and spirits as intermediaries
between man and the cosmos. The spiritual world affected the practice of science
and medicine and, through state sacrifices and local rituals, organized craft
production. The natural world served as a stage for social interactions that
created and applied modes for rational understanding. This study will examine
the diversity and flexibility of these human relations, and their underlying
conceptions of the natural world, in the areas of craft production and healing.
Studies so far indicate that attention to scholarly discourse, local and supra-
local community relations, and state appropriation or suppression of popular
religious practices will cast light on science, technology, and medicine as
Chinese actually practiced them. This proposal requests $12,000 to be used over
twelve months for travel to the archives in China and Taiwan.