* 0220766
* MACSTECH Scholars: Mathematics and Computer Science Technology Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Jeffrey Palmer, Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2008
* USD 395,888.00

This project (MACSTECH Scholars: Mathematics and Computer Science Technology
Scholarship Program) allows the Mathematics and Computer Sciences Programs to
provide 28-45 scholarships each year for four years to financially needy,
academically talented students. Both programs have been identified as "economic
development programs" by the Board of Regents because of their strong technology
emphasis and the critical need for graduates in these areas within the state of
South Dakota. MACSTECH is designed to strengthen the current programs and to
provide a foundation for future success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
contains a comprehensive management plan that incorporates student recruitment
(particularly to develop a critical mass of students in the Mathematics major
and to increase underrepresented populations and women in the programs),
develops multiple mechanisms to improve student retention at various points in
their degree studies, increases the number of highly qualified double majors in
Mathematics and Computer Science, and provides an extensive student enrichment
and support structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A strong retention program involving
continued support for successful scholars fosters the success of those
individuals to degree completion. This is accomplished through advising,
building group cohesion, and extensive use of student support services,
tutoring, enrichment activities and the resources and activities of existing
university programs.&lt;br/&gt;