* 0220248
* ITR: Application Partitioning Without Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Yannis Smaragdakis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2006
* USD 299,634.00

Application partitioning is the task of breaking up the functionality of an
application into distinct entities that can operate independently, usually in a
distributed setting. As networking changes the computing landscape, application
partitioning is becoming an increasingly common form of distributed programming.
This project examines the possibility of automating the partitioning of a
software application. Instead of hand re-coding, higher-level tools allow the
user to express how the application is to be partitioned. The tools can then
rewrite the existing application code to replace local data exchange (e.g.
function calls, data sharing through pointers) with remote communication (e.g.
remote function calls, remote pointers or mobile objects). The tools are based
on a novel static analysis and translation algorithm. The potential impact of
this work is in significantly simplifying distributed program construction, a
prime intellectual and practical challenge of computer science. Automatic
partitioning can revolutionize the way a large class of distributed programs is
developed. Additionally, the proposed tools have a high educational value: they
can be used for illustrating crucial concepts in both programming languages and
distributed systems, while minimizing distractions due to low-level complexity.