* 0220130
* ITR: Research on Recruiting Middle School Minority and Majority Girls into a High School IT Magnet
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Lecia Barker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 12/31/2007
* USD 424,750.00

&lt;br/&gt;EIA - 0220130&lt;br/&gt;Barker, Lecia J.&lt;br/&gt;Garvin-Doxas,
Ronda K. &lt;br/&gt;U. Colorado at Boulder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: ITR:
Research on Recruiting Middle School Minority and Majority Girls into a High
School IT Magnet&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this ITR-and ITWF-
funded project is to increase the participation of women and minorities in the
critical professional careers in information technology. Increased participation
in information technology (IT) by women and minorities will lead to broader
perspectives from which IT products and services are researched, developed, and
supported; increased social equity; and greater size and diversity in the IT
professional workforce. Prior research shows that middle school is a critical
juncture for girls, since it is at middle school when girls begin to make
choices more heavily influenced by stereotypical career choices and other
culture-based beliefs than their genuine interests. This project is an
extensive, triangulated study examining the recruiting messages and methods that
persuade middle school girls to enroll in a public computer magnet high school.
The magnet offers three information technology tracks and recruits from 22
middle schools in a diverse district serving 71,000 children (55% Hispanic, 21%
white, 20% African-American, 3% Asian, 1% Native American).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes a communicative approach to the study of
recruiting, in which recruiting is considered an act of persuasion. This permits
a focus on: the content of messages and how they affect particular audiences
(and not others) in particular social contexts; the individual characteristics
of the recruiter; and the interactive processes among the recruiter, the
recruited, and the social/cultural setting. Since persuasion is a culturally
situated accomplishment and therefore will vary by group, data will be gathered,
analyzed, and reported according to demographic information. The University of
Colorado-Boulder's principal campus-wide academic initiative, the Alliance for
Technology, Learning, and Society (ATLAS), provides much of the structure for
this project. ATLAS developed an IT certificate program open to all
undergraduates (Technology, Arts, and Media certificate) which is attracting a
surprisingly high percentage of women. Part of the recruiting research enlists
the help of these students and the TAM curriculum. The results of the research
will be widely disseminated through conference presentations, publications, and
an information web site with special attention to reaching audiences that make
policy decisions and can effect real change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;