* 0220386
* Dynamic Models for Electrodynamic Suspended Magnetic Levitation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Brad Paden, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2005
* USD 249,729.00

PI: Brad E. Paden &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Univ California-Santa
Barbara&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0220386&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: "Dynamic
Models for Electrodynamic Suspended Magnetic Levitation" &lt;br/&gt;Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;The novelty in this project is the application of mathematical
analysis to investigate the dynamic properties of electrodynamic suspension
(EDS) magnetic levitation (maglev). Objective of the research are to: a)
develop, validate and analyze dynamical models for EDS on a perforated track, b)
investigate fundamental limitations of the proposed technology with respect to
design parameters and levitation control strategies, and c) guide the further
technological development of maglev, and d) facilitate cost effective
engineering designs. The intellectual merit lies in the application of tools
from functional analysis and dynamical systems to forward the development of
maglev technology, and to introduce these tools to the maglev research
community. The program thereby advances knowledge in maglev, and across the
fields of system theory, dynamical systems and functional analysis and magnetic
levitation. By investigating the fundamental limitations of perforated track EDS
maglev with respect to design parameters and levitation control strategies, we
guide the technological development of and advance discovery of new maglev
technology and facilitate engineering design. Understanding physical limitation
will advance knowledge of maglev in a fundamental way, and we aim to define new
research directions within maglev technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
suggested research is well-organized through a cohesive plan of dynamical
modeling, mathematical analysis, experimental validation and dissemination of
results in engineering and mathematics communities. Our available resources is
primarily through interactions with researchers within the field of maglev,
dynamical systems and control theory, mathematics, and industry. Our ongoing
interaction with Dr. Richard Post at LLNL, the inventor and patent holder of the
Inductrack levitation concept, ensures support on the modeling of maglev. The
strong position of the Center for Control Engineering and computation at the
University of California at Santa Barbara (UCSB) gives valuable support in
infinite dimensional dynamical systems and control theory through its affiliated
members from multiple departments among Mechanical and Electrical engineering
and Mathematics. MagTube, a newly started venture capital funded company located
adjacent to our campus, provides know-how on important engineering issues in
maglev design, and ensures relations with industry. Maglev technology has
potential for significant impact on society at large by promoting efficient high
speed transportation without direct combustion of fossil fuels, and with
substantially higher energy efficiency than existing means of ground, air and
sea transportation. The research will also contribute to MagTube.s innovative
transportations concept (which has received $2 million in venture capital after
a critically reviewed financial analysis) of a high speed transportation network
based on magnetically levitated capsules moving in evacuated tubes in an
automated network system resembling packet switched networks in communication
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups through support of the PI as he works with the LEGO-
Robotics, which involves secondary school teachers and students from Latino
communities. The experimental apparatus will enhance the infrastructure for
research at UCSB by establishing instrumentation and data acquisition
capabilities. The equipment will also contribute to the education facilities
used in the PI's graduate dynamics and control lab course taught in
collaboration with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department at UC
Santa Barbara. &lt;br/&gt;Research dissemination will be performed to fora on
maglev, dynamical systems and control research, through conference attendance
and journal publication. Our experimental results, data and simulation models
will be made available through the internet for effective data sharing. Lastly,
we have already significant interaction with MagTube and General Atomic who aims
to commercialize the inductrack technology.&lt;br/&gt;