* 0220066
* Acquisition of Experimental Gas Source Mass Spectrometer for Stable Isotope Geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2004
* John Eiler, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 10/31/2004
* USD 75,000.00

0220066&lt;br/&gt;Eiler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides partial support
for an experimental gas source isotope ratio mass spectrometer commissioned from
Thermo-Finnigan. This instrument will provide routine analytical capabilities
needed to support our existing programs in the hydrogen isotope geochemistry of
the solid earth and atmospheric reduced gases. Furthermore (and more
importantly), it will be the first ever built with an experimental collection
system designed to simultaneously measure relative abundances of common
isotopomers (e.g., 12C16O16O, 13C16O16O and 12C18O16O measured in conventional
mass spectrometry of CO2) and very rare isotopomers containing two or more rare
isotopes (e.g., 12C18O18O, 13C18O16O and 13C18O18O). These species have unusual
thermodynamic properties that suggest they can be used to develop intramolecular
geothermometers; we also anticipate that their distribution in nature is
influenced by non-equilibrium isotope fractionations, such as result from
metabolisms, photochemical reactions, and mass transport. The natural
geochemistry of these very rare isotopomers is unexplored and promises to add
new dimensions to our understanding of the natural cycles of common molecular
gases (e.g., N2, O2, CO, CO2, N2O - all of which will be analyzable using this
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;***