* 0220154
* ITR:  Algorithmic Problems in Population-Scale Genomics
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Daniel Gusfield, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2006
* USD 505,939.00

EIA-0220154 Gusfield, Daniel University of California-Davis

ITR: Algorithmic Problems in Population-Scale Genomics

Now that genomic level technologies are widely available (for sequencing,
resequencing, micro-array screening of sequences etc.), the dream of comparing
sequence variations at the population level is starting to become a reality.
These comparisons will be used to help to identify the genetic basis of disease
susceptibility, and will have additional uses. This shift to opulation-scale
genomics introduces a new set of computational problems, and provides a huge
opportunity for high-impact algorithm development and research.

This project focuses on novel, critical computational problems that arise in
population-scale genomic data acquisition and analysis. The specific
computational problems to be addressed arise out of on-going population-scale
investigations into population-level genomic variability. It will focus on novel
computational problems that have not been previously formulated and addressed,
and problems where additional formulations are needed to better capture the
relevant biology. Although the algorithmic techniques will be grounded in
theoretical computer science and discrete mathematics (and the results will be
of interest in those fields), the standards for success will be the ultimate
applicability of the results in genomics. The research will be conducted at
several levels: modeling and defining important problems; finding and developing
efficient algorithms; implementing and distributing software for the most
important results; and applying the software on population-scale genomic data.
Our first focus is on problems related to computationally extracting haplotype
information from genotype information, and the construction and use of haplotype
maps. The larger significance of the project will be the development of powerful
computational tools for use by geneticists and gene mappers, which will help to
more effectively identify the genetic bases for disease susceptibility and other
important genetic traits.