* 0220139
* ITR: Resource Management Techniques for Internet Services on Large-Scale Clusters
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Klaus Schauser, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Brett D. Fleisch
* 08/31/2006
* USD 350,000.00

Web-based services delivered on scalable cluster platforms are playing an
increasingly important role in today's society. A key aspect that has not been
sufficiently addressed is delivering scalable performance with quality of
service guarantees. It is all too common that web services suffer from outages
due to unexpected demand. In the future, as even more computing devices (e.g.,
Sensor Networks) depend on services, ensuring scalability, reliability, fault-
tolerance and quality of service will become paramount, and will allow our
society to function normally. This proposal aims at solving the critical
research necessary to achieve this vision.

This project will study the problem of resource management for Internet services
on large-scale clusters, and develop novel solutions that address the
shortcomings of traditional approaches (i.e., poor resource utilization, high
cost, and low flexibility). This work will develop models that express how
clusters share the resources, and will devise metrics that capture the needs of
Internet services. Performing extensive simulations using workloads of real web
services, a variety of scheduling algorithms and techniques for managing
resources will be analyzed. Results from these studies will be applied in
building an actual cluster research prototype capable of delivering the desired
service guarantees.