* 0220850
* University of Portland Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Carmen Schabel, University of Portland
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2007
* USD 240,126.00

This project encourages and assists qualified financially needy students
majoring in computer science, engineering, and mathematics in the completion
their degrees. Central to the project is the fostering of socially cohesive
cohorts of students progressing together through their programs in an
academically enriched, interdisciplinary, supportive environment. A special
effort is made to increase the participation and retention of underrepresented
groups. The project supports an initial group of 10 students, recruited in the
first year, through four years of study. A second group of 10 students,
recruited in the second year of funding, are supported for three years of study
with their final year of study funded by other sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
outstanding feature of the project is the coupling of this very individualized
environment typical of a liberal arts college with a high quality School of
Engineering. Existing university programs are integrated into the project.
Activities for the CSEMS students include a weekly interdisciplinary seminar and
social gathering, the opportunity for shared housing, opportunities to work
together as peer-leaders in courses relevant to their disciplines, shared
volunteer projects that use their academic expertise, and group interactions
with professionals in their fields of interest. Students work closely with an
academic advisor, have the opportunity to work with an industry contact, and
participate in internships in his or her field of study. &lt;br/&gt;