* 0220314
* Control of Patterns in Systems With Large Numbers of Actuators and Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Wijesuriya Dayawansa, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2006
* USD 126,985.00

With the emergence of micro electromechanical systems, we are fast approaching
the days of having to understand how to control nonlinear systems containing
massive numbers of actuators and sensors. Next generation applications such as
holographic data storage devices, and wavelength division multiplexing, will
require novel precision analog control methodology. At the same time, scientists
are only beginning to get a glimpse of information processing activities in the
brains of higher animals. It is argued that understanding control theoretic
aspects of pattern generation in massive actuator/sensor arrays is central to
successfully tackling these challenging technological problems. Representative
patterns of interest will be solitary waves, stationary impulses, travelling
waves, and spiral waves. Existing theories explain the stability of these
patterns, but fail to address how to control them. A research program
focussing&lt;br/&gt;on controlling these patterns in desirable ways is outlined
in the proposal. Primary mathematical tools will be (a) wave generation in
networks with symmetry, (b) theory of solitons, (c) spiral waves, and (d)
actuator-inhibitor equations. It is argued that feedback control techniques
outlined in each case can advance the state-of art significantly, by discussing
potential applications in the control of arrays of micro electromechanical
systems, understanding signal processing aspects of the brain of primitive
animals, and as template models of spiking networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;