* 0220930
* Collaborative Research:   Underwater Gliders for Monitoring Western Boundary Currents
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2006
* Russ Davis, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 10/31/2006
* USD 633,178.00

0220769/0220930 Owens/Davis&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project between Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution and Scripps Institution of Oceanography will
demonstrate the feasibility of using an autonomous underwater glider to monitor
the structure and strength of western boundary currents. During the first year
of the proposed work the reliability of the glider will be demonstrated in a
less severe environment. During the ensuing years, the complexity and duration
of the glider missions will be increased as we begin deploying them to make
transects between the New England continental shelf and Bermuda. The choice of
the Gulf Stream as the initial boundary current to be investigated was made for
obvious logistical reasons. The gliders will provide cross-sections of velocity,
temperature and salinity between the surface and 1000-1500 m depths which will
be available in real-time. These data will be combined to provide approximately
monthly estimates of the relative and potential vorticity of the Gulf Stream and
its fluxes of heat and salt. The broader impact of this research will be in
providing a new autonomous oceanographic instrument platform and observational
techniques that will, first of all, be applicable to all other western boundary
current including those believed to be crucial for predicting climate
variability. Beyond that this instrument will find application in coastal zone
monitoring for pollution and living resources, for military surveillance and as
a general tool for oceanographic observation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;