* 0220560
* Development of a Low Energy Neutron Scattering Facility
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2008
* David Baxter, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 12/31/2008
* USD 4,434,796.00

This project involves the construction of a Low Energy Neutron Scattering (LENS)
facility at the Indiana University Cyclotron Facility (IUCF). LENS will use the
existing linear accelerator at IUCF to produce 11 MeV protons, generating a
pulsed neutron beam through (p, n) reactions on a Be target. Not only is LENS a
novel and relatively inexpensive pulsed cold neutron source, but also - when
completed in 2005 - LENS will enable the design of novel neutron instrumentation
for small angle scattering, a broad program of research in materials science and
biology, the development of novel neutron sources and moderators, and the
education and training of the next generation of neutron scientists in the
United States. LENS will also serve as a regional user facility that will be
particularly well-suited for high-risk experiments and feasibility studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The particular aspects of LENS that are being completed
through this project are (1) the construction of neutron guides and (2) the
development of a novel Larmor Precession Scattering Instrument (PSI) for spin-
echo small-angle neutron scattering (SESANS) experiments. PSI will use polarized
neutrons and will be sensitive to structures in the size range from 10 nm to
1000 nm. It can be operated either as a relectometer or as a high-resolution
difractometer. In addition, use of coherent neutron waves from pinhole sources,
a coded aperture mask, and newly developed phase-contrast imaging will allow
imaging of structures from 1 micron to 1cm in size. With conventional small-
angle neutron scattering (SANS), the SESANS PSI, and phase-contrast imaging,
LENS will enable qualitatively new types of neutron scattering measurements,
leading to new science. Among the initial experiments that will be conducted at
LENS are studies of heterogeneities in glasses and ceramics, "spintronics" in
magnetic semiconductors, hydride formation in alloys and pure metals, polymer
networks and blends, nanostructured polymers, RNA helicases and protein:protein
complexes, and chlorophyll aggregates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small-angle neutron
scattering (SANS), using neutrons with relatively low energies (so-called "cold"
neutrons), allows scientists to study aspects of materials and biological
substances that are not accessible using other types of radiation, such as
X-rays. In particular, neutrons are sensitive probes of the structure and
dynamics of atoms and molecules. For this reason, they have now become widely
used, not only in physics, chemistry, and materials science, but also in
biology, earth science, and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
completion of the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory in 2006, neutrons promise to be used increasingly as sensitive and
versatile scientific probes. However, the relative dearth of neutron sources in
the United States up to this time has contributed to the depletion of the ranks
of U. S. neutron scientists. The Low Energy Neutron Scattering (LENS) facility
at Indiana University will help to correct this situation by providing in a
university setting the opportunity for the education and training of the next
generation of neutron scientists, including those from fields such as biology
that have not traditionally employed neutron scattering techniques to the full
extent of their usefulness. In addition, LENS will serve as a regional user
facility, enabling investigators from other institutions - including industry -
to make use of neutron-scattering methods. LENS will also be used for
potentially high-payoff experiments that are too risky to justify time on larger
pulsed-neutron sources.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;