* 0220820
* Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Ross Abraham, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

To assist with the recruitment and retention of promising students in the
Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics (CSEM) fields and to help improve
the quality of their education, this project supports a scholarship program for
students in the CSEM fields. The goal of the SDSU CSEMS project is to increase
the number of students pursuing and successfully completing degrees in the CSEM
fields, with special consideration given to women and minority students
underrepresented in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this goal,
the Management Team has established the following objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Advertise the CSEM scholarship opportunity and recruit 30 students in the CSEM
fields who have demonstrated academic merit and financial need;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Promote high quality and sustained faculty-student relationships between the
scholarship recipients and their faculty mentors and monitor student
progress;&lt;br/&gt;3. Increase the students' awareness of the academic support,
career planning, and educational enhancement opportunities available to them and
encourage them to utilize these resources and opportunities;&lt;br/&gt;4.
Increase the students' awareness of and interaction with the high technology
industry and higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals the
CSEMS scholars each have extensive contact with faculty mentors who guide their
proteges through the college experience. Under the direction of their mentors,
scholars attend a variety of Educational Enhancement Activities designed to
provide a mixture of practical knowledge, academic discourse, appreciation of
the university, and global and community awareness. Each CSEM scholar also has
contact with a member of the business and industrial community in order to gain
insight into different degree-related careers that will be available to them.
The SDSU CSEMS project has the potential to increase not only the number of
financially needy and underrepresented students, but also the overall number of
students majoring and graduating in high-demand technology-based fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;