* 0220931
* Inkjet-printed inductively-coupled power harvesting circuits on plastic
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Vivek Subramanian, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* James W. Mink
* 06/30/2005
* USD 300,000.00

There has been intensive research focused on the development of an electronic
replacement for the ubiquitous UPC barcode. To replace consumer barcodes, ultra-
low cost will be paramount. Organic-based circuits may enable this due to their
low fabrication cost. In this work, the investigators will develop the
technologies necessary for RFID barcode replacement systems, and will use these
to demonstrate a major subcomponent of any REID system - the power harvesting
subcircuit.

Power for barcodes will be supplied by inductive coupling since battery
integration is not feasible. To achieve the cost points required for UPC
replacement, it is necessary to integrate this and other REID circuitry on
existing packaging with little or no perturbation of the packaging process.
Specifically, the elimination of the need for lithography, plasma etching, and
vacuum evaporation is critical to ensuring adequately low cost.

The investigators will use nanocrystal-based and organic-based materials and
processes that they have developed to demonstrate high quality active (diodes
and transistors) and passive (inductors, wires, and capacitors) components, and
will assemble these to fabricate the first functional power-harvesting sub-
circuit on plastic. The entire process will be performed at low cost using a
custom inkjet printer, eliminating all lithographic and vacuum-based process
steps.

High-Q Spiral inductors will be fabricated using a novel low-temperature gold
nanocrystal inkjetting technology that has been developed by the investigators.
Parallel plate capacitors will be formed using nanocrystal electrodes and
inkjetted polymer dielectrics. Schottky diodes will be developed using inkjetted
gold and silver nanocrystals as the rectifying and ohmic contacts and inkjetted
organic semiconductors as the active layer. Transistors will be fabricated by
inkjet processing using an existing polythiophene-based process. Finally, the
various components will be integrated to form a power-harvesting circuit.

An undergraduate and a graduate student will be involved in this work. In
particular, the mentoring of the undergraduate student will be emphasized
through a series of tutorials and review programs. The results of this proposal
will also be used in a University-sponsored highschool outreach program. This
will increase the level of interest in science and engineering among local high-
school students