* 0220800
* Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship Program (CSEMS)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Paul Nunez, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/2007
* USD 395,256.00

This scholarship program serves students attending two of the ten community
colleges of the Maricopa County Community College District (MCCCD). The goal is
to recruit academically talented but financial disadvantaged students into the
high technology disciplines, while providing a solid support system to help them
succeed through degree completion and/or transfer to a four-year institution.
The two community colleges combine their resources to enhance student success.
Phoenix College brings an expertise in providing a solid infrastructure of
student support services designed to promote academic success. Mesa Community
College brings a history of curricular reform in the STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics) disciplines and its unique relationships with the
business community through its Business &amp; Industry
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together these colleges will work towards the
following scholarship program objectives:&lt;br/&gt;(a) 90% of computer science,
engineering, or mathematics (CSEMS) scholarship recipients make satisfactory
progress in their program of study (12 credit hours completed with a cumulative
GPA of 2.5 or better).&lt;br/&gt;(b) 100% of recipients participate in 90% of
CSEMS special events/activities during the semester for which they receive
scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;(c) 85% of CSEMS scholarship recipients make
satisfactory progress towards their educational goals (i.e., be enrolled as
full-time students at a community college in the following semester, transfer to
a university, or have met the requirements for/been awarded an AAS or AS degree
in the targeted programs).&lt;br/&gt;(d) One-third of CSEMS scholarship
recipients are from groups that are traditionally underrepresented in CSEMS
(women, persons with disabilities, Hispanic, African-American, Native
American).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A CSEMS Faculty Advisor, CSEMS Faculty Mentors,
and a CSEMS Advisory Committee that includes representation from financial aid,
student support services, and industry representatives are guiding the program.
Each scholarship recipient works with the CSEMS Faculty Advisor to develop an
Individual Education Plan. Support services include campus orientations
(including financial aid, counseling services, advisement, and career centers),
college visitation days, industry visits, monthly CSEMS support activities, and
an ongoing monthly relationship with each CSEMS recipient's assigned CSEMS
Faculty Mentor. The CSEMS Faculty Mentor not only monitors progress, but also
works with the scholarship recipient to identify additional resources, such as
tutoring or internship opportunities.