* 0220460
* Phase Behavior and Network Morphologies in ABC Triblock Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Frank Bates, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 01/31/2008
* USD 629,000.00

Synthetic polymers command one of the largest commercial markets in the chemical
industry with products ranging from ough trash bags to balloon catheters used in
delicate angioplaty. Increasingly, polymeric materials must combine multiple
functions (e.g., toughness, hardness, solvent resistance, permeability, clarity,
etc.), while optimizing processing characteristics and minimizing cost. Block
copolymers, formed by joining two or more chemically distinct macromolecules,
provide unparalleled control over nanoscale morphology and the prospect for
creating advanced materials with competitive properties. Linear two-monomer
block copolymers (AB, ABA, ABABA, etc) are well understood thermodynamically;
four microphase separated states have been established within the framework of a
universal phase diagram, both theoretically and experimentally. Three-monomer
triblocks (ABC, ABCBA, etc.), which offer a much richer spectrum of materials
design combinations, phase behavior, and functionality, are significantly less
well understood. This proposal targets several model ABC triblock copolymer
systems, strategically selected for fundamental phase behavior studies, and for
development as ion conducting membranes. Perhaps the greatest limitation in
connecting ABC triblock copolymer theory and practice is a daunting array of
experimental variables. A systematic and precise approach to varying composition
and block sequencing through model anionic polymerization of styrene (S),
isoprene (I), and ethylene oxide (O) is identified, thereby enabling an
organized evaluation of phase behavior based on small-angle X-ray and neutron
scattering (SAXS and SANS), dynamic mechanical spectroscopy (DMS), transmission
electron miscoscopy (TEM), and other methods. ISO and SIO triblock materials
will be assessed in the weak and strong segregation limits with an emphasis on
identifying multicontinuous and triply periodic structures in coordination with
a leading theoretical program. Synthesis and structural characterization of
model polyolefins, obtained by anionic polymerization and catalytic
hydrogenation, will compliment this fundamental thrust while contributing new
materials to this most important sector of the polymer industry. Glassy
poly(dyclohexylethylene) (C), rubbery poly(ethylethylene) (E), and
semicrystalline poly(ethylene) (E) will be configured into complimentary
sequences (CEE E, CE E E, and E ECE) and model nanostructures and evaluated for
response to shear in the melt state and the associated mechanical properties in
the solid state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membranes present an attractive
development opportunity for block copolymers. Selective transport
characteristics can be combined with robust mechanical properties, chemical
stability, and superior processability. Ion conduction membranes are identified
as particularly attractive with applications as solid-state electrolytes and
proton conducting fuel cell membranes. Ion conductivity will be determined as a
function of morphology using lithium doped ISO and SIO triblocks. Multiply
continuous morphologies, such as the gyroid, are anticipated to provide facile
ion conduction without domain alignment. New triblocks containing acidic
moieties (e.g., carboxylic or sulfonic acid) will be prepared using anionic or
living free-radical polymerization methods, augmented by post polymerization
functionalization. Poly(acrylic acid) in combination with fluorinated
poly(butadiene) and poly(styrene) is an initial target compound. These proton-
conducting materials will be characterized by SAXS, SANS, DMS, and TEM, thereby
establishing the correspondence in phase behavior between conventional non-polar
block copolymers&lt; and those containing ionic substituents &lt;br/&gt;