* 0220986
* SGER:  Oxygen and cosmogenic isotope approaches to paleoaltimetry of the Bolivian Altiplano
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2003
* Paul Renne, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Arthur Goldstein
* 03/31/2003
* USD 9,300.00

Garzione&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0220986&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this SGER
award is to assess the potential for using the * 18 O values of carbonates
deposited on the Bolivian Altiplano as a paleoaltimeter. The * 18 O
paleoaltimetric technique relies on an understanding of the changes in the * 18
O values of meteoric water vs. altitude in the region of study and has been used
successfully in the Himalaya. The PI's would like to extend the use of this
technique to the diverse climatic regimes across the Bolivian Andes and
Altiplano. Additionally, a cosmogenic paleoaltimeter is theoretically feasible,
and this project seeks the funds to the lay the groundwork for development of a
new geologic paleoaltimeter. If successful, the information gained by this
project will allow an independent calculation of paleoelevation that can be
compared with existing paleobotanical, geomorphologic, and structural estimates.
The exploratory nature of this project and the potential impacts of 1)
quantitatively calculating Altiplano paleoelevation and 2) assessing a new
paleoaltimetric technique makes this work highly appropriate for SGER funding.
The broader impacts of this proposal are to better establish the use of oxygen
isotopes in studies of paleoelevation and to test a new cosmogenic method for
paleoelevation determination. Both of these techniques will be broadly
applicable to other modern and ancient orogenic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;