* 0221029
* Collaborative Research: Nanoscale Investigations of Marine Organic Matter Diagenesis
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Chris Jacobsen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2006
* USD 144,523.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0221295&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0221029&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0221336&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigation of the chemical structures
of the uncharacterized fraction of marine dissolved organic matter remains an
elusive goal for marine organic chemists. An approach to be used in this work is
to directly address supramolecular size scales of marine organic matter
structures by assessing their microheterogeneity on micro to nanoscales. Using
Scanning Transmission X-ray Microscopy (STXM), a technique that allows the
registration of Near Edge X-ray Absorption Fine Structure (NEXAFS) spectra, will
allow the quantification of the relative abundance of different functional
groups and element bonding types. This spatial mapping of the chemistry of
macromolecular assemblages at scales intermediate between bulk chemical analysis
and analysis individual molecules or molecular classes offers the capabilities
of a important new analytical tool to marine chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;In a survey
mode, a range of organic materials collected and contributed by several
researchers from different parts of the world's oceans will be examined using
these techniques. This approach will be extended with additional samples of
collected sediment and suspended (trapped) particulates. Laboratory experiments
using whole phytoplankton and bacterial cultures will be used to provide
materials appropriate to the earlier stages of organic matter diagenesis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;