* 0221350
* US-Southern Africa Workshop:   Synthesis of SAFARI 2000 -- Implications for Local and Regional Science and Policy, Charlottesville, VA, October 2002
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Robert Swap, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 07/31/2003
* USD 30,000.00

0221350&lt;br/&gt;Swap&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports 15 African
participants in a US-Southern Africa Workshop on "Synthesis of SAFARI 2000 -
Implications for Local and Regional Science and Policy," scheduled for October
8-13, 2002, in Charlottesville, Virginia. The co-organizers are Professor Robert
Swap, with the Department of Environmental Sciences at the University of
Virginia, and Professor Harold Annegarn, with the Atmosphere and Energy Group at
the University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa. There will be a total of
about 150 participants, approximately one third of whom will come from US
academic institutions, one third from various countries in Southern Africa, and
the remainder from governmental, nongovernmental and international
organizations. This workshop will enable the researchers to synthesize and
interpret valuable information from the Southern African Regional Science
Initiative (known as SAFARI 2000), and to also plan the next phase of regional
environmental research. It is expected that this meeting will lead to the
development of collaborative, interdisciplinary research and education
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SAFARI 2000 was an international science project
to investigate the linkages across time and space scales between Southern
Africa's terrestrial, atmospheric, and biogeochemical processes, and their
impacts on regional and global environmental change. The project involved nearly
300 participants from 18 different countries. This workshop will enable
participants, some of whom are US and African students and junior investigators,
to review the current state of understanding about and missing information on
land-atmosphere-biosphere interactions concerning Southern Africa, and explore
emerging areas of cross-disciplinary and interdisciplinary research that will
advance the knowledge on the natural functioning of Southern Africa's
ecosystems. They will also participate in the process for translating the
research results into a format that is relevant to society. A synthesis of the
results of SAFARI 2000 will be produced in a workshop report, thus providing
valuable new information to the international global environmental change
community, as well as to local and regional policy makers. Results will also be
disseminated through professional journal articles and via a web
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of International Science and Engineering,
the Division of Atmospheric Sciences, and the Division of Behavioral and
Cognitive Sciences jointly support this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;