* 0221595
* IGERT:  Program for Interdisciplinary Mathematics, Ecology, and Statistics (PRIMES)
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Donald Estep, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 09/30/2009
* USD 3,260,765.00

Ecological research is a traditional strength within many departments and
colleges at Colorado State University. Nearby state and federal agencies also
interact with CSU faculty to monitor and model ecological resources. Much of
this research activity is interdisciplinary and uses advanced mathematical and
statistical tools. But, due to disciplinary boundaries in our graduate programs,
neither ecology students with interests in quantitative methods, nor
mathematics/statistics students with interests in ecology, are receiving the
education they need to work on such interdisciplinary research. The vision of
PRIMES is to break down these boundaries through early and uninterrupted
exposure to interdisciplinary research projects, via a course called Team
Research in Ecology (TREE). Students will obtain the tools they need to work
effectively in TREE through reciprocal course offerings among the graduate
programs, through modular courses on Advanced Quantitative Methods in Ecology
(AQME), and through colloquia, workshops, and conferences. Teaching
assistantships, research assistantships, and internships with nearby state and
federal agencies will reinforce the interdisciplinary training of PRIMES and
leverage IGERT fellowships. Existing projects in quantitative ecology at CSU
will shape the curriculum of PRIMES, drive the interdisciplinary collaborations
among faculty members and students, and lead to topics for Ph.D. theses.
Projects will be organized into five Research Focus Groups to allow sharing of
resources and ideas on related problems: Ecology of Managed Ecosystems, Ecology
of Global Change, Dynamics of Introduced Disease, Aquatic Resources Modeling,
and Evolution in Structured Populations. The PRIMES Council, with
representatives from Biology, Mathematics, Statistics, and other participating
departments, as well as an external agency, will guide the program toward the
goal of making PRIMES a permanent fixture in graduate education at CSU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
the fifth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions
for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering
supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;