* 0221664
* IGERT:  Nanoscale Engineering and Science: One Campus,  Two- University Approach
* EDU,DGE
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2007
* Mun Choi, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Van Hartesveldt
* 11/30/2007
* USD 3,300,546.00

The motivation for this IGERT project is to educate a new class of engineers and
scientists who will participate in multi-disciplinary, team-based research
projects that are at the forefront of the emerging field of nanoscale
engineering and science. Research in this area will lead to the ability to
manipulate matter at the molecular and atomic levels in order to produce
materials and devices with unique and controllable properties. Undertaking a
timely response through an integrated and cohesive program of education and
training in the area of nanoscale engineering and science will provide the IGERT
Fellows with the unique opportunity of being at the forefront of the
developments in this exciting platform. Drexel University and the University of
Pennsylvania will support 14 doctoral students (7 at each university) through
the NSF IGERT program every year. The unique opportunities, capabilities, and
strengths of each institution will be enhanced through an integrated graduate
educational program. IGERT Fellows enrolled at Drexel University and the
University of Pennsylvania will have access to about 30 faculty members
representing disciplines encompassing chemistry, physics, chemical engineering,
biomedical engineering, materials science and engineering, mechanical
engineering, electrical engineering, and education. IGERT Fellows will be
encouraged to select topics of research that are co-advised by faculty members
from both institutions. There are four major activities that comprise this IGERT
project: (1) interdisciplinary research and training; (2) new courses and
seminars; (3) internships in industry, federal research laboratories and leading
universities in Europe, Asia and South Africa; (4) career-integrated education.
The pooling of talent, resources, and efforts from the two institutions will
result in a one-campus, two-institution approach that effectively integrates
education and research training. The proximity of the two contiguous campuses is
ideal for developing and delivering joint courses on nanoscale engineering and
science and allowing for reciprocal use of laboratory
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet
the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
the fifth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions
for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering
supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;