* 0221843
* Orographic Enhancement of Precipitation in Mid-latitude Baroclinic Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Bradley Smull, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 03/31/2006
* USD 830,800.00

The goal of this research is to advance understanding of the orographic
modification of precipitation systems as they pass over major mountain ranges.
The study will integrate data from two recent field programs: the Mesoscale
Alpine Programme (MAP), conducted over the European Alps in 1999, and the second
phase of the Improvement of Microphysical PaRameterization through Observational
Verification Experiment (IMPROVE II), conducted over the Oregon Cascades in
2001. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data in both projects was collected from a variety
of airborne and ground-based advanced weather radars. This collection of radars
was effective at indicating the predominant precipitation mechanisms over the
windward slopes in both projects. In MAP, mobile Dopplers provided further
information in deep valleys hidden from the view of fixed site radars. In
IMPROVE II the University of Washington Convair aircraft collected ice particle
samples aloft, while ground observers collected ice particle samples at the
crest of the Cascades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tentative conceptual model of
orographic precipitation enhancement inferred from the data collected in MAP
suggests that coalescence of drops below the 0 degree C level and riming that
generates graupel, just above the 0 degree C level, are key processes in
producing particles that fall out quickly on the windward slopes. This process
seems to work best in unblocked flow over the terrain, i.e., when the flow is
strong and weakly stable, so it possesses the energy required to rise directly
over the barrier. The process works even better when the flow up the terrain is
slightly unstable, so that embedded convective cells can form and accelerate the
coalescence and graupel-forming processes over the first large windward peak of
terrain. Preliminary analysis of the new IMPROVE II data set suggests that
similar processes are at work over the Cascades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
empirical conceptual models will guide the critical evaluation of high
resolution numerical model runs for the MAP and IMPROVE II storms. Numerical
model output provides a database which will be evaluated for consistency with
the MAP and IMPROVE II empirical models of orographic enhancement. The numerical
models also will be run for select cases to obtain finer spatial resolution and
more details on the microphysical processes taking place in the model. The radar
data will provide dynamical constraints on the model results and the data will
be examined for consistency with the model-simulated microphysical fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvements to the numerical models will help to advance
the forecasting of precipitation and runoff in mountainous regions.