* 0221666
* Collaborative Research: Modeling and Processing of Topologically Complex 3D Shapes
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Mathieu Desbrun, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 12/31/2004
* USD 112,496.00

DMS-0138445&lt;br/&gt;Denis Zorin&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0221666&lt;br/&gt;Mathieu
Desbrun&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0220905&lt;br/&gt;Peter Schroder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
is a collaborative project funded by the CARGO program
under&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0138445, DMS-0221666, and DMS-0220905.&lt;br/&gt;Accurate
computational representations of complex geometry &lt;br/&gt;are of great
importance in many disciplines ranging from &lt;br/&gt;engineering and
manufacturing to medicine and biology. With &lt;br/&gt;the wide availability of
powerful computational resources and &lt;br/&gt;ever better acquisition
technologies such as 3D laser &lt;br/&gt;scanning and volumetric MRI or CAT
imaging the geometries &lt;br/&gt;used in applications are becoming increasingly
complex. One &lt;br/&gt;aspect of this complexity is topology, i.e., the
presence&lt;br/&gt;of holes and tunnels and of a network of one and
&lt;br/&gt;zero-dimensional surface features such as creases and spikes.
&lt;br/&gt;Typical examples of topologically complex shapes are a
&lt;br/&gt;perforated plate or the system of blood vessels of the body.
&lt;br/&gt;Traditional representations of geometry are at worst weak
&lt;br/&gt;and at best cumbersome and inefficient in representing&lt;br/&gt;such
complex topologies. Modeling of macro- and microscopic &lt;br/&gt;biological
structures is becoming increasingly important &lt;br/&gt;for medical research,
training, and treatment support. Such &lt;br/&gt;structures often have extremely
complex shape and topology &lt;br/&gt;(e.g., the blood vessel or the nervous
system, facial&lt;br/&gt;muscles, a folded protein molecule). The
representations &lt;br/&gt;and algorithms we develop will result in new
efficient ways &lt;br/&gt;of manipulating and processing computer
representations of &lt;br/&gt;such structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project a team with expertise in numerical analysis, &lt;br/&gt;geometric
modeling, discrete algorithms and computer graphics &lt;br/&gt;is studying ways
to bring fundamental mathematical tools &lt;br/&gt;and highly efficient
algorithms to bear on the challenge &lt;br/&gt;of creating efficient and
accurate computational &lt;br/&gt;representations and algorithms for surfaces of
complex&lt;br/&gt;topology. In particular we are investigating theory and
&lt;br/&gt;practical algorithms for (I) removal of topological noise
&lt;br/&gt;in existing models as well as in raw data used for surface
&lt;br/&gt;reconstruction; (II) topology discovery in volumetric &lt;br/&gt;data
sets; (III) construction of multiresolution &lt;br/&gt;representations of
geometry which can meaningfully&lt;br/&gt;abstract fine level topology at
coarser resolutions to &lt;br/&gt;enable powerful multiscale techniques for
rendering, &lt;br/&gt;modification and simulation. Particular attention is paid
&lt;br/&gt;to exploring measures of topological scale which are
&lt;br/&gt;crucial to most of the algorithms being developed. The
&lt;br/&gt;algorithms to be developed by the team will have immediate
&lt;br/&gt;applications in two areas: Computer-Aided Design and
&lt;br/&gt;Medical Visualization. In CAD, examples of potential
&lt;br/&gt;applications include topology cleanup, simplification &lt;br/&gt;for
integration of scanned 3D data with manually &lt;br/&gt;constructed models and
use of multiscale representations &lt;br/&gt;for interactive conceptual design
representations.&lt;br/&gt;