* 0221558
* Sequential Fundraising
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Lise Vesterlund, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 09/30/2003
* USD 83,106.00

SBR-
9975288&lt;br/&gt;Vesterlund&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
It has been well established that charities often choose to announce past
contributions during fundraising drives. However, this type of announcement
strategy appears to be inconsistent with the standard prediction that sequential
move games result in smaller contribution levels than simultaneous move games.
The project outlined in this proposal will develop a theory that explains the
use of announcement strategies in fundraising games. In addition, two
experiments will be conducted to test the theoretical predictions for
contributions in sequential public good games. The proposed project will not
only improve understanding of the sequential nature of fundraising games but
also our overall understanding of charitable giving.&lt;br/&gt;The results of
the proposed research will be documented in six publishable papers--four
theoretical papers and two experimental papers. In the first paper, a simple
model is developed in which contributors are identical and the quality of the
charity can be revealed by acquiring costly information. Results indicate that
fundraisers for high quality charities prefer to announce past contributions.
The reason is that the first contributor, contingent on the announcement,
purchases information and reveals the quality of the charity through his first
contribution. The second paper l relaxes the assumption that contributors are
identical to demonstrate that heterogeneity of contributors implies an optimal
solicitation ordering, and this ordering makes it impossible for the fundraiser
to cheat and solicit first contributions from multiple
contributors.&lt;br/&gt;In the first two papers the purchased signal is perfect
and the fundraiser has no incentive to make more than one announcement. One
reason why fundraisers make continuous announcements may be that the signal is
noisy. Such a model is explored in the third paper. To keep the analysis simple,
information on the purchasing option is ignored and instead, it is assumed that
all contributors receive private and noisy signals. In this model contributors
use information about past contributions to update their beliefs about the
charity's quality, and an informational cascade is likely to
arise.&lt;br/&gt;Two different experiments test the predictions of the purely
altruistic theory for contributions in sequential public good games. The first
experiment tests the predictions of sequential move contribution games by
examining the contributions in three public good games: a simultaneous game, a
sequential game and finally a sequential game where the first contributor cannot
commit to a one-time contribution. The second experiment examines the effect of
the public good's production technology on contributions in sequential public
good games. In addition to testing the traditional voluntary contribution
predictions these two experiments also provide empirical tests of recent models
of fairness. An interesting feature of these fairness models is that they
predict higher contribution levels in sequential public good games than in
simultaneous move games, suggesting that preferences for fairness may be a third
explanation for the use of announcement strategies in fundraising
games.&lt;br/&gt;