* 0221688
* IGERT:  Multidisciplinary Program in Wind Science and Engineering
* EDU,DGE
* 01/15/2003,01/31/2012
* Kishor Mehta, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Boone
* 01/31/2012
* USD 2,743,336.00

Due to an increase in population and economic development along the coast, our
society is increasingly exposed to natural hazards including hurricanes and
tornadoes. Every year these hazards cause many fatalities and injuries; major
disruption in community lifelines such as power, communication and
transportation; and large amounts of property damage. The events of September
11, 2001, showed us that man-made hazards are likely to be part of our lives.
Since, such natural and man-made hazards are unpredictable, we can curb losses
through careful planning, effective public policies, and good engineering. The
objective of this IGERT program is to produce a cadre of professionals prepared
for broader multidisciplinary research, comprehensive planning and balanced
decision-making in the future. This objective will be met by integrating
graduate research and training in a program that crosses the disciplines of
atmospheric science, engineering, and economics leading to an interdisciplinary
doctoral degree. The focus of the program is wind science and engineering and
associated economics/risk management. Scientist and engineers at Texas Tech
University have pursued wind-related research since 1970 when a devastating
tornado struck near the university and destroyed much of downtown Lubbock. Over
the past three decades the research program has continued to grow in the areas
of building response and design, the atmospheric boundary layer and
economics/risk management. With close to twenty faculty members participating in
the program, a variety of research projects are in progress at a given time.
Some of the research areas are wind characteristics in tornadoes and landfalling
hurricanes, post-disaster investigation of building damage and economic losses,
deign criteria for shelters, full-scale building response in the field, wind
tunnel studies, simulation of damage, forecast for wind power, hurricane
evacuation and others. NSF IGERT Fellows will take core courses in atmospheric
sciences, wind-related engineering, economic/risk management, ethics and GIS.
The fellows will also be trained through a rotation of three laboratory courses
in meteorological measurement, wind-related engineering experimentation and
statistical analysis of random phenomena. A one-semester internship in a
national laboratory, industrial organization or governmental agency is part of
the program. This training along with selected courses in a specific discipline
will prepare the Fellows to pursue multidisciplinary research in wind science
and engineering. The goal is to complete a Ph.D. degree in four to five years
after completion of the bachelors degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-
wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists
and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the program, awards are being made
to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;