* 0221066
* Collaborative Research:   Mid-Latitude Modes of Climate Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* James McWilliams, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2006
* USD 429,434.00

0221066/0220700 Ghil/Dewar

It is proposed to study coupled mid-latitude climate variability on decadal and
longer time scales. The main hypothesis is that a critical component of this
variability arises from intrinsic ocean sources. This hypothesis will be
analyzed using a numerical model of the coupled ocean-atmosphere system,
focusing on the oceans' wind-driven variability, rather than on that of the
thermohaline circulation. An intermediate complexity model is ideally suited to
test this hypothesis. The model consists of an oceanic and an atmospheric
component, each of which captures the turbulent nature of the corresponding
fluid. The new feature of our proposal is in coupling these two models, and
analyzing the nature of the coupled turbulence that results. To achieve
turbulence simultaneously in the two fluids requires working with reduced models
of each. One fundamental problem faced by more dynamically complete models in
achieving this same goal is insufficient computer power. Parameterization of
small-scale oceanic variability as a feedback on the ocean's general circulation
and on climate thus stands as a critical problem for understanding and
predicting coupled climate variability. Initial steps will be taken towards
formulating such parameterizations and testing them within this model. Coupled
general circulation models also face the problem that the phenomenology of
coupled behavior is not currently known, thus complicating the analysis and
interpretation of model results. This work will contribute to a solution of this
problem by providing a conceptual paradigm for coupled system behavior. The
intellectual merit of this proposal is to analyze a viable hypothesis relevant
to the coupled climate problem on inter-decadal timescales. The broader impacts
of the work lie in developing scientific partnerships between two leading
institutions (UCLA and FSU) in this field, broadly disseminating the results of
our work by means of publications, seminars and presentations at national and
international meetings, and addressing a problem of crucial societal importance
in climate prediction.

