* 0221062
* Collaborative Research: Diversity and Biogeography of Marine Oligotrich and Choreotrich Ciliates Assessed by Morphological and Molecular Markers
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Laura Katz, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2006
* USD 230,060.00

Microzooplankton assemblages in the sea are often dominated by oligotrich and
choretrich ciliates. Ciliate communities are diverse and dynamic, with rapid
changes in abundance and species composition over short time scales.
Understanding the nature and implications of diversity in ciliate communities is
critical if we are to extrapolate measurements (e.g. grazing, growth) obtained
with one ciliate community or a few species in culture to regional or global
models of food webs. In addition, the degree of inter- and intraspecific genetic
variability across spatial and temporal scales is unknown for these ciliates.
Finally, analysis of morphological markers alone has generated considerable
debate between researchers who argue that all ciliates are cosmopolitan versus
those who believe that there is limited gene flow between geographically
isolated ciliate populations. One key to addressing all of these issues is to
quantify the correspondence between molecular markers and morphology within and
between populations. At present, however, molecular data are sparse for these
ecologically important groups. &lt;br/&gt;This project combines molecular and
morphological methods to elucidate the diversity of marine ciliates in the
subclasses Choreotrichia and Oligotrichia (Cl: Spirotrichea). This large group
of planktonic grazers comprises an important trophic link between phytoplankton
and bacterial production and higher consumers. The main focus of the study is to
collect DNA sequence data from natural populations of choreotrichs and
oligotrichs, and to relate these sequences to morphospecies determined by
traditional methods. A combination of techniques will be applied to handpicked
cells from natural assemblages to evaluate diversity across a range of scales
from meters to thousands of kilometers, with intensive sampling of ciliates
along the southern coast of New England and the western coast of the United
Kingdom. Intraspecific genetic variability will also be quantified as changes
within populations over short temporal and spatial scales. &lt;br/&gt; The study
has two objectives: 1) to quantify diversity within a subset of marine
oligotrich and choreotrich species sampled from nearshore environments using
both morphology and molecular markers, and 2) to assess patterns of
intraspecific variation on short spatial and temporal scales in a few abundant
species of oligotrich and choreotrich ciliates. For both objectives, individual
cells will be picked for genetic analysis and preserved for species
identification. For objective one, small subunit ribosomal gene sequences will
be compared. For the second objective, more variable markers will be analyzed,
including the internally transcribed spacer regions (ITS1 and ITS2) of the
ribosomal genes and an intervening sequence between histones H3 and H4 (H3H4IS).
Combining molecular and morphological approaches, this study will produce
comprehensive data on genetic diversity of populations of oligotrichs and
choreotrichs. These data are an essential first step for connecting information
on individual species abundances sampled across time and space to whole
communities of ciliates. In addition, this work will provide the first test
using molecular data on marine ciliate endemism and will train graduate students
in relevant morphological and molecular techniques. The resulting data will have
broader implications for questions regarding global protist diversity and
biogeography and will be necessary to fully explore the role of ciliates in
energy flow and nutrient cycling in marine systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;