* 0221014
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Cultural, Structural, and Economic Factors in the Advent and Acceptance of a New Cultural Product Market
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Timothy Dowd, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2003
* USD 7,427.00

SES-0221014&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Timothy Dowd&lt;br/&gt; Maureen Blyler&lt;br/&gt;
Emory University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Doctoral Dissertation
Improvement Grant proposes to take a more holistic approach to the examination
of the emergence of new cultural product markets by examining the role of
cultural, structural and economic factors. Past sociological research has
detailed the role of culture, social structure, and the state and public policy
in the emergence of markets. However, much of this work focuses on production
factors associated with markets' emergence and generally highlights the social
construction of markets. The PIs suggest that markets are more driven by demand-
side factors than factors of production. This project will investigate how
advertisers, consumers, and producers contributed to the emergence and
accommodation of a new consumer specialty magazine market within that particular
market sector. The investigators argue that to truly understand markets, we must
understand not only how markets are created and persist, but also how they are
enabled by factors that are not exclusively social or economic. Recent archival
data and a content analysis of major U.S. newspapers and magazines will be used
to examine how the new economy magazine market emerged and was legitimized by
advertisers, consumers and producers. &lt;br/&gt;