* 0221464
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Internationalization of Professional Business Services: Impetus or Impediment to the Development of Advertising Services in Southeast Asia?
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Annalee Saxenian, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

A few foreign transnational corporations (TNCs) dominate professional business
services (advertising, accounting, legal, and management consulting activities)
worldwide. An analysis of location patterns of branch offices of these global
producers finds that Asia Pacific has the highest concentration of global
business service centers of all developing regions, with Southeast Asian cities
emerging as important third tier hubs in the global business service network.
Existing literature on the internationalization of business services views these
peripheral nodes of global networks as passive recipients of foreign investment.
Yet in many business services in Southeast Asia, locally generated dynamics
appear to be emerging which indicate that the region is shifting from being a
passive recipient of foreign investment, to a generator of local business
service activity and a source of competitive advantage for TNCs. The main goal
of this doctoral dissertation research project is to examine foreign direct
investment in professional business services -- the form it takes, its
determinants and its impacts on developing metropolitan economies of Southeast
Asia. A secondary goal of the research is to determine implications for public
policy. This research addresses current theoretical biases based on a case study
of the Southeast Asian advertising and marketing industry. The analysis has two
components: an in-depth case study of the industry's development in a single
city, Bangkok, to develop and refine the theoretical framework, and a cross-
national comparative study of the development trajectories of a single TNC firm
operating in Bangkok, Manila, Kuala Lumpur and Singapore. The TNC acts as a
proxy to control for variation in firm organization, strategies, ownership and
services, thus regional variations in the TNC's strategy, role, and interaction
with other locally based firms will indicate differences in country-specific
factors. Hypotheses are tested using a mixed research approach that combines in-
depth, semi-structured interviews with firms and key informants, archival
research of organizational histories and government policies, and statistical
analysis of the service economy and professional business services industries in
each city. Anticipated findings from this research are that: (1) sources of firm
competitive advantage increasingly originate locally, in the branch firm and
through linkages with other local agencies, suppliers, and supporting
institutions; and (2) TNC investment is having a stimulating, rather than
stifling, effect on the development of local factors of production in this
industry.

This project research will contribute to a refinement and deepening of knowledge
in three key theoretical areas of regional development studies: international
producer services theory, East Asian development theory, and the theory of
international networks of production clusters. In particular, the research will
provide insights into urban economic development in Southeast Asia through
enhanced understanding of the impacts of internationalization and emerging local
dynamics in foreign-dominated global business service industries. The findings
will also inform developing countries about the development of policy frameworks
and initiatives aimed at promoting the knowledge economy and enhancing
innovation and productivity through professional business services. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.