* 0221131
* Early Detection of Corrosion in Steel Cables by Magnetoelastic Techniques
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* ming wang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/2006
* USD 270,000.00

High tensile steel wires have structural applications as individual wires, or as
tendons, cables or ropes. Typical structures include pre-tensioned and post-
tensioned concrete bridges and buildings, cable-supported bridges and anchors in
ground engineering. Structures and facilities exposed to the ambient deteriorate
and eventually wear out or become unsafe. Understanding when to replace them and
how to prolong their useful lifetimes is a critical issue. The objective of this
investigation is to develop a magnetoelastic nondestructive technique that would
detect corrosion early, and quantify its progress.&lt;br/&gt;The magnetoelastic
technique is based upon the dependence of the magnetic properties of structural
steels on the state of stress and the magnetic permeability is the property that
has been used as the parameter to precisely measure the internal stresses. It is
recognized that high vibrations and fatigue, coupled with the existing stress
state in these cables, are factors that can influence the progress and perhaps
the initiation of corrosion in these cables. Hence the corrosion assessment will
be monitored by how the magnetoelastic properties are altered by the onset of
corrosion. To confirm the performance of the magnetoelastic sensor for early
corrosion detection, two electrochemical techniques, DC electrochemical
polarization and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, will be used.
&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the proposed investigation will be the development of a
nondestructive technique for structural health monitoring and life extension.
This will benefit society by improving the safety of bridges and other civil
structures.&lt;br/&gt;