* 0221678
* IGERT:  Molecular Engineering of Microdevices (MEMD)
* EHR,DGE
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2012
* Andreas Von Recum, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Richard Boone
* 11/30/2012
* USD 3,654,060.00

In recent years the demand has been growing rapidly for non-silicon miniature
devices with highly-precise features. At the same time, commercialization of
these devices is hindered by a great need for novel molecular engineering and
miniaturization techniques. Progress will require highly interdisciplinary
collaboration between engineers, chemists, physicists, and biologists. Four
centers at OSU have organized an inter-center IGERT program uniting the broad
range of expertise necessary to foster new manufacturing technologies. These
technologies will be achieved by integrating molecular self-assembly with
micro/nano-manufacturing of polymeric and ceramic materials. A unifying
molecular engineering protocol will be developed and applyed to the design,
fabrication, and testing of devices in two major areas: (a) polymer- and
ceramic-based biomedical devices (i.e. BioMEMS), and (b) high performance
ceramic sensors, sensor arrays, and membranes for transportation and
environmental applications. Although a few inter-center research projects have
been conducted among these four centers, they are isolated cases having limited
scope. The technical breadth and complexity of this integration, to our
knowledge, has not been previously attempted on this scale. A natural outgrowth
will be the development of a broad-based, cross-center educational program. The
vision is to integrate the latest research developments into a practical student
curriculum, and to impart to doctoral students the necessary multidisciplinary
skills and global awareness needed to catalyze broader impacts on society. The
key elements of the inter-center education and training program include four to
five new MEMD courses (multipurpose seminar course, overview course, sensor
technology, nanotechnology and/or membrane science and technology); an
interdisciplinary curriculum; dedicated research at two or more centers;
industry internships and internships at national laboratories; travel to
national and international meetings; tours and visits to research labs in the
U.S. and abroad; and a web-based dissemination plan. The recruitment and
retention of minorities and women will be emphasized in the award of thirty
IGERT-MEMD fellowships. Each institution will commit to providing the necessary
infrastructure, including appropriate laboratory and/or clean room and common
space and sharing of equipment, in support of an external user community.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the program, awards
are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span
the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.

