* 0221646
* Social welfare and gold mining: A comparative pilot study in Suriname and French Guiana
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Ricardo Godoy, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 06/30/2003
* USD 24,982.00

The question of how support from social welfare systems affects a household's
economic reliance on natural resources is of interest in many social contexts.
This pilot research by a cultural anthropologist will ask how forest peoples in
Suriname and French Guiana participate in small-scale gold mining given access
to national social welfare systems. Previous research suggests that gold mining
in this area attracts large numbers of poor people, who have few subsistence
alternatives, and a small number of relatively well off people, who can earn
revenues by investing in mining equipment. The research predicts a U-shaped
relation between access to social welfare and participation in gold mining, with
poor people with the least access to welfare and rich people being the most
likely to engage in mining. This hypothesis will be tested in two adjacent
countries that are culturally and environmentally similar but differ in their
systems of social welfare. The researchers will study three Maroon villages in
Eastern Suriname and Western French Guiana, varying in their access to public
services. Socioeconomic survey interviews will be carried out with fifty
households in each village, ethnographic interviews and observations will be
recorded at both sides of the border, and statistical information will be
obtained from government offices and non-governmental organizations. Two U.S.
graduate students will be trained in the fieldwork and will conduct their own
research on comparative topics. Aside from contributing to the training of
students in social science and advancing our understanding of the relation
between access to welfare and work, the project will inform us about the
relation between social welfare policy, socioeconomic development, and forest
resource use and conservation.