* 0221240
* Collaborative Research:  A Uranium-Series and Hafnium Isotope Investigation  of the Link Between Partial Melting and Mantle Heterogeneity Beneath the Southeast Indian Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* David Graham, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 09/30/2005
* USD 247,178.00

Under this award, the PIs will measure 176Hf/177Hf and 238U-230Th-226Ra-232Th
activities in basalt glasses from the Southeast Indian Ridge (SEIR)to test how
the depth and rate of melting control the sampling of regional heterogeneity in
the underlying mantle during ocean ridge magmatism. With these new data, it
should be possible to sort out differences in the mineralogy of the mantle
source, the depth and extent of melting, and the source compositions. The SEIR
was chosen for the study, because along it a number of systematic variations
occur at constant full spreading rate (70-75 mm/y) and in the absence of large
transform offsets and nearby ocean island hotspots:(a)there is a large eastward
increase in axial depth (2300 to 5000 m) and a morphological transition from
axial high to axial valley; (b) there is evidence that melt production rate and
crustal thickness decrease eastward along axis; and (c) lavas from this setting
record systematic variations in temperature and mantle composition. It has also
been the subject of previous petrologic and isotopic analyses of numerous basalt
glasses. The PIs will search for and use correlations of 230Th/232Th,
230Th/238U, Th/U, 226Ra/230Th, Ba/Th and 176Hf/177Hf with these physical and
geochemical variations to test two fundamental hypotheses:1) A regional increase
in ridge depth at constant spreading rate is primarily controlled by the depth
and rate of melting. 2) The distinctive Pb-Sr-Nd isotope signature of Indian
Ocean MORBs is due to the presence of garnet pyroxenite in the shallow
asthenosphere.&lt;br/&gt;