* 0221031
* Geochemical Constraints on Light Emission in Seafloor Hydrothermal Systems: An Experimental Study Using In-Situ Spectral and Chemical Sensor Techniques
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2008
* William Seyfried, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 07/31/2008
* USD 310,148.00

Recent studies with highly sensitive CCD camera systems deployed from the
submersible ALVIN have revealed light being emitted from hydrothermal fluids
venting at the ocean floor. In general, these studies reveal photon fluxes from
the vent fluids in excess of those predicted from simple blackbody radiation,
suggesting a number of in-situ light-generating processes. In particular,
chemiluminescence (emission of light that accompanies chemical reactions),
sonoluminescence (light emitted by vapor bubble implosion or cavitation), or
crystalloluminescence (emission of light accompanying onset of mineral
precipitation) are thought to be the mose likely processes to account for this.
This investigation is designed to assess unambiguously the intensity and
spectral characteristics of light generated by chemical reactions, vapor
generation, effects and crystallization processes at temperatures and pressures
applicable to marine hydrothermal systems. Under this award, the PIs will use a
series of computer controlled Ti-flow reactors, modified to contain optical
windows, fiber optic cables, spectrometer, and CCD detector that will allow the
intensity and spectral variability of light to be measured and monitored. The
experiments will be designed to specifically assess the role of
chemiluminescence, sonoluminescence and crystalloluminescnce on light generation
for an appropriate range of temperatures, pressures, compositional effects, and
fluid flow rates. The experiments will include a number of in-situ chemical
sensors developed at to better constrain the distribution of aqueous species
during the experiments, while simultaneously linking these data to spectral
observations.&lt;br/&gt;