* 0221606
* BE/CBC: Coupling of Carbon and Water Cycles in a Cold, Dry Ecosystem: Integrative Physical, Chemical and Biological Processes and their Controls on CO2 Exchange
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Bernard Hallet, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 06/30/2005
* USD 1,700,000.00

Welker&lt;br/&gt;0221606&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort will quantify
the coupling of the carbon and water cycles and the interacting physical,
chemical and biological (PCB) processes that control C exchange between cold,
dry terrestrial ecosystems and the atmosphere. They are focusing on cold, dry
ecosystems because: (1) understanding of carbon and water interrelationships and
net C exchange is only rudimentary for this extreme environment, making it
impossible to predict the vulnerability of this ecosystem to the expected
anthropogenically-exacerbated warming; (2) these tundra systems are sufficiently
simple allowing the quantification of all key components and the development of
a system behavior conceptual model and (3) the vital role of unfrozen water in
this cold, dry environment underlies the importance of thresholds and highly
nonlinear interactions between PCB processes. Results will contribute to the
understanding and the quantification of global carbon and water cycling, as well
as to the understanding of extreme habitats on Earth, and possibly on other
cold, dry planetary bodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They will quantify the seasonal
changes in the coupling of C and water at the leaf and ecosystem scales using in
situ isotopic approaches, evaluate and quantify how the seasonal patterns of
physical, chemical and biological processes interact to regulate the dynamics of
net C exchange, and use a biogeochemical model to investigate net CO2 exchange
and the complex PCB interactions under current climates and a range of likely
future climate change scenarios and integrate these with arctic and global
carbon budget estimates. The program will be based on articulating the
complexities of carbon and water coupling under current conditions, but also on
the responses of the biological, chemical and physical processes and
interactions in response to field manipulations of winter and summer
precipitation and warming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They anticipate that the study
will result in a new insight into the adaptations of plant and microbial life in
cold, dry ecosystems and the coupled nature of carbon and water in an ecosystem
that is very different from more temperate ecosystems where most current
understanding of these processes has originated. Furthermore, they expect to
gain a more precise understanding of the extent to which this ecosystem responds
to future climate change and the consequences of these changes for arctic and
global C budgets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;