* 0221229
* Linking Bioturbation and Sensory Biology: Chemoreception Mechanisms in Deposit-Feeding Polychaetes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Sara Lindsay, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2006
* USD 342,662.00

Soft-sediment benthic habitats are ubiquitous in the marine environment and
typically&lt;br/&gt;feature macrofaunal assemblages that include large numbers
of deposit-feeding invertebrates&lt;br/&gt;such as polychaetes, bivalves,
gastropods, crustaceans, holothurians, and hemichordates. Via&lt;br/&gt;their
feeding, modulated in part by chemoreception, these organisms have profound
effects on&lt;br/&gt;the ecology, biology, geology, and chemistry of their
habitats. Very little is known, however,&lt;br/&gt;concerning the physiology and
molecular biology of chemoreception in deposit feeders. &lt;br/&gt; This
research is a comprehensive investigation of the sensory mechanisms
coordinating&lt;br/&gt;chemoreception in deposit feeding spionid polychaetes. It
directly addresses this lack of&lt;br/&gt;information and will therefore have a
significant impact on the current understanding of&lt;br/&gt;chemoreception in
polychaetes and other marine invertebrates. In the first of three objectives,
the ultrastructure and innervation of putative sensory structures on spionid
polychaete palps will be described using electron and confocal
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt; Second, the chemoreceptive capacity of palp sensory cells
and nuchal organs will be tested with&lt;br/&gt;behavioral assays and activity-
dependent cell labeling studies. The behavioral assays will identify chemical
cues that elicit significant feeding responses and establish their threshold
sensitivities. Complementary immunocytochemistry experiments will determine (1)
if the chemicals that elicit behavioral responses activate the sensory cells
described in objective 1; (2) the sensitivity of the sensory cells (i.e.,
stimulation thresholds); and (3) the distribution of cells responding to a
particular chemical cue. &lt;br/&gt; Third, a functional biochemical approach
will be used to characterize and isolate candidate chemoreceptor proteins
associated with the peripheral sensory cells and nuchal organs. Several outcomes
of the research are of particular significance. First, the cell-labeling method
will be further refined for use with small invertebrates, and will provide a
powerful tool for future studies of the neural mechanisms coordinating habitat
selection by many species of marine invertebrate larvae. Second, the sequence
information and purified receptor will set the stage for development of mRNA and
antibody probes that can be used to examine gene expression and detail the
chemosensory transduction pathways in polychaetes and other marine
invertebrates. Such information will be useful to researchers interested in the
evolutionary relationships among invertebrate phyla and the in evolution of
sensory structures.&lt;br/&gt; In addition to its scientific relevance, the
project provides significant opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
student training. Three K-12 educators or high school students will also
participate through the Maine Research Internships for Teachers and Students
program. Their participation not only increases the capacity of this over
subscribed program, but also strengthens the links between the local K-12
community and the University of Maine. Internet activities and resources will be
created that focus on sensory perception and ecology in the marine environment.
These materials will extend the research to an even larger Internet audience and
facilitate the incorporation of ocean science examples into topics typically
approached only from a terrestrial and human perspective.&lt;br/&gt;