* 0221133
* SGER: Testing the Viability of (U-Th)/He Thermochronology in Complex Tectonic Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Kevin Furlong, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2003
* USD 17,986.00

Exhumation in the northern California Coast Ranges, and orogens in general,
results from&lt;br/&gt;the interplay of geodynamic processes that drive uplift
and surface processes that respond to the&lt;br/&gt;rates and patterns of
uplift. A variety of approaches have been used to determine patterns
of&lt;br/&gt;exhumation, but placing robust, quantifiable constraints on these
estimates is difficult because of&lt;br/&gt;the feedbacks and linkages among
large scale geodynamic, thermal, and landscape evolution&lt;br/&gt;processes.
There is a critical need for a technique to constrain the trajectory of rocks at
shallow-&lt;br/&gt;crustal (low-temperature) levels to constrain uplift and
exhumation in active orogenic belts. Most&lt;br/&gt;recently, (U-Th)/He
thermochronometry has been identified as a potential tool to
help&lt;br/&gt;quantitatively constrain exhumation and uplift. The (U-Th)/He
system has the advantage of a low&lt;br/&gt;closure temperature (~ 60-70 C for
apatite) and thus in principal it records the last few&lt;br/&gt;kilometers of
unroofing. As a low-T thermochronometer the same characteristics that make
(U-&lt;br/&gt;Th)/He so appealing for geomorphic studies also raise questions
about its utility in regions of&lt;br/&gt;complex thermal and/or tectonic
histories. It is uncertain whether this tool can extract
meaningful&lt;br/&gt;information from a complex signal that incorporates both
the exhumation history and the&lt;br/&gt;inevitable thermal feedbacks driven by
that exhumation. In this project we will apply
(U-Th)/He&lt;br/&gt;thermochronometry coupled with landscape evolution, thermal
and geodynamic modeling, to&lt;br/&gt;evaluate if (U-Th)/He dating can be
confidently applied in regions of active tectonism that are not&lt;br/&gt;in
thermal or geomorphic steady-state.