* 0221834
* BE/CBC: Ecosystem Response to Elevated Arsenic Concentrations
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Gary Huxel, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,490,000.00

Professor Thomas Pichler of the University of South Florida and coworkers are
funded by the Biocomplexity-Coupled Biogeochemical Cycles program to study
arsenic cycling in marine thermal vents in New Guinea. Arsenic can function as a
toxin or a nutrient and more work is needed to understand its roles in an
ecosystem. Little is known about arsenic biogeochemistry in vents; this site
chosen was chosen because it is pristine and therefore the study will not be
strongly affected by other pollutants. The work combines biochemistry, geology
and ecology. Analyses include inorganic aqueous species, isotopes and dissolved
organic matter from pore fluids and the water column. In addition, microbial,
foraminiferan, meiofaunal and macrofaunal invertebrate diversities and community
strucutres will be investigated in the sediments using morphological, isotopic
and PCR-based molecular methods. Bioenergetic computations as well as
mathematical models of biota will be performed. Interactive broadcasts will link
the research with middle school science classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
effects of arsenic on human health are a well-documented global concern.
Understanding how arsenic moves through the environment and whether it is
bioavailable is crucial in evaluating water quality world-wide. In the pristine
environment in New Guinea, natural arsenic will be observed in relation to the
biota. The results will have applications in understanding trace arsenic in
other ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;