* 0221515
* Development of High-Resolution, Multi-Century Records of Trace Element Deposition in West-Central Greenland Using ICP-MS
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Joseph McConnell, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 12/31/2006
* USD 322,838.00

McConnell 0221515 The Principal Investigator will develop three spatially
distributed, continuous, multi-century glaciochemical records of more than 20
chemical species, trace elements, and isotopes with unprecedented temporal
resolution (~50 to 100 samples). These unique records will significantly expand
possible applications of glaciochemical data to the study of a range of
environmental and global change issues. This work builds on recent NSF-funded
development at the Desert Research Institute (DRI) of a new method for
continuous, high-resolution ice-core analyses called Continuous Flow Analysis
with Trace Elements (CFA-TE). CFA-TE is a novel analytical approach in which a
continuous ice-core melter is coupled directly with an Inductively Coupled
Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS) and traditional Continuous Flow Analysis (CFA)
system. The apparatus makes possible continuous, high-resolution and exactly co-
registered glaciochemical measurements of a broad spectrum of chemical species,
trace elements, and isotopes. Measurements on an approximately 137meter core
from Summit, Greenland demonstrate the potential of this new approach. Using
sample handling and analytical protocols developed for the successful Summit
analyses, CFA-TE will be used to measure more than 20 chemical species, trace
elements, and isotopes on one archived and two new approximately140-m ice cores
from high accumulation regions of the dry snow zone in west-central Greenland.
This area is strongly influenced by large-scale changes in atmospheric
circulation and anthropogenic pollution from North America. These new
glaciochemical records will extend from around 1750 A.D. to the present and will
be the highest resolution, multi-century elemental and isotopic glaciochemical
records ever produced from Greenland ice cores.

The application of ice-core chemical data in environmental, biogeochemical, and
global change studies has been limited by 1) relatively coarse sample resolution
in time even for high resolution studies, 2) inexact co-registration in depth
for different chemical measurements, and 3) the limited number of chemical
species, elements, and isotopes routinely measured in ice cores. The recent
development of the CFA-TE method for ice-core analysis eliminates many of these
issues and presents a new opportunity to develop very high-resolution, broad-
spectrum glaciochemical records at relatively modest cost. Together with
similar, recently completed measurements from Summit, these rich data sets will
open new avenues for using glaciochemical data to investigate environmental and
global changes issues ranging from anthropogenic, volcanic and biomass-burning-
related trace element fallout to changes in hemispheric-scale circulation.