* 0221120
* An Investigation of Impurities in Greenland Ice Cores
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Ian Baker, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/2005
* USD 132,607.00

Baker 0221120

This proposal will be jointly funded by the Arctic Natural Sciences Program and
Antarctic Glaciology Program. Several Greenland and Antarctic ice cores have
revealed considerable information about the concentration and depth distribution
of particles, trace gases and impurities. In order to accurately model phenomena
such as diffusion and grain growth, and the electrical and mechanical properties
of natural polycrystalline ice, including the impacts of temperature changes, it
is necessary to know the concentrations of these impurities and their
microstructural location. For example, understanding if the impurities are in
the grain boundaries, triple junctions, or the lattice will enable the
electrical conductivity to be modeled accurately with a clear physical basis.
Thus far, the microstructural location of impurities in natural ice has received
little attention. Recently, the Principal Investigator developed a new
technique, using a low-vacuum scanning electron microscope, energy-dispersive
x-ray microanalysis, a cold stage and controlled sublimation, to determine the
microstructural location of impurities in polycrystalline ice. Preliminary work
on ice cores from the Greenland Ice Sheet Project 2 (GISP2) showed that sodium
chloride was located in the grain boundaries while most of the sulfate was in
the lattice. Other impurities such as magnesium, calcium, aluminum, potassium,
and silicon, were occasionally observed in either location. In contrast,
examinations of ice core specimens from both Byrd Station and Vostok Station,
Antarctica do not have sodium chloride at the grain boundaries, although
magnesium sulfate has sometimes been observed there. The purpose of the research
is to apply this novel technique to determine how the microstructural location
of impurities changes with depth/age and impurity content in ice cores from
three sites (Dye 3, Camp Century and GISP2) in the Greenland ice sheet and three
sites in Antarctica (Siple Dome, Vostok and Taylor Dome). Comparison between the
different sites is important because they are in different locations, at
different elevations, have different snow accumulation rates, and are at
different temperatures. Electrical conductivity measurements and simple
mechanical tests will also be performed on specific grain boundaries from the
cores prior to their microstructural characterization in the scanning electron
microscope.