* 0221480
* Extraction and Analysis of Halocarbons and Other Trace Gases in Greenland Ice Cores
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Eric Saltzman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/2005
* USD 375,000.00

0221480&lt;br/&gt;Saltzman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gases trapped in polar ice
cores are a unique and invaluable archive for investigating paleoatmospheric
composition and variability. To date, efforts have focused on carbon dioxide,
oxygen, methane, and nitrous oxide, which occur at mixing ratios in air of
parts-per-billion and above. There are many more trace gases present at lower
concentrations in ice cores that contain a wealth of information about
biogeochemical cycles and atmospheric chemistry. In particular, ice cores
potentially contain a record of natural variability of halocarbons such as
methyl chloride (CH3Cl) and methyl bromide (CH3Br) that are major contributors
to the atmospheric halogen burden and to stratospheric ozone loss. Ice cores
also contain a record of paleoatmospheric carbonyl sulfide (OCS), the most
abundant sulfur gas in the atmosphere and a precursor to the stratospheric
sulfate layer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator will measure
CH3Cl, CH3Br, and a number of other trace gases on ice core samples from shallow
and deep Greenland ice cores. Trace gases will be extracted by mechanically
shredding ice core samples, with analysis by gas chromatography with mass
spectrometric detection. Preliminary ice core measurements indicate that: 1)
paleoatmospheric levels of CH3Cl and OCS can be obtained from ice core samples
using dry extraction with analysis by gas chromatography/mass spectrometric
detection, and 2) the interpretation of ice core CH3Br measurements is more
complex, as this gas is contained both in gas bubbles and in the ice matrix.
Experiments will be carried out to differentiate between gas stored in the air
and in the ice matrix, and to understand the factors controlling the
partitioning of this gas between these phases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective is to provide new baseline data for the concentration of halocarbons
and other gases in pre-industrial northern hemisphere air. These data will
provide strong constraints on the anthropogenic contribution to their
atmospheric budgets. This study will also provide insight into the relationship
between the atmospheric levels of halocarbons and climate variability, over
periods of widely varying climate conditions and rapid climate change. In terms
of broader impacts on society, this research will help to provide a stronger
scientific basis for policy decisions regulating the production and use of
ozone-depleting and climate-active gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;