* 0221487
* Primitive Antibodies
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Samuel Schluter, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2006
* USD 450,000.00

A grant has been awarded to John J. Marchalonis, Ph.D. for studies on
&lt;br/&gt;"Primitive Antibodies". This project addresses the molecular basis of
&lt;br/&gt;diversification of the recognition molecules that are essential for
the &lt;br/&gt;generation of specific immunity. The project focuses upon the
immune system &lt;br/&gt;of sharks because these are the most primitive
vertebrates to share with &lt;br/&gt;humans the combinatorial immune response.
This is based uniquely upon the &lt;br/&gt;recombination of gene segments to
generate the variability in antigen &lt;br/&gt;receptor molecules present in
serum and on blood cells. Sharks, which arose &lt;br/&gt;approximately 450
million years ago, like humans have immunoglobulins (also &lt;br/&gt;termed
antibodies), T-cell receptors (TCRs), major histocompatability
&lt;br/&gt;antigens (MHC), and recombination activating genes (RAGs) that are
required &lt;br/&gt;to allow rearrangement of the gene segments making up the
antibodies and &lt;br/&gt;T-cell receptors. The project will address both
conserved and unique &lt;br/&gt;features of the combinatorial system of
carcharhine sharks to elucidate the &lt;br/&gt;molecular underpinning of
combinatorial immunity as it is expressed in all
&lt;br/&gt;vertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes three major
areas of focus: The first is the complete &lt;br/&gt;characterization of the
shark RAG locus with emphasis upon its evolutionary &lt;br/&gt;emergence and
functional similarities and differences to the molecular &lt;br/&gt;homologs
found in mammals and other higher vertebrates. The second major &lt;br/&gt;area
of concentration is the characterization of the genes specifying the
&lt;br/&gt;alpha/beta and gamma/delta T-cell receptors of carcharhine sharks
including &lt;br/&gt;their diversity and gene organization, and the construction
of recombinant &lt;br/&gt;single chain TCRs for functional and structural
analyses. Because of the &lt;br/&gt;pronounced differences in organization of
shark and mammalian antibody gene &lt;br/&gt;segments, it is crucial to
determine the arrangement of shark TCR genes. &lt;br/&gt;The third aim tests the
generality of clonal selection theory by &lt;br/&gt;determining whether sharks
which have a cassette organization of antibody &lt;br/&gt;gene as opposed to
translocons of higher vertebrates show clonal &lt;br/&gt;restriction in their
antibody forming lymphocytes. These studies are &lt;br/&gt;directed towards
applying molecular and protein chemical technologies to &lt;br/&gt;obtain
precise answers to fundamental problems of the system as it obtains
&lt;br/&gt;in all vertebrates, with implications for defense against invading
&lt;br/&gt;pathogens, cancers and immunological dysfunction in
autoimmunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;