* 0221086
* Collaborative Research: Estuarine Crab Transport: Linking Post-Settlement Dispersal, Bio-Physical Mechanisms and Hydrodynamic Corridors
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Richard Forward, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/2007
* USD 470,542.00

Secondary pelagic dispersal of juvenile benthic organisms following initial
larval settlement may strongly influence local and regional population dynamics,
yet secondary dispersal is rarely considered in recruitment studies. While the
relative importance of post-settlement blue crab dispersal in determining
recruitment patterns in Pamlico Sound, NC, is presently recognized, the factors
initiating movement by early juvenile blue crabs away from settlement habitats,
the mechanisms mediating across-sound transport, and the population-level
consequences of redistribution to alternative habitats, have not yet been
explored. This project will address these issues through an interdisciplinary
study that incorporates: (1) small-scale field measurements in seagrass beds
along the sound-side of the Outer Banks to identify the factors cueing initial
movement from settlement habitats, (2) laboratory experiments to test the
behavioral mechanisms that drive pelagic emigration, and (3) sound-wide
hydrographic surveys to characterize Pamlico Sound circulation coupled with
synoptic measurements of the spatiotemporal distribution of postlarval and
juvenile blue crabs. The project will be conducted during 2002-2003 to take
advantage of concurrent postlarval and juvenile sampling supported by another
NSF award. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the
understanding of how pelagic dispersal occurs in estuaries that are not
dominated by tidal motions, but by irregular or persistent wind-induced motions.
Generalizations of recruitment dynamics from past work on systems with strong
tidal signals (e.g., Chesapeake and Delaware Bays) may not accurately
characterize patterns of estuarine recruitment in predominantly large, wind-
driven systems such as Pamlico Sound. &lt;br/&gt;