* 0221484
* Creation of National Forum for Synergistic Program Development in Smart Structures and Sensor Technologies
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2002,05/31/2004
* Fu-Kuo Chang, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 05/31/2004
* USD 192,000.00

Sensing Systems is an emerging topic of national and international interest in a
variety of fields from living systems, e.g. biological, to non-living, e.g.
engineered systems, to energy systems and infrastructures. Convergence of sensor
technologies, communications, and computing has the potential to overcome
barriers of time, scale, materials and environment. The scope of this program
development in sensor technology encompasses the needs, the current and emerging
technologies, and efficacious partnerships required to develop and implement
future sensing systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this proposal
is to create national forums for the development of R&amp;D programs in smart
structures and sensor technologies. Through a series of strategically crafted
forum activities industry in sensors and devices and users community can be
pulled together behind NSF's program aimed at advancing the emerging
technologies expanding the commercial products and markets, and broadening the
applications of advanced sensors and smart structures. These forums include a
series of strategic programs in panel discussions, special interest topics,
seminars, workshops, exhibitions, demonstrations, and projects that will be
primarily held in conjunction with major conferences that address 'state-of-the-
art' research, education and development projects in the areas of smart
structures and sensor technologies. Such conferences include the Smart
Structures and Materials with SPIE (The International Society for Optical
Engineering), ASCE (American Society of Civil Engineers) and ASME (American
Society of Mechanical Engineers) annual meetings, AIAA (American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics) Adaptive Structures Forum, Modal Analysis, etc. As
anticipated, the state-of-the-art technology and the state of the practices in
these emerging disciplines will also be rapidly advancing. Thus, this three-year
effort will update the research community about these technological
advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These forums will also focus on educational
needs, curriculum modifications, laboratory developments and innovative pedagogy
at both the undergraduate and graduate levels in the area of sensor technology
and smart structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;