* 0221199
* SGER: Holocene and Modern Climate Change in the High Arctic: Evaluating the Feasibility of Running an REU site on Svalbard.
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2003
* Ross Powell, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 04/30/2003
* USD 20,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;0221199&lt;br/&gt;Werner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This recommendation for
an award is being made as a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER). This is
a collaborative proposal among Principal Investigators at the Universities of
Massachusetts and Illinois at Chicago, Bates College, and Mt. Holyoke College.
The Principal Investigators will determine the feasibility of establishing an
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site in Svalbard that focuses on
studying modern physical processes and proxy records of Holocene environmental
change in glacial, lacustrine, fjord, and near shore marine environments.
Svalbard is an important location for understanding climate and geophysical
feedbacks on global scales where, in the 20th century, there have been profound
reductions in sea ice and retreating glacier margins associated with atmospheric
warming. Proxy records indicate that Svalbard experienced significant climatic
fluctuations during the Late Holocene, culminating with the Little Ice Age at
the end of the 19th century. This area should offer excellent opportunities for
marine and terrestrial paleoenvironmental research to understand the
ocean/atmosphere system on a variety of spatial and temporal timescales due to
its excellent record of Late Holocene climate. There are currently no REU Sites
in the Arctic that focus on Late Holocene environmental change. The Principal
Investigators anticipate that students will participate in modules or projects
at several sites and that the projects undertaken will become senior thesis
projects during the subsequent academic year. They will conduct an annual
symposium where the students will present their research results. An important
goal is to inspire a diverse group of undergraduate students (especially women,
underrepresented minorities, and if possible, persons with disabilities) to the
rewards and challenges of conducting climate change research in the Arctic.
&lt;br/&gt;