* 0221791
* BE/CBC: Biogeochemistry of Fe(III) and Sulfate Reduction in Extreme Acidic Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* Allan Feldman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,600,000.00

Professor Richard Yuretich of the University of Massachusetts Amherst and
coworkers are supported by the Biocomplexity-Coupled Biogeochemical Cycles
program to study the microbiology, hydrology and environmental science of acid
mine drainage (AMD) sites. The team will study the processes of Fe(III) and
sulfate reduction in an AMD site in western Massachusetts through field studies,
modeling and laboratory experiments, and will quantify the roles of acidophilic
and acid-tolerant anaerobic microorganisms. Changes in hydrology and
geochemistry of the stream and groundwater will be monitored as a function of
distance from the AMD source. Sediment from the stream and surrounding aquifer
will be examined for anaerobic microorganisms, for iron and sulfate reducing
microorganisms and for the metabolic potential of these species. A variety of
molecular genetic probes and polymerase chain reactions (PCR) will be used in
the identification of species. Additional experiments will involve in situ
microcosms in the laboratory that will be modeled in order to study attenuation.
International collaboration will enable comparisons with similar mines in the
United Kingdom. K12 teachers in training will act as research assistants, and
real pedagogical work will be done on the effects of teaching
style.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acid mine drainage results from the oxidation of
pyrite and other sulfide minerals in streams and shallow groundwater. Much
research has been directed toward understanding the formation of these
conditions, however, the biogeochemistry of natural attenuation is relatively
unknown. Organisms discovered here might have global significance in the
reduction of iron and sulfate in other environments. Knowledge about microbial
cycling of iron and sulfur can be applied to other ecosystems.