* 0221153
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Early Labor Force Experiences of Non-College Bound Youth in Chicago: The Role of Schools and Neighborhoods
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2003
* Charles Bidwell, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 10/31/2003
* USD 6,365.00

SES-0221153&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Charles Bidwell&lt;br/&gt; Julia Gwynne&lt;br/&gt;
University of Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Doctoral Dissertation
Improvement project investigates the role of schools and neighborhoods in
shaping early labor force experiences of non-college bound youth in Chicago.
Specifically, it proposes that social experiences within schools and
neighborhoods influence three dimensions of labor force participation: The
choice of labor force participation versus college attendance, the type of first
employment, and the early stages of development in an employment career. The
proposal argues that social experiences within schools and neighborhoods are
composed of two elements, form and content. While content involves any sort of
interest, purpose or motive, form is the structuring mechanism by which content
is experienced. Within the school context attention is focused on the form
(degree of differentiation) and content (academic vs. vocational) of the
curricular program as well as the form (frequency, intensity) and content
(encouragement of information about college vs. labor force) of social
interaction with school personnel. Within the neighborhood, the focus is on the
form (frequency and intensity) and content (encouragement of and information
about college vs. labor force) of social interaction with local adults. These
two elements of social experiences in both neighborhood and school bear directly
on the way in which youth make decisions about post-secondary opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project makes contributions to research on labor force
experiences of non-college bound youth. First, it expands the literature on
occupational attainment by examining mechanisms other than educational
attainment that are important in facilitating the location of employment.
Second, by simultaneously considering the role of both schools and neighborhoods
in transition into the labor force, this project offers a more complete picture
of resources available to youth as they negotiate the job search
process.&lt;br/&gt;