* 0221713
* IGERT: Graduate Training Program in Interactive Digital Multimedia
* EHR,DGE
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2009
* Kenneth Rose, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 11/30/2009
* USD 3,426,376.00

This IGERT award will support the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate
training program of education and research at UCSB in the broad field of
interactive digital multimedia. The objective of the program is to train
students in a truly interdisciplinary approach to digital multimedia, while
preparing them for careers in industry, research, and education. The convergence
of digital media, computing, and communication has created new and exciting
opportunities in science, engineering, and the arts. The goal of this program is
to integrate multiple, diverse approaches to the creation, analysis, deployment,
and utilization of digital media within a coherent educational framework of
training and research. This multidisciplinary endeavor necessitates
collaboration between students and faculty from a broad spectrum of backgrounds
and perspectives, including computer science, electrical and computer
engineering, psychology, geography, design, composition, and art. Through
innovative and interdepartmental courses and seminars, opportunities for
internships in industry, and guidance by faculty from several departments,
students will gain a unique perspective on interactive multimedia, including the
creation, encoding, and distribution of multimedia content, as well as
applications of multimedia systems in education, communication, and arts and
entertainment. Areas of focus for research and education include image, video,
and audio processing, networking, human-computer interaction, graphics and
visualization, visual arts, interactive media, and computer music. The graduate
training program will emphasize a broad background in several of these areas,
while research projects, interactive installations and artistic performances
will bring together small, interdisciplinary teams of researchers with diverse
expertise. The IGERT-supported program will leverage existing strengths at UCSB
in related areas and will involve the participation of several departments. The
program will complement the UCSB Media Arts and Technology Program, a masters-
level graduate program, by enabling doctoral students from several departments
to build upon the current foundation it provides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is
an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the program, awards
are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span
the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;