* 0221211
* The Genetic and Geographical Mosaics of Specialization:  A Linkage Map-Based Analysis
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Sara Via, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/2005
* USD 106,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The process of speciation requires the evolution of characters that
act as barriers to gene flow. The barriers themselves are well studied but the
genetic details of how they evolve and persist remain surprisingly obscure.
Recent results from genetic linkage mapping reveal that races of pea aphids
specialized on different crop plants differ at relatively few key genomic
regions, with much of the genome remaining quite similar between these incipient
species. This project concerns whether the same genetic markers linked to
genomic regions controlling divergent host plant use in one geographical
population of pea aphid (New York) are also associated with divergence between
specialized pea aphid races in other locations (Iowa and Maryland). This will be
accomplished by genotyping 200 aphids from each location. Finding that the same
markers tag divergent genomic regions in different specialist populations will
improve our understanding of the genetic processes involved in the evolution of
divergent populations and demonstrate the utility of these mapped markers in
further analyses of the evolution of specialization and speciation in pea
aphids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will form the basis of a novel
approach to the study of the genetic mechanisms of ecological specialization and
speciation. It will also serve as a training ground in multidisciplinary
approaches to speciation for undergraduates and graduate students. Moreover,
this investigation of the genetics of crop pests will inform and influence
future work in agricultural entomology. Both PIs are actively involved in
outreach activities designed to further understanding of basic evolutionary
principles among agriculturalists, conservation biologists, religious leaders
and the general public. &lt;br/&gt;