* 0221382
* Species complexes in the sea: model systems for studying the biodiversity and evolutionary history of the Indo-West Pacific reef biota
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Gustav Paulay, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2006
* USD 342,099.00

Coral reefs are arguably the most diverse and vulnerable coastal ecosystems and
are &lt;br/&gt;currently undergoing unprecedented decline. Both their diversity
and vulnerability are &lt;br/&gt;influenced by genetic structuring, the spatio-
temporal scale and pattern of geographic &lt;br/&gt;differentiation within and
among species. By documenting such structuring, we gain a better
&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the origin and distribution of reef biodiversity.
Furthermore, data on the level &lt;br/&gt;and scale of genetic interconnections
are crucial for predicting reef response in the face of &lt;br/&gt;stressors and
for the design of appropriate conservation strategies. &lt;br/&gt; On the basis
of morphological species ranges, previous workers have generally
&lt;br/&gt;characterized reef organisms as widespread, especially in the Indo-
West Pacific (IWP), the &lt;br/&gt;largest and most diverse marine region. Wide
species ranges in the IWP imply dispersal across &lt;br/&gt;numerous, vast, open
ocean barriers, supporting the belief that reef organisms have
&lt;br/&gt;tremendous dispersal abilities. Past molecular studies found IWP
populations to be typically &lt;br/&gt;interconnected over basinal to sub-
basinal scales. However recent studies on stomatopods in &lt;br/&gt;Indonesia
and supratidal crustaceans in the Americas encountered finer levels of genetic
&lt;br/&gt;differentiation. These studies raise the question: is fine-scale
genetic structuring common &lt;br/&gt;among reef organisms? &lt;br/&gt;
Preliminary data show fine-scale genetic differentiation in several widespread,
reef-&lt;br/&gt;associated gastropods. Each species is composed of numerous,
divergent populations with &lt;br/&gt;ranges limited to archipelagoes or
islands. Their life history attributes are typical of many reef
&lt;br/&gt;organisms, and initial data show considerable structuring in co-
occurring taxa with different life &lt;br/&gt;history strategies. The goals of
this project are to document the extent of geographic, genetic
&lt;br/&gt;structuring in selected reef-associated gastropods in the IWP, and to
use these patterns to &lt;br/&gt;address questions about large-scale, spatio-
temporal processes in the marine biosphere. &lt;br/&gt;Evolutionarily
significant units (ESUs), the relevant conservation and evolutionary units, will
be &lt;br/&gt;identified throughout the region. Hypotheses about the source and
dynamics of ESUs, and thus &lt;br/&gt;patterns of distribution and
diversification, will be tested using sequence data. &lt;br/&gt; The
significance of the proposed work lies in the nature of fine scale genetic
structuring &lt;br/&gt;encountered in these taxa, which makes them model systems
for studies of marine speciation &lt;br/&gt;and biogeography, and has major
implications for reef management and conservation of &lt;br/&gt;biodiversity.
Fine-scale, but deeply divergent genetic structuring has rarely been encountered
in &lt;br/&gt;marine taxa and only in continental settings; its occurrence on
islands is unprecedented and &lt;br/&gt;contrary to expectations. How can
organisms capable of dispersing far into Oceania &lt;br/&gt;differentiate on an
archipelagic scale? This conundrum implies that rare dispersal events may
&lt;br/&gt;be highly important in the spread as well as differentiation of
marine populations. Exploring the &lt;br/&gt;phylogenetic nature of genetic
structuring in independent gene trees will shed light on a variety &lt;br/&gt;of
hypotheses about the origin of marine biodiversity and distribution of reef
organisms. &lt;br/&gt; High levels of genetic differentiation also imply that
conservation and resource management strategies on reefs need to be
appropriately scaled. Understanding the size and distribution of genetically
interconnected units is crucial for designing appropriate management units, such
as marine protected areas. Congruent genetic structuring delineates intrinsic
breaks in the distribution of reef biota and thus identifies natural management
units. This project will lead to better management strategies for reef-
associated marine resources, and will also have &lt;br/&gt;direct educational
impact at several levels. The project team will be interacting with resource
&lt;br/&gt;managers regularly. The species studied are important food organisms,
and provide an &lt;br/&gt;excellent venue to introduce implications for resource
management and thus influence reef &lt;br/&gt;management strategies on numerous
Pacific islands. The results of this work will be &lt;br/&gt;disseminated
regionally as well as in the scientific literature. &lt;br/&gt;