* 0221256
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Territory Identity and Geopolitical Visions of Russians
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* John O'Loughlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 01/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

This research examines the geopolitical perceptions of Russian citizens and how
these perceptions are tied to their collective sense of national identity and
Russia's sphere of influence. While much is known about the geopolitical
attitudes and ideologies of Russian elites, less is known about the views of
ordinary Russians. Entirely absent from the literature is the "meta-geography"
or the regional and global mental maps of ordinary Russians. This doctoral
dissertation research project will map the perceptual geography of Russians in
order to understand how they regard and conceive of the Russian geopolitical
spheres and how these territorial domains relate to their perceptions of Russian
national identity. A large, representative, nation-wide survey (sample size of
1200) conducted across Russia in 202 sampling points will gauge opinions on
various geopolitical and national issues, as well as measure socio-demographic
characteristics of the respondents. Using regression analysis, the survey data
will be used to account for the variation in nationalist beliefs and
geopolitical mental maps. Because the sample is large, comparison of the mental
maps of national groups in Russia, as well as difference by ideology, gender,
income, age, occupation, religion, education and region of residence, can be
carried out. It is expected that Russian citizens will have varying perceptions
and conceptions of territory that parallel those of Russian elites, but they
will have a more practical sense of the importance of territorial/national
issues and the limitations of Russia in the framework of the difficult economic
transition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research
seeks to make an impact on four broad areas of research. First, it expands the
use of mental mapping within political geography beyond textual analysis or
small sampling of particular groups. By expanding the use of cognitive mapping
techniques to large groups of ordinary citizens, this research will provide a
framework for future work using mental maps beyond this research's focus on
Russian nationalism and geopolitics. Second, this research engages the gaps and
similarities between ordinary Russians and Russian elites on contemporary
political matters and attitudes. The geopolitical conceptions and territorial
perceptions of Russians has not been examined thoroughly and in a democratizing
society, these attitudes increasingly matter. Third, the new geopolitical
relationship between Russia and the West in the post-September 11th world
depends on the popular support of the Putin Administration's rapprochement with
the US. This study will indicate if the new pro-West positioning matches the
beliefs of the average Russian. Fourth, the strength of ordinary Russians'
feelings towards the Russian near abroad (the countries of the former Soviet
Union) is necessary for understanding the long-term prospects of Russian-U.S.
cooperation or potential conflict in Eurasia, particularly in the Trans-Caucasus
region and in Central Asia. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;