* 0221587
* SGER:  Biocomplexity associated with controls of sensitivity and stability in tundra systems over decadal time scales.
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Patrick Webber, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 03/31/2005
* USD 98,878.00

A 5-day symposium will be convened to explore how biocomplexity controls the
sensitivity and stability of tundra systems over decadal time scales. Experts in
the field will be invited to give keynote presentations and participate in
appraising existing knowledge and prepare a science plan to identify avenues of
research examining the complexity, function and dynamics of tundra systems. Five
themes and primary questions related to climate and the tundra will be addressed
across multiple spatial and temporal scales. This includes drivers of change;
patterns of change; sensitivity to change; responses to change; and implication
of change. This symposium will bring together scientists involved in the North
American tundra Experiment (NATEX) that is part of a larger network of
scientists known as the International Tundra Experiment (ITEX). The ARCSS
program supports ITEX work as part of the Land-Atmosphere-Ice Interactions
(LAII) component. To enhance international and student participation, real time
video web casting and teleconferencing will take place. These broadcasts will be
forwarded to the Joint Office of Scientific Support for ultimate inclusion in
the ARCSS Data Coordination Center. A synthesis report will be prepared and
circulated. Key personnel identified during the symposium will draft a science
plan similar to the LAII science plan and will include an outline for
biocomplexity related research in Arctic terrestrial systems. A manuscript for
publication in an appropriate internationally recognized journal is planned.