* 0221267
* Uncultivated microorganisms and their domestication
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Slava Epstein, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2006
* USD 596,336.00

This research focuses on marine uncultivable microorganisms. The uncultivables
represent one of the largest reservoirs of biological diversity in the ocean.
The project will answer the following two questions: 1) what is the nature of
uncultivability and why do the uncultivables not grow in the laboratory? and 2)
how to change this and domesticate the uncultivables? Answering these questions
is the long-term aim of the research and this project is a contribution towards
this goal. With support from an NSF SGER, the PIs developed a novel approach for
growing uncultivable microorganisms in pure culture in situ. The current
research builds on these results and has the following objectives: Objective 1:
to resolve the nature of uncultivability in selected microorganisms. Using their
new technique, they isolated individual members of several consortia in pure
culture in situ, and maintained their co-cultures in vitro. Using an array of
fine chemical tools, the PIs plan to resolve the chemical nature of the
interactions within these microbial synergisms. The PIs have designed the
chemical analyses such that the objective will be achieved whether these
microbial interactions are based on cross-feeding, removal of inhibitors,
signaling, or other kinds of chemical exchange. Objective 2: to domesticate
selected uncultivable microorganisms. Once the PIs have resolved the nature of
chemical interactions between the members of microbial consortia, they plan to
chemically mimic the presence of synergistic partners in Petri dish. The
domestication process may prove highly specific to each microbe, or it may be
applicable across a wider range of different microorganisms. Objective 3: to
initiate a new culture collection of previously uncultivable microorganisms. The
PIs see the detailed study of these "uncultivable" microorganisms as their long-
term goal and, at this point, plan to make use of the newly isolated strains by
building a new collection of novel microorganisms. The PIs plan to make this
collection open to everyone so that their characterization will proceed in a
timely manner. Broader impact of this research includes training of two graduate
students, involvement of undergraduate students through work-study and honors
programs, and data dissemination to the public at large through meetings with
local residents.