* 0221838
* BE/CBC: The Jasper Ridge Global Change Experiment: Biocomplexity in Ecosystem Responses to Long-Term Environmental Changes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Christopher Field, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,900,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Jasper Ridge Global Change Experiment:
Biocomplexity in Ecosystem Responses To Long-Term Environmental
Changes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed here utilizes annual
grassland as a model system to test four hypotheses concerning the regulation of
the cycles of carbon, nitrogen, and water in response to global change.
Specifically, the PIs will explore the mechanisms through which (1) plant
physiology and species dynamics alter cycles of C, N, and H2O, (2) levels and
dynamics of C, N, and H2O regulate plant species composition, (3) microorganisms
control short-term and long-term N availability, and (4) plant chemical
composition regulates structure and function of the soil microbial community.
Together, these hypotheses dissect the complex web of feedbacks linking
biogeochemical cycles and ecological dynamics. The research builds on the
infrastructure and ongoing operations of the Jasper Ridge Global Change
Experiment, a multi-factor, ecosystem-scale manipulation. The manipulations were
initiated in 1998 with NSF support and are now supported by the Packard
Foundation. They include two levels of temperature, two of CO2, two of N
deposition, and two of precipitation, with single-factor manipulations as well
as all of the possible 2-way, 3-way, and 4-way
combinations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team includes biogeochemists,
ecophysiologists, population biologists, and microbial ecologists. The project
will explore interactions between biogeochemical cycles and species dynamics
across a range of time scales, from short-term physiological changes, through
changes in species composition that unfold over several generations, to slow
feedbacks from changes in soil stocks of C and N. The experiment's large array
of treatments, plots that contain thousands of individuals of the dominant
plants, and duration of several generations of the key species, provides a
unique framework for addressing specific questions about biogeochemical
responses to realistic global changes as well as fundamental questions about
controls on major biogeochemical cycles. A modeling framework will be used that
combines biogeochemistry, species changes, and species effects on
biogeochemistry for synthesizing results across the project and integrating
those results in the broader fabric of global-change research. This experiment
is intended as a model system, where ease of manipulation and rapid responses
can facilitate testing mechanistic hypotheses and establishing a framework for
generalizing underlying principles to other ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will have a range of broader
impacts. Jasper Ridge provides a core for diverse projects led by students as
well as independently funded researchers. Located on university campus in a
major urban area, the project is highly visible and widely integrated in
Stanford classes as well as organized activities for K-12 students and the
general public. It is an effective tool for communicating the nature of global
changes, the diversity of their impacts, and the potential of biogeochemistry
research. With the funding requested here, we will focus on increasing
opportunities for secondary students, with an organized curriculum and
internships.&lt;br/&gt;