* 0221651
* IGERT:  Multidisciplinary Graduate Progrqam in Biotechnology
* EHR,DGE
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2008
* Mary Wirth, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 11/30/2008
* USD 3,424,080.00

Research on protein structure, function and assembly is an inherently
multidisciplinary enterprise that is also driving rapid change and growth across
many types of companies. The goal of this IGERT program is to create a new model
for graduate education to prepare students for this evolving world. In this new
model, students will learn how to pool the knowledge of different scientific,
engineering and business disciplines, and different socially diverse groups to
achieve creative and productive research collaborations. Students will
understand their research in a larger perspective to include its impact on
academic, industrial, and social environments. The program will include science
and engineering doctoral students and MBA students of twenty-four University of
Delaware faculty from four Colleges and seven Departments. The program is
supported by a diverse local biotechnology industry from incubating start-ups to
large global companies. It links these research groups to form a network of
university and industrial collaborators having complementary expertise. The
research projects are collaborative across disciplines and are synergistic,
spanning topics that include living cells, new tools, and synthetic materials.
The educational program augments a strong academic experience by incorporating
the additional features of workforce skills, career guidance, and collaboration
between business and technical students. A new course, "Multidisciplinary
Teamwork in Research", is introduced that includes scientists, engineers, and
MBA students. This course brings industrial speakers into the classroom to
discuss unmet challenges that need to be addressed by research, and brings in
social scientists to train students in teamwork and diversity. The course
includes training in writing and oral presentations, and experience in working
creatively on problems in teams that include science, engineering and business
students. The educational program also features laboratory experience in other
departments, industrial internships, attending conferences, presenting posters,
an industrial mentoring program, participation of minority undergraduate
researchers, and lectures and seminars on ethics. The IGERT program will be the
subject of a doctoral dissertation by a social scientist to provide detailed
assessment and dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program
intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers
with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and
personal skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is
intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing
innovative new models for graduate education and training in a fertile
environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary
boundaries. In the fifth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-
one institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of science and
engineering supported&lt;br/&gt;