* 0221704
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Terahertz and Infrared Studies of 6.1-Angstrom Semiconductor Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Junichiro Kono, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 07/31/2006
* USD 50,000.00

0221704&lt;br/&gt;Kono&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a two-year
collaborative research project between Professor Junichiro Kono at Rice
University in Houston, Texas and Professor Noboru Miura at the University of
Tokyo in Japan. The researchers will undertake studies on structures fabricated
from the 6 Angstrom III-V semiconductors. Their goal is to increase the
fundamental understanding of these quantum structures. They will be undertaking
magneto-optic studies in very high (up to 600 T) magnetic fields at Rice
University and carrying out additional experiments utilizing the Free Electron
Lasers at the University of California at Santa Barbara and at Stanford. They
will also be performing ultrahigh field magneto-optics experiments at the
Megagauss Laboratory (MGL) in Tokyo. This is a unique high field facility where
different types of high-field magnets are available. Finally, theoretical
efforts at understanding and interpreting the spectroscopy experiments will be
provided by some of the researchers that have expertise in optical, transport,
and electronic properties of bulk and quantum confined semiconductors and
devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the efforts of two
laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The
U.S. researchers have expertise in optical spectroscopy of semiconductors, THz
dynamics of semiconductors using free electron lasers and theoretical input. The
Japanese researchers have expertise in the growth of magnetic structures,
knowledge of electronic and optoelectronic devices, growth of mesoscopic
structures, high-speed electron transport and optical properties and devices.
&lt;br/&gt;It is likely that some of the interesting properties/phenomena
learned in these systems will be used in future semi-conducting devices. The
research will offer a good opportunity to join efforts between the two
countries. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
cooperation. A number of postdocs, graduate students and undergraduate students
from the participating institutions will also be participating in the research.
The researchers plan to distribute the results of their findings through the
Web, publications and presentations at conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;