* 0221993
* Synthetic Routes to Main-Group Inorganic Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2006
* John Kouvetakis, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/2006
* USD 410,709.00

This project focuses on the synthesis of novel solid-state inorganic materials,
including epitaxial growth of device-quality thin-film heterostructures and
nanostructures. These materials will have applications in microelectronics,
optoelectronics, and refractory ceramics. A unique aspect of this effort in
materials design and synthesis is the ability to build in precise atomic
arrangements primarily via molecular chemistry so as to overcome thermodynamic
impediments arising from differences in atomic sizes, electronic level filling
and electronegativities of constituent atoms and thereby form new and metastable
materials that cannot be obtained by conventional routes. The range of target
materials includes: (a) New semiconductors in the C-Si-Ge-Sn system, which are
intended for integration of Si-based microelectronics with optical components;
(b) Quaternary wide bandgap optical materials based on covalent carbides and
nitrides of the main group; (c) Si based superhard dielectric materials and
diamond-like compounds comprising light elements. The electronic structure, band
structure, optical, dielectric, mechanical and structural properties of these
materials are thoroughly investigated by experimental as well as theoretical
methods. The work is well suited to provide broad preparation and state-of-the-
art skills to undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral student researchers in
synthetic solid-state chemistry and materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research has significant potential for high impact in important areas of
national interest including areas such as new optical, semiconducting, and
superhard/ultrastrong materials, which are of interest to microelectronics and
defense industries. The research provides fundamental knowledge in novel device
chemistry and physics, and thus makes important contributions to emerging and
future technologies such as, high-speed computers, full color displays and
communication and detection systems. In addition to significant research and
technological accomplishments which include US and international patents, the
work provides graduate and postdoctoral training to new generations of
scientists and engineers in the preparation and processing of new materials and
in the art of chemical vapor deposition, which is a vital field in the
microelectronics industry. Collaborations are ongoing with local industries to
develop materials for use in silicon-based high-speed electronic devices as well
as new generations of solid-state lighting systems that are energy efficient and
environmentally safe. The group maintains international collaborations and
outreach with researchers in Germany, Norway, Mexico, and the Czech
Republic.&lt;br/&gt;