* 0221324
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Fire Breaks: Conservation Planning, Place Making, and Fractured Identities in the Gran Sabana, Venezuela
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Garth Myers, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 01/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Because tropical forest fires are a threat to global biodiversity, developing
nations are implementing increasingly aggressive fire-suppression policies. Such
management policies tend to reveal ignorance of indigenous fire-management
strategies, such as those practiced by the Pemon in the Gran Sabana of
Venezuela. As a result of state fire-suppression policies, the Gran Sabana now
appears to have "contradictory" patterns of fire, with too much burning in the
"wrong" places, in particular near permanent communities. At the same time, fire
suppression combined with political-economic pressures and acculturation
processes has led to a decline in traditional, prescriptive burning in
forest/savanna boundaries. This decrease in burning in the "right" places may
ultimately lead to excessive fuel accumulations and contribute to damaging fire
events. To assess whether fire patterns in the Gran Sabana in fact are
"contradictory," this doctoral dissertation research project will use
participatory mapping and fuelbed, remote sensing, and statistical analysis to
evaluate changes in fuel levels in the grasslands along riverine forests in the
upper Rio Caroni river basin since roughly 1980. To assess the political-
economic and cultural reasons for these contradictory fire patterns, the
doctoral student will employ ethnographic methods and reviews of state documents
to uncover changes in indigenous and state practices, knowledge, and
representations of fire since roughly 1950. The project will integrate these
biogeographical, technical, and ethnographic methods into a theoretical
framework that draws from post-structural political ecology, landscape theory,
and the work of social theorist Henri Lefebvre, and it will provide important
primary data on fire patterns in savanna/forest boundaries in southeastern
Venezuela.

On a broader level, this study will contribute to the literature on social
forestry, in particular to the emerging research on culturally sensitive and
participatory forest fire management. Although such participatory practices show
great promise for biodiversity conservation, tropical fire management in
Venezuela and elsewhere continues to rely on traditional, technical methods.
This conservatism is often inherent in the "institutional cultures" of state
agencies, which may be influenced by social and political-economic imperatives,
long-held notions of the inadequacy of indigenous knowledge, and erroneous but
powerful ideas about the inherent danger of any sort of forest fire. At the same
time, indigenous people may respond in contradictory and often unexpected ways
to socially insensitive fire suppression policies, depending on particular
social contexts and cultural processes. In the case of the Gran Sabana, some
young Pemon now burn more in the "wrong" places to protest state policies, while
many elders have abandoned prescriptive burning practices (such as in
forest/savanna boundaries). Other elders, bowing to pressures from state
agencies, neglect to teach their children appropriate uses of fire, which
occasionally leads community members to mistakenly start large dry season fires.
Ultimately, the case of the Gran Sabana suggests that fire management is not
simply a technical issue but also a social, cultural, and political problem that
can not be solved through fire-suppression strategies alone. This study will
advance understanding of the intricate cultural, social factors, and political-
economic pressures and tensions that lead to contradictory and often destructive
burning practices. It therefore will make a fundamental contribution to
biodiversity conservation and indigenous rights in tropical forest regions. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.