* 0221390
* Doctoral Dissertation  Research: Credentials and Markets: An Inquiry into the Structure of Practice
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Charles Bidwell, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2003
* USD 4,480.00

ES-0221390&lt;br/&gt;Charles Bidwell&lt;br/&gt;Robert
Petrin&lt;br/&gt;University of Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Doctoral Dissertation Improvement project examines ways in which post-secondary
educational institutions (PSEIs) contribute to stratification of technical
personnel in the contemporary American economy. Among the specific questions it
seeks to address are: (1) do PSEIs that science and engineering graduates attend
have pervasive effects on subsequent occupational outcomes, and (2) does the
functional differentiation among science and engineering graduates reflect
differences in their social backgrounds and the regional clustering of
technologies and industries. In order to shed light on these questions this
research will develop a framework for embedding post secondary educational
institutions in labor market analyses by providing a description of labor
markets and career structures segmented by relations between PSEIs and
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several post-industrial trends have led to the re-
evaluation of structuralist concepts from economics and sociology and
contributed to a resurgent interest in theories of labor market segmentation.
The role of regions and education in science and engineering suggests that PSEIs
might play a role in structuring labor markets. Indeed, prior research on
science and engineering has found that rewards in technical subsystems are often
products of institutions' positions in networks of information and resource
exchanges. Therefore, in the proposed research the structure of science and
engineering practice is posited as manifest, at the individual-level, in the
distribution of individuals from various social backgrounds and with various
educational credentials across fields and functional roles in the economy. At
the college and university-level, the structure of practice is believed to be
manifest in enduring relationships between PSEIs and other key actors in their
environments which shape the opportunities available to graduates over the
course of their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary data for this research
will be drawn from selected national data on college graduates collected by the
Nations Science Foundation (i.e., Scientists and Engineers Statistical Data
System and Survey of Earned Doctorates). These data will be matched to a number
of other sources to generate a composite data set linking science and
engineering graduates to relevant information on the PSEIs they attended, as
well as economic data on regional and sectoral conditions believed to be
correlated with labor market processes. Since employer characteristics play
important roles in determining returns to education, it will be necessary to
collect and include these types of supplementary data in analysis, as well as
data on PSEIs' relationships with key actors in their environments. Analysis
will consist of two major phases. The first will provide a description of PSEIs'
positions in labor markets. The second will examine individuals' functional
roles in the economy as correlates of their socioeconomic background and
characteristics of their degree granting institutions. Career trajectories will
be similarly analyzed using appropriate methods for multicohort
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;