* 0221369
* Studies of Circumpolar Currents
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* John Marshall, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2006
* USD 564,383.00

0221369 Marshall Simple theoretical models of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current
(ACC) will developed and applied to further our understanding of this central
component of the global ocean circulation. The formalism of the residual mean
will be exploited in an attempt to develop a theory for the stratification and
overturning circulation of the ACC and how it depends on eddy transfer processes
and the patterns of wind and air-sea flux acting at its surface. Specifically,
solutions of the zonal-average residual mean problem will be fully explored to
investigate processes that control the pattern of meridional overturning and
interior stratification of the ACC. Those solutions will then be extended to
3-dimensions to explore the role of regional patterns of air-sea interaction and
topographic interaction on ACC dynamics: this will be done by numerical solution
of the residual mean equations in 3-dimensions. Finally, the theoretical model
will diagnosed in terms of more realistic models and observations. The
intellectual thrust of the proposal is that it addresses issues that are
fundamental to our understanding of the general circulation of the ocean: the
role and representation of the ocean's geostrophic eddy field in shaping the
large-scale circulation of the ACC. It seeks to develop a simple conceptual
framework that, if successful, could provide a reference point for observation
and models of circumpolar flow. The study has the potential for broad impact
because the ACC is a system of great importance to the global ocean and to
global climate, is thought to be major player in glacial-interglacial cycles,
uptake of anthropogenic CO2 and global biogeochemical cycles.

