* 0221246
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Fission and Fusion: Amerindian Environmental Politics and Resource Justice in Guyana
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2003
* Claudia Carr, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2003
* USD 11,540.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will utilize a political ecology
framework to investigate the relationship between domestic racial conflicts,
industrial and conservation globalization, and Amerindian political
differentiation in Guyana. New mining, timber, and conservation development
pressures are the basis for multiple legal and political actions of Amerindian
organizations. In contrast to unified federations and ethnic based politics,
however, the panoply of resource conflicts in Guyana has not catalyzed political
unity among Amerindians thus far. The richness in this movement's
diversification provokes a reconsideration of important meta-questions in
debates of human and environmental change: What is the relationship between land
and ethnicity? How do histories of environmental uncertainty affect the modes of
social movements? What is the connection between environmental changes and
political space that restricts ethnic discourses? Has the practice of
development and conservation become more accountable to indigenous communities?
In pursuit of the idea that different community histories of economic security
and resource access since liberalization are the primary variables affecting
political activity and organization, fieldwork will be conducted in the capital
of Georgetown and two Amerindian regions in the interior. A blend of qualitative
research methods drawing on archival documents, interviews, participant
observation, and legal case analysis will be employed. The research findings
will illuminate complex community associations that intersect contours of ethnic
boundaries within the Amerindian movement of Guyana, perhaps reflecting more
critical alliances based on specific histories of ecological change and economic
security.

This doctoral dissertation research will engage a variety of literature,
including studies in political ecology, accountability in international
development, the political economy of the Caribbean, and social movements of
indigenous peoples and other marginalized groups. This research most
distinguishes itself, however, from those cases and studies that collapse
environmental crises with homogeneous ethnic politics. The research will reveal
some general constraints and opportunities of alternative indigenous political
strategies and approaches to survival, potentially illuminating unusual tactics
for engaging the development-conservation nexus. It will also be a challenging
discourse to dominant resource management agencies, international NGOs, and
development institutions. As such, this research on the context of Amerindian
politics in Guyana will also inform other marginal groups experiencing similar
ecological, social, and economic marginalization in other countries. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.