* 0221207
* US-Africa Workshop:  Achieving Public Understanding of Research in Developing Countries, Cape Town, South Africa, December 2002
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Bruce Lewenstein, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 07/31/2005
* USD 84,000.00

0221207&lt;br/&gt;Lewenstein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a total of
37 participants from the United States, South and East Asia, and the Americas in
a US-Africa Workshop on "Achieving Public Understanding of Science in Developing
Countries," scheduled for December 5-9, 2002, in Cape Town, South Africa. There
will be a total of approximately 60 participants, which will also include
attendees from Europe and Australia. A special effort has been made to include
participants from developing countries throughout the world. The co-organizers
are Professor Bruce Lewenstein, with the Department of Communication at Cornell
University, and Ms. Marina Joubert, with the Department of Science Communication
at the Foundation for Education, Science, and Technology (FEST), Pretoria South
Africa. The workshop participants will explore issues on the public
understanding of science, and build networks and collaborations that can lead to
innovative projects and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The meeting will bring
together knowledgeable practitioners of public communication of science and
technology, scholars, and scientists. They reflect a great diversity of
expertise, with some coming from the electronic or print media fields, while
others are experienced in presenting research to the public. The meeting will
explore two cross-cutting issues: 1) the difference between public understanding
of science and public understanding of research, and 2) the differences between
a traditional deficit model of science communication and newer contextual, lay
knowledge/expertise, and participation models of science communication. Prior to
the workshop each participant will produce an "op-ed piece" about the challenges
and opportunities for achieving public understanding of science in developing
countries. These position statements will be circulated to all participants in
preparation for discussion during the meeting. As an outcome of the workshop a
guide will be produced for use in the development of a "Southern African Science
Communication Network." Results will be disseminated through professional
journals and via a web site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project supports the
participation of two junior investigators from the United States, and one from
Nigeria. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of International Science and
Engineering, the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, and the Division
of Social and Economic Sciences jointly support this award.&lt;br/&gt;