* 0221563
* Developmental Functions of SNR1 and the BRM Chromatin Remodeling Complex in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Andrew Dingwall, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 07/31/2004
* USD 230,000.00

A fundamental challenge among all multicellular eukaryotes is coordinating the
expression of critically important genes in different cells throughout
development to produce a fully functional adult. This coordination is
accomplished by short-range inductive signals between cells that rely on
diffusible peptides and/or direct cell contacts to initiate intracellular
signaling cascades that ultimately influence the expression of specific target
genes. Chromatin has emerged as one of the primary obstacles with which the
cell's transcription and replication machinery must contend. Factors necessary
to transcribe or replicate DNA must gain access to regulatory sites that are
packaged into nucleosomes and higher order structures. This is especially
problematic when cells are in mitosis and chromatin is extremely condensed.
Energy dependent chromatin remodeling complexes have evolved to locally
decondense regions to assist in factor binding. The best studied of these
complexes is the highly conserved SWI/SNF complex, found in yeast, flies and
mammals, that is required for the activation of many, but not all genes. These
complexes are very large (~2-MDa) and are composed of 8-11 polypeptides. Recent
work with the purified yeast and mammalian complexes has elucidated many of the
biochemical properties involved in chromatin remodeling; though many aspects
regarding the in vivo biological functions are unclear. For example, while only
one subunit has any identified catalytic activity, the remaining subunits are
necessary for full in vivo function, modulating the complex activities or
targeting it to specific genes or processes. Significant questions remain, such
as why so many subunits and how do they individually contribute to the functions
of the complex? Do any of the subunits have roles independent of the complex?
Also, the complex appears to influence gene regulation both positively and
negatively (activation and repression). How is this accomplished and is the
regulation direct or indirect? What are the in vivo targets of the complex and
how are they selected? Drosophila offers an ideal system for examining these
questions, with the full array of genetic, biochemical and cell biological tools
available, including a completed genome sequence and a wealth of existing
mutations. Drosophila research also provides a detailed developmental framework
to bridge these disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes molecular, genetic
and biochemical analysis of the Drosophila SWI/SNF complex, known as the Brahma
(BRM) complex to address these questions. The efforts are focused on one of the
most highly conserved and critically important components, known as SNR1. This
subunit is crucial in both flies and humans for coordinating or targeting
specific protein interactions between the complex and a variety of transcription
factors and cell cycle regulatory proteins. A recently isolated temperature
sensitive snr1 mutant allows for conditional removal of snr1 function, and the
project takes full advantage of this property to fully characterize the
biological requirements for SNR1 during development. This is especially
important as the snr1 gene is essential in flies and loss of its human
counterpart has been strongly correlated with aggressive childhood cancers. In
addition to genetic and biochemical studies, DNA microarray analyses using RNA
isolated from homozygous mutants at the restrictive temperature will be used to
gain a much needed view of the range of targets of the complex in higher
eukaryotes, setting the stage for a full investigation of how those targets are
selected and regulated in developing tissues. The broader impact of the research
is that, through the use of a conditional mutation that is unique among the
metazoan SWI/SNF complexes, the biological significance of chromatin remodeling
in developmental processes can be better defined by examining in detail when and
where the complex is required, and for what functions.