* 0221516
* A Modeling Study of the Intrinsic Variability of the Gulf-Stream and Kuroshio Extension Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Francois Primeau, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2007
* USD 376,832.00

0221516 Primeau&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to test the hypothesis
that the observed variability is a manifestation of intrinsic variability
associated with the transitions between multiple equilibria. To do this the
investigators will apply the recently developed methods of numerical bifurcation
analysis to a hierarchy of ocean models with increasing realism to compute the
solution branches found in the simpler model. The following clear criteria will
be tested. If they are not met, the hypothesis must be rejected. &lt;br/&gt;1.
The equilibria with elongated recirculation gyres should be relatively less
unstable than the equilibria with elongated gyres to be consistent with the
observation that eddy activity decreases during periods of elongated gyres
&lt;br/&gt;2. The unstable modes associated with elongated recirculation gyres
should have amplitude patterns that dominate in the downstream region of the
jet, and those for the contracted recirculation gyres should have amplitude
patterns that dominate in the upstream region, to be consistent with the
observation that the eddy variability moves downstream during elongated
states.&lt;br/&gt;3. The mean zonal path of the jet extension should be further
north for equilibria with elongated recirculation gyres to be consistent with
the observation that the zonal mean path of the Gulf Stream and Kuroshio
Extension moves northward during elongated states.&lt;br/&gt;Through this study
a Ph.D. student will be trained in ocean modeling and in the application of
dynamical systems theory to climate problems. In addition a software package to
do numerical bifurcation analysis of ocean models will be produced and made
available to the community. The possibility that the observed large-scale
patterns of low-frequency variability are the result of intrinsic variability is
an exciting one because observations show that these current changes are
signi?cant contributors to the maintenance sea surface temperature anomalies and
thus could contribute to mid-latitude climate variability.&lt;br/&gt;