* 0221254
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultivation and Conservation: Exploring Pattern and the Potential for Coexistence in Northern Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Paul Leslie, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

In many parts of the developing world, societies that traditionally engaged in
pastoralism, small-field farming, and other livelihoods that had relatively
minor impacts on the natural environment have been adopting more modern forms of
economic activity, often with more profound impacts on natural systems. With
these changes, the need has grown to better understand how biodiversity and
other qualities of the natural environment can be maintained in landscapes being
impacted more significantly by humans. This Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement project will investigate the interplay between cultivation and
conservation along one of the most important remaining wildlife corridors in
Northern Tanzania's Tarangire Region. These corridors are used by several large
species to reach fertile rainy season pastures east of Tarangire National Park.
The region is also undergoing social and land-use change as pastoral Maasai
adopt cultivation and engage in mixed farming methods. It is hypothesized that
constraints to production vary across both the social and physical landscapes.
The research will determine which constraints most strongly impact cultivation
decisions, the relationships between landscape structure and agricultural change
in the corridor area, and the way that changing land use alters vegetation
composition and habitat structure. Responses to constraints may impact long term
sustainability and resilience by reducing effort to counteract other constraints
to higher yields. Changes will be reflected spatially in the pattern of species
composition and in the temporal pattern of field establishment, fallowing, and
abandonment. Methodologies from the natural and social sciences will be used
within a landscape ecology framework. Participant observation and social surveys
will be used to understand food production strategies of Maasai. A cluster
sampling design using the boma (a group of households that live as a unit,
sharing herding and sometimes cultivation decisions) will be used to interview
households. Constraints to cultivation will be measured through survey of crop
losses to predation, disease, and drought as well as soil analysis. Vegetation
sampling will examine the physical impact of cultivation across the landscape,
verifying verbal responses. The vegetation of a nearby village with a less
developed cultivation system will also be surveyed and both will be compared to
available surveys from the 1970s. This village will provide a baseline for water
table and climate driven changes in vegetation
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide valuable insights
into the processes through which natural systems are impacted by human activity
as well as the processes through which people experiencing change monitor and
respond to environmental change. These insights will have significant utility
both for academic discourse and for land and resource managers in this region
and elsewhere. The broader impacts of the research include contributing to
knowledge of how pastoralists diversify their economies, while adding ecological
data to the impact of changes on natural resources. This research will also
enhance the integration of social and natural science data within the context of
landscape ecology. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;