* 0221453
* Collaborative Research: Beyond BGP: Flexible and Scalable Interdomain Routing (BGGP)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Lixia Zhang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Wu
* 09/30/2007
* USD 600,000.00

Interdomain routing performs the critical function of gluing together individual
pieces of the Internet topology to create a connected data delivery
infrastructure. Today this critical function is performed by the Border Gateway
Protocol (BGP) [rfc1771] which establishes reachability information among
Autonomous Systems (ASes). However despite its importance, current measurements
and analysis have not led to a basic understanding of BGP's dynamics,
performance under stress, fundamental weaknesses, and potential breaking points
(if any). Although a few data collection points have been set up in the last few
years &lt;br/&gt;[ipe,routeviews], the routing data collected by these
measurement points are mixed with measurement artifacts [ftntalk], thus the data
do not necessarily reflect the protocol's behavior in actual operation.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order for the Internet to continue its unprecedented
growth, the interdomain routing protocol must continue to evolve to meet ever
increasing and sometimes contradictory requirements. There is a general belief
that the current BGP routing protocol may be unable to meet its new requirements
(for instance, accomodating the sharp increase in use of site multi-homing,
which keeps routing tables from optimally small sizes[huston:scale:2001]). BGP
is generally thought to be reaching the end of its useful lifetime, although
this has not been validated by analysis or measurements
[nimrod,irtfrr,huitema:ipng,huston:scale:2001]. Due to the lack of a shared
understanding of the problem and lack of sufficient data and analysis, there is
no consensus on where/when BGP collapses and what (if anything) should be done.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To address the above critical questions facing
interdomain routing, the researchres have assembled a team with research and
operational experience, and expertise in network protocols, algorithms, modeling
and analysis. The resarchers have identified the following fundamental technical
requirements that the global routing must meet: it must scale in order to handle
the growth (both in the number of users and in the richness of connectivity);
security and resilience are critical issues, so it must continue to function in
face of ever increasing faults and attacks; it must be able to fully utilize the
rich Internet connectivity; and it must both allow network operators to apply
various policy constraints and implementors to easily extend the protocol's
functionality when needed. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Based on the above criteria
the researchers propose to tackle the challenge with the following 3 steps. (1)
Develop measurement methodologies and collect data necessary to understand the
current BGP operation, its overhead, dynamics under stress, potential
vulnerabilities, inadequacies in functionality. The research will base this
measurement effort on precise requirements that is identiied as lacking in
existing data, such as for the data not to be collected over vulnerable multihop
links [ftntalk]. A new effort at University of Oregon, separate from this
proposal, is the measurement companion, if funded. (2) Guided by our measurement
and analysis, evaluate several proposed design approaches, including meeting the
requirements by tinkering with BGP, by a NIMROD-like [nimrod] maps-approach, by
two different approaches to handling multihoming scalability, and by a Clean
Slate approach of a complete BGP replacement. Each of these approaches
emphasizes different aspects of the interdomain routing problem. The researchers
believe there are fundamental trade-offs between many of the desired technical
requirements and that these trade-offs are currently not well understood. The
combination of measurement and rigorous analysis with a team including
operations expertise will bring these trade-offs into clear view. (3) Based on
the data analysis and design evaluations the researchers will produce a final
approach as the recommendation for moving forward. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Through iterations of the above steps, the proposed research
undertaking is expected to produce new understanding of current interdomain
routing operations, their dynamics and resilience (or lack of it), and
vulnerabilities; a new analysis will also be produced that draws on direct and
intensive measurement and operations knowledge to capture the fundamental trade-
offs among interdomain routing requirements; and a conclusion will be reached on
how to meet the future Internet's interdomain routing needs.