* 0221611
* IGERT:  Institutions, Diversity, Emergence, Adaptations and Structures (IDEAS)
* EDU,DGE
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2011
* Michael Cohen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Boone
* 11/30/2011
* USD 3,263,969.00

The University of Michigan and The Santa Fe Institute, two leading institutions
in the study of complex adaptive systems, are jointly organizing and supporting
an IGERT graduate program for social scientists interested in institutional
performance and design. The analytic core of the curricula borrows from multiple
disciplines: economics, political science, computer science, physics, and
sociology. The emphasis will be on how collections of diverse agents behave and
adapt when their interactions are structured by formal and informal
institutional constraints. Student researchers will study how formal
institutions adapt and respond, how informal institutions emerge, how the
structure of relationships between and within institutions affects performance
and robustness, and when and how cultural, social, economic and behavioral
diversity matter for institutions. The program will be housed at the University
of Michigan but students will have the opportunity to visit the Santa Fe
Institute for a semester. The IDEAS IGERT will enable students to become active
members in the social science research communities at both institutions through
seminars, research assistantships, interdisciplinary courses, and interactions
with faculty. IDEAS students will also take courses and attend seminars with
students enrolled in STIET (another NSF sponsored IGERT at
UM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
the fifth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions
for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering
supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;