* 0221625
* IGERT:  Predoctoral Training in Functional Genomics of Model Organisms
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2011
* Barbara Knowles, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Richard Boone
* 11/30/2011
* USD 3,135,321.00

The objective of this IGERT project is to initiate an interdisciplinary, inter-
institutional degree program in Functional Genomics of Model Organisms supported
by an interactive faculty from the University of Maine, the Jackson Laboratory,
and the Maine Medical Center Research Institute. The major challenge for
biological and biomedical research for the foreseeable future is to understand
how the information encoded within a genome determines the development and
functioning of a living organism. To move from the level of DNA sequence to an
understanding of the molecular interplay producing the final traits of an
individual will require a continuum of experimental approaches ranging from
experimental genomics, molecular biology, and novel biophysical methodologies,
to advanced data screening schemes and computational techniques. Traditional
alignments of the biologically based disciplines will be insufficient to solve
the complex problems associated with functional genomics. Genome projects,
regardless of the organism, will rely increasingly on the physical and
computational sciences. The increased need for interdisciplinary research will
require scientists trained to work interactively in multiple disciplines. This
program introduces a new educational paradigm, developed to train students to
move freely among the disciplines needed to investigate genome function.
Students receive training in the biological, physical and computational sciences
through a combination of core and advanced courses, intensive workshops, and
research seminars. Emphasis is placed on a high-quality research environment and
a tutorial relationship between the student and her/his mentors and program
committee. Central to the students' training in interdisciplinary research will
be the use of a paired mentoring system, a concept referred to as twinning. The
primary mentor plays a role similar to the traditional graduate advisor and
comes from the student's primary area of research. The secondary mentor comes
from a second discipline, and each student develops a research project dependent
upon interdisciplinary collaborations.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the program, awards
are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span
the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.