* 0221707
* Health Monitoring of Multi-Strand Steel Tendons and Cable Stays for Civil Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Frieder Seible, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/2006
* USD 180,000.00

PI: Francesco Lanza di Scalea&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Frieder Seible&lt;br/&gt;
University of California, San Diego&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
0221707&lt;br/&gt;Proposal title: Health Monitoring of Multi-Strand Steel
Tendons and Cable Stays for Civil Structures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monitoring the structural health of existing
constructed facilities is becoming an increasingly relevant aspect of
engineering. Structural health monitoring includes ensuring proper structural
performance and providing early detection of critical damage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at developing a health monitoring
method for multi-wire steel strand tendons and cable stays that are widely used
in civil structures such as cable-supported bridges and prestressed concrete
members. The ultimate purposes of the method are 1) real-time measurement of the
applied loads and 2) detection of critical damage including corrosion and broken
wires. The project will investigate the use of ultrasonic stress waves as
potential candidates to perform these tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intermediate
objectives of the research include: 1) the characterization of the dispersive
behavior (velocity/frequency relationship) of stress waves propagating in multi-
wire strands; 2) the perfection of a method for load measurement based on
monitoring the stress wave propagation velocities; 3) the assessment of the
sensitivity of stress waves to structural damage in the strands; 4) the
development of a method for correcting the effects of temperature on the
measurement of load. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of the proposed
activities will contribute to ensuring the safety of the Nation's critical civil
infrastructure components, such as bridges. Broader impacts of the project will
include educational aspects. A graduate student will be directly involved in all
of the research activities. An undergraduate assistant will also collaborate to
the project. The topics of structural health monitoring and non-destructive
evaluation have been recently included in the curriculum development of UCSD's
Structural Engineering department. Two courses on these topics are being
developed, one at the undergraduate level and the other at the graduate level.
Relevant findings resulting from the research activities will be incorporated
into the classroom lectures for these courses. Demonstrations on ultrasonic
measurements in strands will be given as part of the courses' programmed
laboratory sessions. &lt;br/&gt;