* 0221376
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Varves and Varve-Forming Processes in a High Arctic Lake
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Raymond Bradley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 02/29/2004
* USD 12,000.00

Paleoenvironmental reconstructions from high Arctic settings have been extremely
valuable sources of information for a range of purposes, but especially as
indices of climatic change, which is amplified at high latitudes. High Arctic
lakes have been sources of information for many paleoenvironmental
reconstructions because their watersheds and sediments usually are undistrurbed,
ice cover limits wind-driven disturbance, and they receive highly seasonal
sediment inputs. Glacial lake sediments from the high Arctic are particularly
useful, because annual to semiannual temperature resolution is possible and
sediment supplies usually are not limited. This doctoral dissertation research
project will study of how varves (distinct annual layers of sediments) form in
Arctic lakes. The project will examine the varves and varve-forming processes of
Lake Tuborg on Ellesmere Island in Nunavut, Canada. Lake Tuborg was formed when
ice advanced across the mouth of a fiord, creating a lake with seawater trapped
beneath freshwater. This has led to strong chemical and density stratification
of the water column and a lack of oxygen at the bottom of the lake. Burrowing
organisms therefore could not disturb the sediments that have been carried into
the lake by rivers and streams, allowing relatively undisturbed layers of
sediment to accumulate each year. The sediments have accumulated in this way for
more than 3,000 years, so the lake contains an unusually long, pristine record
of environmental change. The specific tasks of this project are to understand
the modern distribution and deposition of sediment by monitoring physical
processes in the lake and to elucidate spatial, temporal, physical and chemical
changes in recently deposited sediments (those deposited over the last century
or so). Physical processes will be recorded to monitor within lake conditions
and the movement of sediment. Concurrent measurements of air temperature and
precipitation will be made, and recent sedimentation will be analyzed with
networks of well-dated short gravity cores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
provide insight into the climatic significance of undisturbed sediments from
Lake Tuborg by providing a better understanding of the varve-forming process.
These analyses will improve understanding of past climate change at high
latitudes, thereby providing a framework for placing future changes in a long-
term context. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;