* 0221430
* First AMPATH International Conference: Valdivia, Chile: University of Kentucky Computational Support: April 10-12, 2002
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* John W.D. Connolly, University of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Greene
* 03/31/2003
* USD 53,141.00

The University of Kentucky will provide engineering and computational equipment
support to the AMPATH Project's First International Conference in Valdivia,
Chile, April 10-12, 2002. The main objective of the conference is to create an
environment for AMPATH participants in Latin America, potential participants and
those with a regional, hemispheric or international interest in the project to
exchange ideas, form new partnerships and solidify existing
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Kentucky had agreed to
lend AMPATH the technology required for this conference to be accessible via the
Access grid. The Grid node will be connected to the REUNA network, and through
this connection, to the UCAID Abilene network. Interested participants
worldwide, who are unable to attend personally, will be able to monitor the
conference from their own sites, using the Access grid
connection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference support offered by UK includes
shipping of the portable Access grid node, sending engineering staff to set up
and maintain the equipment, as well ad international airfare, meals and lodging
for the UK and AMPATH engineers, and the cost of the network connection to the
Abilene backbone. In addition, the University of Kentucky will receive
technology support from the University of Illinois at Chicago, which will send
equipment for its AGAVE (Access Grid Augmented Virtual Environment) system and
an engineer to maintain this equipment. The AGAVE system will connect to the
Access Grid using the University of Kentucky's node.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will continue the exploration of connectivity of research and education
networks between USA and South America.&lt;br/&gt;