* 0221979
* Reconstruction of the End Member Contributions to and Ventilation Rate of Glacial-Age Lower Atlantic Deep Water
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Wallace Broecker, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2005
* USD 228,564.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0221979&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reorganizations
of large-scale ocean circulation very likely triggered the large and abrupt
climate changes which punctuated the glacial world. Hence, as part of our
preparation to deal with the ongoing greenhouse gas buildup, we must learn as
much as possible regarding the nature of the ocean's alternate modes of
operation. This project is aimed toward doing just
this.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two paleo observations for the glacial deep Atlantic
fail to jibe. One is the difference between the 14 C to C ages for coexisting
benthic and planktonic foraminifera, which was greater than that for pre-
industrial time but still far less than that for the deep Pacific. This suggests
that the conveyor circulation was operating at a somewhat reduced but still
significant rate. The other is the tilt of density horizons across the Florida
Straits reconstructed from 18O measurements on benthic foraminifera which
suggest that the strength of conveyor circulation was far less than
today's.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the absence of a clear way to reconcile these
observations with one another and also with the nutrient content reconstructed
for glacial age lower deep water, researchers at the Lamont Dougherty Eart
Observatory of Columbia University will attempt to improve upon both the
paleonutrient reconstruction and the estimates of benthic-planktonic age
difference. To do so, they have identified 21 cores in the LDEO collection
forming a traverse sampling along the western flank of the Mid Atlantic Ridge
extending from 45'N to 45'S (water depth 3.6 + 0.4 km). They will establish the
stratigraphy in each core by 14C and 18O measurements on planktonic foraminifera
and also attempt to quantify the extent to which Holocene foraminifera have been
mixed downward into the late glacial section by analyzing single benthic
foraminifera for 18O. They will then do d18O, d13C, Cd, and Zn measurements on
benthic foraminifera, and neodymium isotope measurements on dispersed
ferromanganese coatings on fine silicate debris, in late glacial sections for
all cores. Additionally they will measure benthic-planktonic 14C age differences
on late glacial samples from the cores with the highest sedimentation rate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;