* 0221857
* Collaborative Research:  Bayesian and Likelihood Based Multilevel Models for Small Area Estimation
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Tapabrata Maiti, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2003
* USD 45,069.00

This research project focuses on Bayesian and likelihood based multilevel models
for small area estimation. These methods will be compared and contrasted against
some of the existing methods, such as the pseudo maximum likelihood, penalized
quasilikelihood, etc. Some of the novel features of this research will be the
use of stratum varying regression coefficients, new priors for the variance-
covariance matrix rather than the standard Wishart prior, development of small
area estimation models allowing measurement errors for covariates, use of
hierarchical likelihood in the context of small area estimation, and the use of
survey weights for small area estimation. One of the major applications of this
project will be the estimation of income and poverty for states and counties,
and possibly even for lower levels of geography such as census tracts and school
districts (when data become available) between decennnial censuses. However, the
methods are fairly general, and can be applied to other studies as well. Among
others, these methods will be applied to study youth unemployment for small
areas based on the Scottish School Leavears Survey, effectiveness of schools and
student character in an education survey conducted by the Inner London Education
Authority, and a British Social Attitudes Survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The terms
"small area'' or "local area" are commonly used to denote a small geographical
area, such as a county, a municipality, or a census division. They may also
describe a "small domain;" that is, a small subpopulation such as a specific
age-sex-race group of people within a large geographical area. In these days,
there is a global need for reliable small area statistics both from the private
and public sectors. There are increasing government concerns with issues of
distribution, equity, and disparity. For example, there may exist geographical
subgroups within a given population that are handicapped in many respects, and
need definite upgrading. Before taking remedial action, there is a need to
identify such regions, and accordingly, one must have statistical data at the
relevant geographical levels. Small area statistics also are needed in the
apportionment of government funds, and in regional and city planning. In
addition, there are demands from the private sector since the policy-making of
many businesses and industries relies on local socio-economic conditions. Thus,
small area estimation techniques have global applicability, and are useful for
diverse applications.&lt;br/&gt;