* 0221416
* US-Africa Cooperative Research:  Collaboration in Materials Research
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Winston Soboyejo, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 07/31/2004
* USD 251,809.00

0221416&lt;br/&gt;Soboyejo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a one-year
collaborative project among Professor Winston Soboyejo, at Princeton University;
Professor Aboubaker Beye, at the Universite Cheikh Anta Diop de Dakar, Senegal;
Professor Yunus Ballim, at the University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa;
and Professor Christopher Chama, at the University of Zambia. The purpose of the
grant is to promote research collaborations in materials science and engineering
between the United States and Africa. Nine US universities and one national
laboratory will be participating in this program. Sixteen scientists (15 from
Africa and one from South America) will spend nine weeks conducting
collaborative research projects at the participating US institutions. They will
conduct research in the following major areas: 1) failure mechanisms in micro-
electro-mechanical systems; 2) processing, characterization and deformation of
nano-scale thin films; 3) holistic approaches to infrastructure materials; and
4) the microstructural design of thermal shock resistant refractory ceramics.
The collaborations will continue with reciprocal visits by the US scientists to
their African counterparts. Support is also being provided to assist with the
establishment of Africa MRS chapters in North Africa (Egypt), and West Africa
(Nigeria). In addition, US graduate students will gain valuable experience about
the process of international collaborative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will also provide assistance for the coordination and/or organization of
the following symposia that were proposed at prior NSF-supported workshops: 1)
micro-electro-mechanical systems and thin films; 2) infrastructure materials; 3)
affordable materials; 4) low cost manufacturing; 5) biomaterials and biomedical
systems; and 6) entrepreneurship in materials. The symposia will feature talks
by US researchers, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, as well as
their counterparts from Africa and South America. Symposia presentations will be
published in special editions of peer-reviewed international journals. Overviews
of the Africa MRS activities will also be presented at the US MRS meetings in
Boston and San Francisco.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of International
Science and Engineering, the Directorate for Engineering, and the Division of
Materials Research are jointly providing support for this project.&lt;br/&gt;