* 0221600
* IGERT:  Technological Innovation:  Generating Economic Results (TI:GER)
* EHR,DGE
* 12/01/2002,12/31/2009
* George Shepherd, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 12/31/2009
* USD 3,486,314.00

This IGERT project is a multidisciplinary training program addressing two needs
that are critical if society is to benefit from technological discoveries: (i)
preparation of a professional workforce with the knowledge and skills needed to
facilitate innovation, and (ii) research that improves our understanding of how
business organizations and economic, regulatory, and legal mechanisms promote or
impede the development and diffusion of new technologies. Faculty from the joint
Georgia Institute of Technology/Emory University Department of Biomedical
Engineering and NSF-Engineering Research Center (ERC) for Engineering of Human
Tissues, Manufacturing Research Center, Microelectronics Research Center,
Microelectromechanical Systems, and NSF-ERC Packaging Research Center are
collaborating with faculty in the Georgia Tech DuPree College of Management,
Emory Law School, and Emory Economics Department. Central to the program are
teams of NSF-funded PhD students, cost-shared Master of Business Administration
(MBA), and Doctor of Jurisprudence students (JD) who participate over a two year
period in activities focused on technical, market, and legal issues related to
the science and engineering (S&E) students' research. This multidisciplinary
team approach is designed to (i) provide S&E students with the skills and
multidisciplinary perspective needed to succeed in industry, (ii) produce S&E
dissertations of technical merit and market relevance, (iii) facilitate
dissertations in management and law & economics that improve our understanding
of innovation, and (iv) provide MBAs and JDs with practical experience in a
technical research environment. Educational features include two graduate level
courses on the Fundamentals of Innovation and a case course developed
specifically for this IGERT that all student participants take as a community of
students, universities-wide seminar & workshop on Innovation Fundamentals,
Intellectual Property Track for the JDs and PhDs in Law & Economics, a Minor in
the Management of Innovation for S&E PhDs, a formal mechanism to initiate
management and law & economics research at the doctoral level on innovation,
internships and frequent interaction with industrial partners, and an annual
Doctoral Research Institute on Innovation for graduate students invited from
universities nationwide.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the program, awards
are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span
the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.