* 0221043
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Century-Scale Forest Dynamics From 20,000-10,000 Yr B.P. in the Western Klamath Mountains, California
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Roger Byrne, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2004
* USD 8,000.00

Long pollen records of terrestrial vegetation change are used to quantify past
climatic conditions, to identify mechanisms of past climatic variability, to
verify model simulations of past climate, and to reconstruct past biogeographic
patterns. A gap currently exists in such records regarding glacial to recent
conditions near the coast from central Oregon to central California. The goal of
this doctoral dissertation research project is to develop a high-resolution
pollen record to reconstruct changes in vegetation in northwestern California
over the past 45,000 years, with particular emphasis on the period between
20,000 and 10,000 years ago. A pollen record from Twin Lake, California, near
the Oregon border, will partially fill this gap and provide an analysis of
forest history and climate dynamics in the Klamath Mountains. Lake sediments
collected from Twin Lake indicate that the site contains a continuous record of
local vegetation since at least 45,000 radiocarbon years ago. This study will
focus on high-resolution pollen analysis of sediments deposited between 20,000
and 10,000 radiocarbon years ago, a period of rapid global and regional climate
changes. Sedimentary characteristics such as magnetic susceptibility, organic
content, and pollen influx rates will also be measured to identify changes in
productivity and erosion rates in the Twin Lake watershed. Accurate
chronological control will be ensured through 20 accelerator mass spectrometer
radiocarbon dates on sedimentary charcoal and identifiable plant remains. This
century-resolution study will complement a 500-year resolution analysis already
completed for the entire length of the record, from 45,000 years ago to the
present. Pollen data will be will be compared with modern pollen composition
from 83 lake sites in the Klamath Region to attempt to quantify past climatic
conditions at Twin Lake.

The results of this study will serve to fill spatial and temporal gaps in our
understanding of the regional variation of past climate change as well as
provide insight into mechanisms of climate variability. In addition, the results
will provide insight into the effects of rapid climate change on the forest
systems of the west coast of North America. The Klamath Mountains region is
known for having an unusually high diversity of coniferous tree species
(including several endemic species of limited range), and has been recognized as
an ecosystem of global significance. Rapid climate change at the end of the last
glacial period may provide a reasonable analogue for projected carbon dioxide-
induced climate change during the next century. Understanding past forest
dynamics may help to predict potential future threats to regional biodiversity
due to climate change, and perhaps aid in mitigating their effects. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.