* 0221966
* Environmental Molecular Science Institute: Actinides and Heavy Metals in the Environment - The Formation, Stability, and Impact of Nano- and Micro-Particles
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2009
* Patricia Maurice, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2009
* USD 5,521,750.00

The overall goal of the Environmental Molecular Science Institute (EMSI)
centered at the Univesity of Notre Dame will be to provide a quantitative,
mechanistic, molecular-scale understanding of the factors affecting the
formation, stability, and impact of nano- and micro-particles. This EMSI has
strong links with collaborators at several National Laboratories (Argonne, Oak
Ridge, Sandia) and in industry (DuPont Engineering Technologies). Research
conducted at the Instititue will provide a molecular-scale understanding of
heavy-metal (Cd, Cu, Pb) and actinide (U, Np) interactions with nano- and micro-
particles in the environment. The scientific activities of the Institute will
integrate traditional macroscopic and microscopic techniques with state-of-the-
art molecular-scale approaches such as x-ray absorption spectroscopy, atomic
force microscopy, and molecular dynamics modeling. Concurrent with these
scientific activities, the Institute will serve as a focus for a range of
innovative educational programs with the purpose being: 1) to disseminate state-
of-the-art understanding of environmental chemistry to an audience outside of
the scientific community; 2) to provide broad, interdisciplinary educational
experiences to a large number of undergraduate and graduate environmental
molecular science students, and 3) to train students from traditionally
underrepresented groups in environmental molecular science. We will set up a
M.Sc. program specifically aimed at talented undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups whose pre-requisites fall slightly below regular
admissions standards. We feel that admission to a M.Sc. program will enable a
large fraction of these students to blossom, and these successful students will
then continue on in a Ph.D. program, either at University of Notre Dame, or
elsewhere. In either case, our Institute will have played a key role in
increasing the number of underrepresented minorities working at the highest
levels in environmental molecular science.