* 0222355
* Collaborative Research: The Effect of Racial, Economic, and Institutional Characteristics on Home Mortgage Lending to Underserved Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Reynold Nesiba, Augustana University Association
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2005
* USD 60,000.00

This research would extend NSF-funded research on home mortgage lending.
Despite high levels of inequality in home ownership across races, ethnic groups,
and neighborhoods in the United States, recent trends among minorities and low-
income groups reveal record high levels of home ownership. In aiming to
understand this development, this project examines how the race and income of
both individuals and neighborhoods affect home mortgage lending to underserved
neighborhoods over the last decade. It also gives special attention to the
institutional factors responsible for changes in lending and the ability of
minority and low-income groups to purchase homes. On one hand, banking
deregulation may have increased competition in ways that serve all income
groups, and new performance guidelines under the Community Reinvestment Act may
have prompted lenders covered by the law to do more for underserved markets. On
the other hand, institutional factors may have had less positive effects: the
rapid changes in the home mortgage lending industry may have resulted in the use
of less favorable loan terms, inadequate consumer protection, and financing of
poor quality housing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To address these issues, this
project analyzes the consequences of institutional changes in home mortgage
lending using nation-wide data from 1992-2001 from the Home Mortgage Disclosure
Act. It measures characteristics of the mortgage applicants and lenders, the
requested loan amount and the outcome of the request, and the census
characteristics of the neighborhood of the housing. The analysis then describes
changes over time in the loans made to minority and low-income groups, and in
the determinants of the decision to deny a loan application. By extending the
previous work of the investigator on Indiana to the nation as a whole, and using
an under-studied data source, the project contributes to our understanding of
how housing inequality emerges and has changed in recent years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project extends the original research with a more
intensive analysis of the interesting case of South Dakota. Unlike most areas
studied in mortgage discrimination research, South Dakota is primarily rural,
has a lower level of national bank penetration than usual, and a distinct
minority (Native Americans, 8.3% of the population). The smaller state-level
scope, as compared to the nationwide data in the original research, will also
permit the PI to undertake a more detailed institutional analysis than would be
possible at a national level. In addition to the broad categories of
institutional type used in the national study, the more intensive South Dakota
research can undertake a more inductive analysis by directly comparing the more
limited number of lenders (97 in 2000) on various dimensions of community
reinvestment performance.&lt;br/&gt;