* 0222179
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Science, the State, and the 'Model Subject': Anatomical Models in Late Eighteenth-Century Tuscany and Austria
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Peter Dear, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 06/30/2004
* USD 5,980.00

This dissertation research project analyses the historical emergence of the
notion of the scientific model, and specifically the emergence of the assumption
that models are universally valid representations of nature, by investigating
the role of anatomical models for the formation of science and the state around
1800. Using archival sources and surviving model collections, the project will
analyze and compare practices of model production and model use at two state
institutions where science was developed in its conceptual and institutional
framework explicitly for state use: a public naturalhistory museum and model
workshop founded during physiocratic reforms in late eighteenth-century Tuscany,
and a military training hospital established in enlightened absolutist Austria.
The project will focus on three question areas: 1) How does the interplay
between conceptual developments and social dynamics within the workshop
establish the models as universal representations, and how does model use
support or challenge these claims to universality? 2) What kind of science was
developed conceptually and institutionally through model production and model
use at the museum, and at the hospital? 3) What is the envisioned function of
this science for the state, and what is the function of the image of the human
body conveyed through the models for enlightened absolutism and subsequent
regimes? Fund are for travel to relevant research sites in Florence and other
parts of Italy.