* 0222427
* Conference:Progress and Directions in Olfactory System Development, Tucson, AZ      January 18-20, 2003
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Lynne Oland, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2003
* USD 5,000.00

Dates: January 18, 2003-January 20, 2003.&lt;br/&gt;Location: Tucson, AZ at the
Westin LaPaloma under the auspices of the University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until recently, understanding of the organization
and development of the primary olfactory pathway lagged far behind understanding
of developmental processes in the visual and auditory systems. In the last half
decade, however, technical and conceptual breakthroughs have allowed astonishing
progress toward understand the olfactory pathway. The proposed conference will
provide a timely accounting of the current status of research in olfactory
system development. It is designed with three objectives: (1) to identify
critical puzzles of olfactory system development that must be solved: (2) to
highlight promising approaches to solving these puzzles; and (3) to provide
direction for essential research in the next few years. The conference thus will
be a working conference, using as its primary mechanism a series of discussion
sessions whose moderators and panels will reflect the field's long-standing and
productive use of model systems from across the animal kingdom.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seven 2-hour discussion sessions are planned, six of which
will focus on the following questions: (1) what processes initiate the formation
of the olfactory periphery and the olfactory bulb, the first olfactory
processing center in the brain; (2) what molecular patterns govern the formation
of the olfactory periphery; (3) how do olfactory receptors and their support
cells develop and mature and how malleable is that process; (4) how do olfactory
receptor axons find their target region in the developing brain; (5) how are
glomeruli formed; and (6) how does behavior influence the circuitry of the
olfactory bulb. The seventh session will be a summary session, with a focus on
future directions. The conference is intended mainly for members of the broad
olfactory community, at all levels including trainees, support for whom is the
focus of the current proposal. Several participants whose primary research areas
lie in other sensory systems but whose interests lie in related developmental
questions also will be invited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our overriding goal is to
emerge with a firm sense of where the field is and where it needs to go, in so
doing, setting the stage for future research initiatives that will take the
field more rapidly toward revealing the mechanisms underlying olfactory system
development. A subsidiary goal is to spark new collaborative interactions among
people in the field. We expect that the trainees who will be involved will come
away with a much stronger understanding of the critical issues facing the field.
They also will have the opportunity to help define the experimental directions
needed to resolve those issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By constructing a venue to
facilitate extended discussion, we expect to forge a broader understanding of
the implications and limitations of the current research, to cross-fertilize
ideas, to set the stage for new collaborations, and to identify necessary
avenues for new research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;