* 0222380
* The Aerosol Monitoring Project: Student/Teacher/Scientist Atmospheric Science for the 21st Century
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2002,05/31/2007
* David Brooks, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 05/31/2007
* USD 531,234.00

In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global Learning and
Observations to Benefit the Environment Program (GLOBE) this project is designed
to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and schoolchildren in a
global information network with the ultimate goal of better understanding
Earth's environment and changes that take place within it. This proposal will
continue to support existing protocols, and conduct scientific research with
GLOBE data. The project will continue to support the protocol for the
measurement of Atmospheric Aerosol Optical Thickness (AOT), which is based on an
inexpensive hand-held sun photometer, and/or sky-color cards. Measurements of
AOT will introduce students to the connections between air pollution, natural
events such as dust storms and forest fires, variations in surface insolation,
and incidences of asthma. More advanced students can use the data in studies of
Beer's law for radiative transfer. These measurements will enhance data from
extremely sparse networks of ground-based AOT observations. Reducing the
uncertainties in the global radiative transfer effects of the aerosols s
currently one of the highest scientific priorities of the climate studies
community. Local and global environmental conditions are affected by the
presence of atmospheric haze layers. Visibility is a major parameter in
environmental quality in its own right and haze layers affect the surface
radiative transfer balance of Earth as well as influencing optical remote
sensing measurements which are a major source on information for study of global
environmental change. In addition, presence of high amounts of aerosols is
thought to aggravate certain bronchial conditions, such as asthma. Students will
be contributing quantitative measurements to the study of haze layers.