* 0222745
* Ant Club Trails:  Privacy and Collaboration in an Ubiquitous Computing World
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* John Canny, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2006
* USD 400,000.00

Information-sharing and privacy are fundamentally in tension, and it is
important to study the trade-off from both technical and social-contextual
perspectives. The emergence of ubiquitous computing opens up radical new
possibilities for acquiring and sharing information, but today's methods cannot
exploit the possibilites without grave privacy risks. This proposal explores a
new methodology that provides much finer control over information exchange: only
the information needed for the collaboration is shared, everything else is
protected, and protection is provably strong. It is then possible to explore
collaborative applications in ubiquitous computing settings that are exciting,
but which would be otherwise impossible. Specifically, a class of collaborative
applications called ``Ant Club Trails'' (ACT) will be developed. The idea behind
Ant Club Trails is to combine information from the ``trails'' left by individual
users, and to share it with other users by collaborative filtering in a way
which protects individual privacy. The project draws on cryptography,
probabilistic reasoning and computational geometry for the development of
working ACT systems. It is also guided by sociology and critical theory toward
design of socially realistic and desirable systems. The outcome should be better
scientific understanding of the information-sharing privacy tradeoff, and a
larger landscape of collaborative applications that protect privacy. The broader
impacts of the work include: (i) empowerment of communities to share and
possibly make a market in community knowledge; (ii) training of research
graduate students; and (iii) involvement of undergraduates in developing ACT
applications on smart phones.