* 0222609
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Stable Isotopic Analysis of Carbon and Nitrogen as an Indicator of Paleodietary Change for Pre-State Metal Age Societies in Northeast Thailand
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2002,03/31/2005
* Michael Pietrusewsky, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 03/31/2005
* USD 15,208.00

This project will involve chemical analyses of carbon (collagen and apatite) and
nitrogen isotope values from a large series of prehistoric human skeletons,
prehistoric faunal remains, and modern plants to better understand dietary
patterns of the inhabitants of northeast Thailand during the pre-state Metal Age
(2000 B.C. to A.D. 500). The project has two central objectives: 1) to
characterize possible temporal dietary changes and 2) to integrate these data
with published results on subsistence, health and disease. The research results
will provide the first detailed documentation of the paleodietary history of
mainland Southeast Asia. Evidence from physical anthropology, and archaeological
and geoarchaeological excavations suggests environmental, cultural, and
biological changes occurred during the pre-state Metal Age in mainland Southeast
Asia. People in this region modified their landscape to provide sufficient, and
eventually surplus, food resources. Technological refinements in food
procurement likely contributed to social stratification and foreign trade. The
research hypotheses suggest dietary intake would have changed as a result of
human modification of the environment as well as cultural technological changes.
Because bone is remodeled over the lifetime of the individual and the carbon and
nitrogen in bone derives from dietary sources, bone chemical composition broadly
reflects the type of foods consumed. Bone isotope analysis can provide another
line of evidence for examining dietary patterns and dietary change over time,
and will permit greater understanding of paleodietary differences in northeast
Thailand prior to state formation. Thus, this project will provide a foundation
for future biogeographical and paleodietary research in this region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has outstanding educational
opportunities in both laboratory and field data collection and analysis for both
the investigators and assistants in Thailand and Hawai. Experience will be
gained in physical anthropology and stable isotope geoarchaeology by working
closely with established researchers from diverse fields. The investigators will
learn first hand a spectrum of state-of-the-art experimental and analytical
methods and instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;