* 0222775
* Integrated Modeling, Control, and Guidance for Full-Envelope Flight of Robotic Helicopters
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Takeo Kanade, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 08/31/2006
* USD 521,972.00

This project will develop an integrated framework for modeling, control, and
guidance of robotic helicopters, which will enable these vehicles to exploit
their full operating capabilities to fly fast, precise, and reliable missions in
a variety of operations in urban and remote environments. Potential applications
include search and rescue, surveillance, law enforcement, inspection, aerial
mapping, wildlife observation, and cinematography. The integrated framework
consists of three interrelated activities: (1) the development of a modeling
technique for high-fidelity low-order dynamics modes, (2) the use of linear
robust multiviariable control theory (H_infinity loop shaping), gain scheduling,
and high-fidelity models for the design and simulation of high-bandwidth full-
flight-envelope controllers, and (3) the use of optimal feedforward methods
(model predictive control) for the design of guidance systems that rely on the
performance and robustness of the closed-loop helicopter dynamics.A key aspect
of the project will be the flight test validation and refinement of the
framework on Carnegie Mellon's Yamaha R-50 and RMAX helicopters. Flight
validation will include a complex mission in a known environment. The mission
will consist segments of standard maneuvers (e.g. hurdle-hop, dash/quick stop,
coordinated turn, slalom, rearward flight, S-turn, etc.). The robotic
helicopters will fly the missions in several different ways (e.g for
aggressiveness, precision, fuel economy, etc.) according to the mission
specification.