* 0222748
* Understanding Environmental Variability and Change through Modeling Soil Processes.
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Elissa Levine, NASA/GODDARD SPACE FLIGHT CENTER
* Interagency Agreement
* Jill L. Karsten
* 05/31/2007
* USD 527,916.00

In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global Learning and
Observations to Benefit the Environment Program (GLOBE) this project is designed
to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and schoolchildren in a
global information network with the ultimate goal of better understanding the
Earth's environment and changes that take place within it. This proposal
consists of various segments addressing GLOBE Program needs: support for
existing protocols, development of new protocols, and scientific research with
GLOBE data. This proposal will support the current set of GLOBE soil measurement
protocols, with the cooperation of the USDA, Cornell University, ISRIC (The
Netherlands). The project will use GLOBE student-collected data to derive and
validate algorithms for physical and chemical soil/plant/atmospheric process
simulation models, including the General Purpose Simulation Model of the Earth
Atmosphere System (GAPS). The GLOBE soil data will be used to determine baseline
estimates of soil quality within various ecosystems and land use scenarios.
Seasonal measurements of surface soil characteristics will assess regional
changes in soil quality. This proposal will also support the development of
materials for education that will include soil science in the context of Earth
Systems Science. Scientists, students, and the general public will be able to
better understand the role of living soil in ecosystems and their role in the
care of our natural resources.