* 0222623
* CONTRAILS: A New Atmosphere Measurement Protocol for GLOBE
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Lin Chambers, National Aeronautics & Space Administration Langley Research Ctr
* Interagency Agreement
* Jill L. Karsten
* 02/28/2006
* USD 255,003.00

In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global Learning and
Observations to Benefit the Environment Program (GLOBE) this project is designed
to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and schoolchildren in a
global information network with the ultimate goal of better understanding
Earth's environment and changes that take place within it. This proposal
consists of various segments addressing GLOBE Program needs: support for
existing protocols, development of new protocols, and scientific research with
GLOBE data. This proposal will support the development of a new protocol to
assess the presence, extent, and duration of jet contrails and cirrus clouds at
the same time of day as the other measurements in the Atmosphere suite of GLOBE
protocols. Jet contrails, under the right conditions, can generate wide-spread
cirrus cloudiness, which has the potential to affect the radiative budget of the
planet. Given increases in jet traffic, the effect by 2050 could increase ten-
fold, and be as large as one quarter of the current anthropogenic greenhouse gas
radiative forcing. While models currently exist to predict the potential areas
over which contrails can develop and spread, there is no consistent observation
program to complement and validate efforts at satellite observation of
contrails. This GLOBE protocol has the potential to fill a gap in observations
and research. %%% In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global
Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment Program (GLOBE) this
project is designed to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and
schoolchildren in a global information network with the ultimate goal of better
understanding Earth's environment and changes that take place within it. This
proposal consists of various segments addressing GLOBE Program needs: support
for existing protocols, development of new protocols, and scientific research
with GLOBE data. This proposal will support the development of a new protocol to
assess the presence, extent, and duration of jet contrails and cirrus clouds at
the same time of day as the other measurements in the Atmosphere suite of GLOBE
protocols. Jet contrails, under the right conditions, can generate wide-spread
cirrus cloudiness, which has the potential to affect the radiative budget of the
planet. Given increases in jet traffic, the effect by 2050 could increase ten-
fold, and be as large as one quarter of the current anthropogenic greenhouse gas
radiative forcing. While models currently exist to predict the potential areas
over which contrails can develop and spread, there is no consistent observation
program to complement and validate efforts at satellite observation of
contrails. This GLOBE protocol has the potential to fill a gap in observations
and research. ***