* 0222771
* GLOBE Soil Moisture Investigation
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2002,05/31/2007
* Paul Ferre, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 05/31/2007
* USD 488,955.00

In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global Learning and
Observations to Benefit the Environment Program (GLOBE) this project is designed
to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and schoolchildren in a
global information network with the ultimate goal of better understanding
Earth's environment and changes that take place within it. This proposal
consists of various segments addressing GLOBE Program needs: support for
existing protocols, development of new protocols, and scientific research with
GLOBE data. This proposal will the support and development of support the
current set of GLOBE soil moisture protocols and learning
activities.&lt;br/&gt;Soil moisture data collected by GLOBE students represents
a unique and valuable resource to Earth scientists. The GLOBE student data have
the potential to become the first readily accessible, long-term, and consistent
record of near-surface soil moisture available on a global basis. This soil
moisture data can be used to validate satellite microwave-derived soil moisture
estimates and to validate this component in GCM and mesoscale models. The
prospect for direct validation of microwave data is limited by the current
launch schedule, but there is much that can be done comparing these observations
to seasonal patterns in forward models of microwave soil response. The area of
weather and climate model initialization, updating, and validation holds more
short-term promise, since the current parameterization of soil moisture is
crude. Improving the representation of land-surface hydrology is a major focus
of this research.