* 0222743
* Intelligent Robotic Tools and Telepresence Environment for Off-Pump (Beating Heart) Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Sosale Sastry, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 09/30/2006
* USD 519,775.00

This project will develop intelligent robotic tools and a telepresence
environment for performing off-pump coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery.
In this context, off-pump CABG surgery means that the surgery is done while
heart is still beating instead of using a cardiopulmonary bypass machine and
stopping the heart to perform heart surgery. Although on-pump open heart surgery
has been refined over the last 30 years and is now a common and successful
procedure it remains highly invasive and fraught with potential complications.
Due to the complications resulting from using cardiopulmonary bypass machine,
performing CABG off-pump is highly desirable. However, off-pump CABG surgery can
be potentially performed for only a small proportion (~10%) of all CABG
surgeries due to technological limitations. Use of intelligent robotics
technology promises an alternative and superior way of performing off-pump CABG
surgery. The intelligent telerobotic tools that will be developed in this
project will actively track and cancel the relative motion between the surgical
instruments and the heart by Active Relative Motion Cancelling (ARMC), allowing
CABG surgeries to be performed on a beating heart with technical perfection
equal to traditional on pump procedures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major focus of
the research will be on developing complementary sensing systems, and algorithms
for intelligent and model based fusing of information supplied form different
systems for superior performance, and model based confidence evaluation to
detect and handle variations in heart rhythm and arrythmias. The sensory systems
that will be studied include sonomicrometry, vision, whisker, force/torque, and
MEMS based inertia sensors. &lt;br/&gt;