* 0222554
* Exploratory Research On Engineering The Service Sector: Collaborative Research: Research on Designing Vaccine Formularies for Childhood Immunization
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Edward Sewell, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Realff
* 06/30/2005
* USD 39,522.00

Childhood vaccination has become the single greatest defense against infectious
diseases among children in the United States. Moreover, biotechnology
breakthroughs are making it possible for vaccine manufacturers to develop
vaccine antigens for numerous diseases. One unplanned consequence of such
innovations is that the Recommended Childhood Immunization Schedule (as set
forth by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices) has become
sufficiently crowded that the prospect of adding additional vaccines (hence
additional injections) to this schedule may not be well received by either
health-care providers or parents/guardians. This has prompted vaccine
manufacturers to develop vaccines products that combine several antigens into a
single injection. Such vaccines, termed combination vaccines, permit new
vaccines to be added to the schedule without placing additional burdens on
parents/guardians, nor requiring children to endure an unacceptable number of
injections during single clinic visits. Such innovations have also created a
combinatorial explosion of choices for health-care providers that will continue
to escalate and expand as additional vaccines are added to the immunization
schedule and as new combination vaccines gain approved for distribution. The
goals of this project are to design operations research models that capture all
the vaccines that are presently in the recommended childhood immunization
schedule, as well as vaccines that may enter the schedule over the next decade,
to formulate and analyze optimization models that can be used to determine the
maximal price at which new combination vaccine products provide good value to
the health-care consumer, and to perform sensitivity analysis to determine the
impact of new vaccines on the optimal vaccine formularies and vaccine
prices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research provide a systematic
approach to compare and evaluate existing and new pediatric vaccines within the
recommended childhood immunization schedule. This, in turn, will provide a
vehicle upon which opportunities for new vaccines and vaccine combinations can
be evaluated using operations research models, hence has the potential to
enhance immunization rates given the set of vaccine choices available. Moreover,
the tools developed will provide a mechanism by which health-care providers and
consumers can assess the economic value of such vaccines, hence facilitating the
application of market principles within the pediatric vaccine industry. This in
turn may also serve to put downward pressure on the prices of such vaccines, an
issue of significant national concern. This research will be conducted in
collaboration with personnel within the National Immunization Program at the
Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).