* 0222432
* Collaborative Research:  Improving the DSL-120A Sonar Mapping System
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Andrew Bowen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 08/31/2004
* USD 44,368.00

P.I. Rognstad, Mark Proposal: 0222468&lt;br/&gt; Bowen, Andrew
0222432&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to upgrade the DSL-120 sonar
mapping system and resolve problems related to the integration of DSL-120A
sensors and capabilities. Primary tasks to be completed as part of this work
are: 1) Improvement of the signal to noise ratio of the system to enhance the
ability to extract useful phase-bathymetry data from the basic sonar system. 2)
The PIs will resolve the acoustic interference between the sidescan sonar and
the Doppler velocity log (DVL), which has prevented the simultaneous operation
of both systems. The inability to use the DVL results in sonar surveys with
degraded navigation data, particularly for surveys covering areas too large for
continuous transponder navigation. Attempts to synchronize the two sonars during
the upgrade were unsuccessful, due to long and variable length latency in the
response of the DVL to external triggering. 3) Bathymetric sonar capabilities of
the DSL-120A system will be improved to enhance resolution of small-scale
features closer to the resolving capabilities of the backscatter imagery. Phase
bathymetric sonars like the DSL-120A cannot distinguish acoustic reflections
from different parts of the seafloor that arrive at the sonar transducers at the
same time - that is, that are the same distance from the tow vehicle. Over a
flat bottom, this will be the case for that part of the seafloor closest to the
vehicle; in areas with high relief, this can happen in any part of the mapped
swath. Multibeam sonar, which combines signals from dozens of hydrophones, can
synthesize narrow beams that reject adjacent reflections, giving greatly
improved bathymetry in these situations. The capability to operate the SM2000
with the DSL-120A sonar system will be added. The multi-beam system will be
synchronized with both DVL and sidescan/swath bathymetry sonars, so all three
acoustic sensors may be used simultaneously. The proposed improvements will
complete the full integration of all the requisite sensors and capabilities of
the DSL-120A sonar system. These improvements will improve signal quality of the
backscatter and phase-bathymetric sonar, improve navigation through the use of
the DVL, and offer the potential for collection of SM2000 near-bottom multibeam
data to improve the quality of bathymetric data acquired using the DSL-120A
sonar.&lt;br/&gt;