* 0222779
* A 2002 Conference:  Integrated Environmental Teaching, Research &amp; Practice: Linking Engineering &amp; Science to Address Complex Problems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Michael Aitken, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 05/31/2003
* USD 25,000.00

0222779 Aitken The Association of Environmental Engineering and Science
Professors (AEESP) and the American Academy of Environmental Engineers (AAEE)
are preparing a conference on education and research needs in environmental
engineering and science. The conference will be held August 10-14, 2002, on the
campus of the University of Toronto. Since no single professional society
represents the entire field, this conference provides a unique opportunity for
the community of educators, researchers and practitioners in environmental
engineering and science to discuss mutual interests, compare methods, and
identify needs for the advancement of the profession.&lt;br/&gt;The overall
theme of the conference is Integrated Environmental Teaching, Research and
Practice: Linking Engineering and Science to Address Complex Problems. Within
this broad theme, five sub- themes will be addressed: Understanding Complex
Environmental Systems; Use of Information Technologies for Monitoring and Data
Management; Integrating Novel and Advanced Technologies into Understanding and
Solving Environmental Problems; Sustainable Systems; and Innovative Educational
Approaches. These sub-themes represent an extension of AEESP's last Research
Needs conference (1999, Penn State), which focused on complex systems, a
sustainable environment, and advanced molecular tools; a recognition that
information technologies play an increasingly important role in obtaining,
organizing and analyzing a vast amount of data for use in decision-making for
environmental systems; and an exploration of how advanced knowledge and methods
can be incorporated into both education and practice. Such an emphasis on the
continuum among research, teaching, and practice is critical to the long-term
evolution of this engineering discipline. ***&lt;br/&gt;