* 0222087
* A Test for Shelter Limitation of Reef Fish Populations at Large Spatial Scales:  An Integrated Empirical and Theoretical Approach
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2008
* Mark Steele, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2008
* USD 549,167.00

&lt;br/&gt;The project is aimed at understanding the causes of population
dynamics in two &lt;br/&gt;species of reef fish at the meso-scale (over areas
tens of km in extent). Most reef fishes, and &lt;br/&gt;other benthic marine
species, have a complex life cycle that includes a site-attached adult phase
&lt;br/&gt;and a larval stage during which individuals may disperse long
distances across open ocean. &lt;br/&gt;Much debate has centered on whether
benthic population dynamics are controlled by the influx &lt;br/&gt;of pelagic
larvae (larval settlement) or by density-dependent interactions among juveniles
and &lt;br/&gt;adults in the benthic habitat. Past controversy, based on the
notion that density-dependence is &lt;br/&gt;not compatible with a strong
larval-input signal, has been resolved following recognition that
&lt;br/&gt;both pre- and post-settlement processes influence the dynamics of
most populations. One &lt;br/&gt;broadly applicable hypothesis (the recruit-
adult hypothesis) predicts that oceanographic &lt;br/&gt;processes controlling
the influx of larvae create predictable differences among populations at the
&lt;br/&gt;meso-scale: sites with high settlement are chronically resource
limited, whereas sites with low &lt;br/&gt;settlement rarely reach their
carrying capacity and adult densities track larval influx. The
&lt;br/&gt;carrying capacity of the benthic habitat, and the post-settlement
interactions within it, are &lt;br/&gt;assumed to be consistent among meso-scale
sites. All experimental evidence on the nature of &lt;br/&gt;post-settlement
interactions is, however, based on study at small spatial scales (a few m's in
&lt;br/&gt;extent). Studies in other environments indicate that population
dynamics can potentially vary &lt;br/&gt;with spatial scale, however, and a
major challenge now is to test whether small-scale results in &lt;br/&gt;marine
systems will extrapolate to larger spatial domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past
small-scale experiments by these investigators on two reef fishes indicate that
competition for shelter &lt;br/&gt;sites used as refuges from predation is the
cause of small-scale density dependence in both &lt;br/&gt;species. The strength
of density dependence, however, depends on the local availability of
&lt;br/&gt;shelter, and is eliminated in habitat patches that provide abundant
shelter. They hypothesize that, &lt;br/&gt;in addition to oceanographic
processes causing differential settlement, the carrying capacity of
&lt;br/&gt;the benthic habitat will also vary at the meso-scale and cause
differences among populations in &lt;br/&gt;the strength of density-dependent
mortality. In this system, the investigators suggest that carrying
&lt;br/&gt;capacity is a function of shelter abundance. They will test
experimentally for shelter limitation at &lt;br/&gt;the meso-scale. To
complement the field work, a mathematical scaling model will be constructed to
explicitly link local- and meso-scale populations. This model will include a
functional description of shelter limitation at local scales and will be used to
test specific hypotheses for the congruence (or lack of it) in population
dynamics at local and meso-scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Testing the expanded
version of the recruit-adult hypothesis will provide a rare
&lt;br/&gt;experimental test of the causal interactions shaping population
dynamics at large spatial scales. &lt;br/&gt;Meso-scale populations are little
studied, but a deeper understanding of their dynamics is of &lt;br/&gt;practical
importance because it at this scale that marine reserves are designated and at
which &lt;br/&gt;most reef fisheries are managed. Support for the hypothesis
that meso-scale carrying capacity &lt;br/&gt;depends on shelter provided by the
reef would also have important implications for the effects on &lt;br/&gt;fishes
of the ongoing habitat degradation on coral reefs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;