* 0222270
* Collaborative Research: CMG Research: Statistical Seismic Imaging
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* William Symes, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 356,000.00

Collaborative Research: CMG Research: Statistical Seismic
Imaging&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A. Levander, W.W. Symes, S.
Minkoff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both the crystalline crust and the shallow near
surface (&lt; 100m depth) environment are complex, mechanically heterogeneous
regions, often having spatial distributions of mechanical properties that are
distinctly different from the relatively smoothly layered sedimentary column.
Exploration seismology is currently one of the most important means of exploring
the subsurface: for petroleum in the sedimentary column, for
geotechnical/environmental purposes in the shallow subsurface, and for
understanding of tectonic processes in the crystalline crust. Reflection
seismology was developed by the petroleum industry to explore the sedimentary
column, i.e., the medium is layered, the preponderance of energy is singly
scattered, and scales are dichotomous. Its applications in both the near-surface
environment and the deep crust have been very successful but also present
problems not usually encountered in petroleum exploration. The near surface is
subjected to chemical and mechanical weathering processes that produce a highly
heterogeneous, nonlayered medium. Mechanical properties can vary by an order of
magnitude within a few wavelengths due to compaction, chemical alteration, and
the presence or absence of water. The crystalline crust, although lacking order
of magnitude changes in mechanical properties, has a spatially complex, often
self-affine (fractal) distribution of seismic velocity and density
heterogeneities. For the relatively long path propagation in the crust, the
wavefield often falls in a strong scattering regime in which linear imaging
systems will produce mediocre or nonsensical results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research program makes first steps toward a complementary imaging paradigm for
complex media, termed statistical seismic imaging, in which statistical
properties of the subsurface are mapped using statistical properties of the
seismic wavefield. As this is an extremely large topic, the proposal scope will
be limited to a few areas of endeavor. The investigations will explore (1)
effective models relating subwavelength scale heterogeneity to macro-scale
propagation effects (effective mechanical properties, velocity, attenuation,
dispersion, etc), (2) the extent to which multiple reflection and refraction can
be differentiated and their effects on traditional seismic imaging, and (3) the
identification of the onset of strong scattering. The research involves a high
level of software development and computational effort, including 3D seismic
simulation and nonlinear inversion for material properties and statistics. No
single discipline possesses the tools to make significant progress on
statistical seismic imaging: expertise in geophysics, applied math, and high
performance computing are needed. The principal investigators have expertise in
these areas. The research has the potential of improving societally important
environmental/geotechnical investigations as well as more fundamental research
on the structure and tectonics of the Earth's crust.