* 0222552
* OCEPT II Follow-On Grant
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Camille Wainwright, Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2006
* USD 600,000.00

The Oregon Collaborative for Excellence in the Preparation of Teachers (OCEPT)
is a statewide collaborative established to improve the mathematics and science
preparation of future teachers in Oregon and increase the diversity of the
population of students preparing to be teachers. It has involved over 500
science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (STEM) and Education faculty
and administrators, academic advisors, and K-12 teachers, from virtually all of
the 34 institutions of higher education in the state, as well as numerous school
districts. More than 200 courses and programs have been developed and/or
significantly impacted. Reported changes include using more diverse teaching and
assessment strategies, adoption of standards-based instructional techniques, and
inclusion of opportunities for related teaching experiences with K-12 students.
OCEPT-influenced classrooms are more interactive, incorporate greater use of
technology, conceptual development and more of a focus on scientific inquiry
and/or mathematics problem solving. The OCEPT II Follow-On project is conducting
a comprehensive summative evaluation to provide evidence of the impact of OCEPT
on faculty, preservice students, institutions, and new teachers. An "Outcomes
Research Study " is the primary vehicle for providing evidence about new
teachers and STEM faculty who taught them. Through this study, novice teachers
are observed and interviewed over a 2-to-3 year time span, and OCEPT faculty who
have taught these teachers are observed and interviewed. In addition, the
project is utilizing instruments from the CETP Core Evaluation study and
contributing to the overall CETP evaluation effort. Induction support and
professional development is provided for novice teachers. In collaboration with
the Oregon Council of Teachers of Mathematics and the Oregon Science Teachers
Association, OCEPT II provides workshops specifically designed for new teachers
and their mentors, welcomes new teachers to statewide conferences, and provides
memberships in the statewide professional organizations. Dissemination
activities include support for Faculty Fellows to develop and publish scholarly
articles on their work through the WRITE ON! Institute.