* 0222462
* Morphing Airfoils Using Smart Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2003
* Farhan Gandhi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 05/31/2003
* USD 55,574.00

The fixed- or rotary-wings of aerospace vehicles comprise of airfoil sections
with carefully designed profiles that are optimum for a certain design flight
condition, or represent a compromise with acceptable performance over some range
of conditions. The ability of an airfoil section to morph or change its profile,
as required, can provide future aerospace vehicles with tremendously improved
efficiency and versatility. Morphing airfoil sections would allow a single
aircraft to be viable for very low-speed loiter/surveillance and high-speed
combat missions; or allow a helicopter in high-speed cruise to have a high
figure of merit even though the outboard regions of the blades encounter
compressibility effects on the advancing side and are close to stall on the
retreating side, in every rotor revolution. However, airfoil sections are
conventionally designed to be rigid, and must remain so under aerodynamic
pressure distributions, even while morphing under actuation loads. This
represents a considerable challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the present
project, an innovative smart-material based actuation scheme is proposed in
conjunction with special skins that are ultra-flexible in extension yet have
significant flexural rigidity. The actuation scheme comprises of an array of
linkages or "vertebrae" (with both active and passive members) connected to the
upper and lower skins of the airfoil section. In each linkage, extension of the
upper active members produces stretching of the upper skin, while contraction of
the lower active members produces shrinking of the lower skin, and together they
produce a rotation of the passive member. Progressively larger rotations of the
successive linkages in the array result in a camber of the airfoil section.
Leading-edge droop of the airfoil section is produced in a similar manner. Skins
that are highly flexible in extension and compression and can accommodate large
elastic strains will be required to achieve significant profile changes. Yet it
is required that the skins be flexurally stiff so sections between supports do
not deform under aerodynamic surface pressures. Such skins are to be designed
using Shape Memory Alloys or Flexible Matrix Composites, in conjunction with
innovative geometric configuration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A finite element
analysis of the airfoil section with spar, flexible skin and linkages
(comprising of active and passive members), will be developed as part of this
project. Using design optimization, the geometry of the linkages and the
properties of the skin that produce both target as well as maximum profile
changes will be determined. Design constraints will include actuator saturation
limits, maximum strains on the skin, and rigidity under aerodynamic loading.
Both Shape Memory Alloy actuators (for maximum actuation strain capabilities) as
well as piezoelectric actuators (for high-frequency capabilities required for
helicopters) will be examined. For high-frequency applications, amplification of
actuation inputs due to structural resonance will be considered.&lt;br/&gt;