* 0222148
* RUI/CMG: Multiscale Approach to Wave Propagation through Turbulent Regions of Earth's Space Environment
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Mark Engebretson, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 12/31/2005
* USD 214,690.00

This is an award under the CMG program (Collaborations Between the Mathematical
Sciences and the Geosciences) to support mathematical modeling of processes in
the magnetosphere. It is jointly funded by the Physical Meteorology program in
the Division of Atmospheric Sciences and the Research in Undergraduate
Institutions (RUI) program of the Division of Mathematical Sciences. Phenomena
originating in the solar wind cause magnetic pulsations upstream from the earth
and inside the magnetosphere. They propagate through the magnetosheath but their
source and means of propagation are not understood. The broad range of spatial
scales and complex dynamics of the plasma regions affected by the pulsations
have posed major obstacles to modeling the phenomenon. A new mathematical tool,
called multiresolution homogenization, circumvents some of the difficulties. The
method constructs mathematical models that implicitly account for a wide range
of scales while requiring explicit modeling of only selected scales. It will be
applied to modeling waves in the turbulent magnetosheath with the objectives of
(1) understanding wave propagation in the magnetosheath and (2) gaining insight
on properties of the magnetosheath itself. As society becomes more dependent on
satellite communications, it is increasingly important to understand phenomena
in the magnetosphere that affect electromagnetic signal propagation.