* 0222064
* SGER: Separation of Polyethylene Wear Debris Found in Synovial Fluid Generated from Total Joint Prostheses Using Bio-Ferrography
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Donna Meyer, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 02/29/2004
* USD 31,516.00

0092944&lt;br/&gt;Meyer&lt;br/&gt;The orthopedic community would benefit from
knowing the ratio of the various constituents contained in the synovial fluid of
patients with total hip and knee replacements before the onset of complications
leading to revision surgery. Aspirating the joints of patients with indications
is recommended most specifically prior to revision surgery. It is the aspirate
from these patients that will be used as the basis for the proposed set of
experiments. The ratios of the constituents to each other may be used by
physicians as one of several tools in the decision whether to perform revision
surgery. There may also be instances in which surgery will not be recommended
based in part on the particulate ratios, in which case benefits to both the
patient and the economy may be realized. The clinical relevance would be that
the surgeon now has a quasi-inside look at the prosthesis before surgery,
offering some information about what area(s) of the implant may require
revision. This is not information that can be readily seen in x-rays or by other
visual means. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An SGER award supports research to examine
the feasibility of using a technique called Bio-Ferrography to separate the
various types of wear particles which form in total hip and knee replacements as
they wear. The PI has access to a unique collection of over one hundred well-
documented samples of synovial fluid aspirate which has been obtained from total
hip and knee replacements prior to revision surgery. The primary wear particles
are ultra high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) from the acetabular cup,
metal particles such as stainless steel or cobalt-cromium-molybdenum from the
femoral head, particles of bone cement used for fixation of the prostheses at
the bone/implant interface, and bone particulate itself. The particles will be
tagged with magnetic tagging molecules which make it possible to sort them by
the magnetic field in the bio-ferrograph. Identification of suitable tagging
molecules, sorting of the particles by material and size, and relating the
nature and amount of wear particles to observations made of the worn joint
during and after surgery will be the main components of the
study.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;