* 0222375
* Scientific Support for the GLOBE Land Cover Investigation
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Russell Congalton, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 05/31/2007
* USD 641,000.00

Congalton&lt;br/&gt;In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global
Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment Program (GLOBE) this
project is designed to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and
schoolchildren in a global information network with the ultimate goal of better
understanding Earth's environment and changes that take place within it. This
proposal consists of various segments addressing GLOBE Program needs: support
for existing protocols, development of new protocols, and scientific research
with GLOBE data. This proposal will support the current set of GLOBE land
cover/biology protocols.&lt;br/&gt;This project will modify existing protocols,
develop and test new ones, and review GLOBE data submitted to the archive. The
project will support the overall training and outreach activities of the
program, fostering student-scientist partnerships. The scientific issue
addressed by this proposal is the need to integrate reference data collection
and accuracy assessment (i.e. validation) into land cover data sets generated
from remotely sensed data. Other GLOBE protocols provide data that are currently
collected by other sources around the world (e.g. temperature, precipitation),
however, no other source of regional, continental, much less global validation
data is currently being collected anywhere except by GLOBE students. This land
cover/biology investigation has the double benefit of allowing student to
experience the process of science while providing for a unique and valuable
validation data set for use by the remote sensing community. This project is
collaborating with NASA's Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS)
team to provide the calibration and validation data for this NASA Earth
Observing System sensor in order to generate regional land cover maps worldwide.
The team is also collaborating with city planners of Auburn, ME, the University
of Waikato and the New Zealand Ministry of the Environment's LENZ project.
Students will work primarily with Landsat data, as well as learning how to use
geographic information systems (GIS) to answer scientific questions about land
cover mapping.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;In response to an Announcement of
Opportunity for the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment
Program (GLOBE) this project is designed to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of
linking scientists and schoolchildren in a global information network with the
ultimate goal of better understanding Earth's environment and changes that take
place within it. This proposal consists of various segments addressing GLOBE
Program needs: support for existing protocols, development of new protocols, and
scientific research with GLOBE data. This proposal will support the current set
of GLOBE land cover/biology protocols.&lt;br/&gt;This project will modify
existing protocols, develop and test new ones, and review GLOBE data submitted
to the archive. The project will support the overall training and outreach
activities of the program, fostering student-scientist partnerships. The
scientific issue addressed by this proposal is the need to integrate reference
data collection and accuracy assessment (i.e. validation) into land cover data
sets generated from remotely sensed data. Other GLOBE protocols provide data
that are currently collected by other sources around the world (e.g.
temperature, precipitation), however, no other source of regional, continental,
much less global validation data is currently being collected anywhere except by
GLOBE students. This land cover/biology investigation has the double benefit of
allowing student to experience the process of science while providing for a
unique and valuable validation data set for use by the remote sensing community.
This project is collaborating with NASA's Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer (MODIS) team to provide the calibration and validation data
for this NASA Earth Observing System sensor in order to generate regional land
cover maps worldwide. The team is also collaborating with city planners of
Auburn, ME, the University of Waikato and the New Zealand Ministry of the
Environment's LENZ project. Students will work primarily with Landsat data, as
well as learning how to use geographic information systems (GIS) to answer
scientific questions about land cover mapping