* 0222945
* GridSolve:  A System for Grid-enabling General Purpose Problem Solving Environments
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Henri Casanova, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2005
* USD 700,000.00

The purpose of GridSolve is to create the Middleware necessary to provide a
seamless bridge between the simple, standard programming interfaces and desktop
scientific computing environments (SCE) that dominate the work of computational
scientists and the rich supply of services supporting by the emerging Grid
architecture. Users of scientific computing environments can easily access and
reap the benefits of shared processing, storage, software, data resources and so
forth, by using GridSolve. Gridsolve will be build upon the work done earlier on
NetSolve software. The work will lead to a new RPC mechanism Grid RPC, will
provide client interfaces for key general purposes SCEs, will ensure that
GridSolve can bind to and utilize all major Grid backends, will adapt GridSolve
to use existing Grid services (security, resource monitoring) ,and will provide
support for flexible state management and data logistics through the use of
distributed storage resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gridsolve is based on a
substantial base of NetSolve software, and draws upon knowledge and experience
using NetSolve with a variety of Grid environments and applications. The effort
will make tools like Matlab and Mathematica work on the grid, with the result
that grid technologies and capabilities will be useful to an even broader base
of scientists and researchers.&lt;br/&gt;