* 0222133
* CMG Research:  Emerging Mathematical Strategies for Stochastic Modeling and Predictability to Climate Variability
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Andrew Majda, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 09/30/2006
* USD 668,505.00

The climate system involves a huge range of interacting spatial and temporal
scales. Development of tools to further understanding of this very complex
system and its predictability is the major focus of this project. Theoretically
rigorous methods allowing for the stochastic modeling of the system have been
demonstrated by the investigators in simple dynamical systems. We extend these
to the more complex but practical systems underlying climate. Additionally an
entirely new perspective on dynamical predictability has been derived by the
investigators using information theory. This will be applied to the problems of
atmospheric and climate prediction and will also enable the development of
rigorous reliability measures for dynamical predictions in general chaotic
systems.

These investigations enable us to gain a much clearer understanding of the
complex system underlying the Earth's climate. Such an understanding will be of
great benefit in interpreting results from societally important projections of
future climate change. Further we anticipate the development of tools which will
enable us to reliably decide when a particular prediction (climate or weather)
is likely to be useful and when it is not likely to have any use. This ability
has important practical implications for policy makers dealing with
fundamentally uncertain systems.