* 0222531
* A Novel Method for Characterizing Atmospheric Turbulence Using Global Positioning System (GPS)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* James Davis, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Johannes Verlinde
* 08/31/2004
* USD 88,090.00

Signals from Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites propagate through the
atmosphere with a velocity determined by the refractivity of the air, which
depends on temperature, pressure, and humidity. This award supports research
based on the principle that the difference between the propagation delays from
two GPS satellites measured at the same position on the ground depends on the
difference in the integrated refractivity along the two ray paths. The
propagation delays are calculated from the measured phases of the GPS signals
and are subject to uncertainty because of clock errors, uncertainties in
satellite range, and receiver noise. However, short-term fluctuations of the
phase difference about averages over periods from a few seconds to minutes are
largely free of these uncertainties and depend mainly on changes in the path-
average refractivity. These fluctuations are caused by the variability of
atmospheric structure and hence may be regarded as a measure of the
irregularity, or turbulence. The objective of the work is to evaluate the
feasibility of continuous, accurate, all-weather remote sensing of turbulence by
monitoring GPS signals. It holds the potential of improving weather forecasts
and alleviating aviation hazards through better understanding of the occurrence
and distribution of turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;