* 0222014
* CAREER:  Laser Micro- and Nano-Processing of Biodegradable Polymers for Biomedical and BioMEMS Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/31/2001,05/31/2007
* Shaochen Chen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 05/31/2007
* USD 361,130.00

This Faculty Early Career Development ( CAREER) project integrates research and
educational initiatives focusing on micro- and nano-scale processing of
biodegradable polymers using laser techniques for biomedical and bioMEMS
applications. Research focusing on laser micro- and nano-scale processing with
parametric studies using both a UV excimer laser and a femtosecond laser to
produce controlled micro-features on polymer surfaces will be addressed.
Biodegradable polymers hold immense promise as new materials for implantable
biomedical micro-devices due to their biocompatibility and ability to naturally
degrade and disappear in tissues over a desired period of time. This
degradability eliminates a second surgery to retrieve the implanted micro-
devices. The CAREER project will: (1) develop an advanced laser technique with a
near-field beam delivery system to produce controlled micro- and nano-scale
patterns on biodegradable polymer surfaces; (2) develop an experimental system
and a numerical model to investigate the transient laser-material interaction
process on extremely small time and length scales; and (3) implement the
research into the development of biodegradable micro- and nano-devices. This
research will make significant contribution to the emerging and
interdisciplinary field of micro- and nano-manufacturing science and technology,
bioengineering, and polymer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated
education plan will focus on curriculum development in micro- and nano-
manufacturing at the undergraduate and graduate levels by infusing emerging and
multi-disciplinary research into the classroom. This plan also encourages women
students in research and adopts cooperative learning techniques in teaching. The
PI also incorporates a learning plan for himself in new methods of educational
pedagogy and curriculum development.