* 0222903
* VISUALIZATION:  Effective Visualizations for Complex 3- and 4-Dimensional Flow Fields
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Raghu Machiraju, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2006
* USD 250,060.00

Despite many advances in the visualization community over the past decade,
effective and efficient representations for three-dimensional flow fields are
still elusive. Many techniques show promise, but do not represent a complete
picture of the flow. This project consists of a systematic investigation of the
current techniques, their advantages and disadvantages, research and analysis of
combined techniques which complement each other, and research into new
techniques. Cognitive analysis and user studies will be undertaken to
investigate existing research. Many of these techniques, including those of the
PIs, proposed a method of representing or rendering a flow field, with little
selfexamination of the limitations towards garnering a true understanding of the
flow field. Several of these techniques have obvious limitations, but present an
improvement over the dearth of any good techniques for three-dimensional flow
visualization. By combining several techniques appropriately, more improvements
can be made. Are these improvements sufficient? What combinations work and which
ones do not? These questions will be investigated and quantified in this
research. Finally, we will ask: How can new techniques be developed that will
overcome some of these limitations?Our subjective understanding of the field
allows us to propose several avenues of investigation. These include an-
isotropic volume renderings, embedded with flow differentiators; schematic
texture algorithms for opaque and semi-transparent stream surfaces; level-of-
detail models for representing the flow; multi-resolution representation of
underlying features; and new representations that provide a more meaningful
context for the flow. This research will greatly aid computational scientists
across many disciplines: computational fluid dynamics scientists, environment
scientists, atmospheric scientists, computational geological scientists and
biomedical researchers. A primary component of their research is the
investigation or simulation of natural phenomena. This phenomena is generally
dynamic, leading to complex and interesting flow fields. For three-dimensional
computations, effective tools to understand, represent and convey these flows
are lacking. This research will provide a firm foundation for research in this
area, as well as lead to new algorithms offering a much clearer representation
for flows.

