* 0222092
* Developing a Regional Context for Rocky Subtidal Communities:  Upwelling, Biotic Interactions and Diversity Regulation in the Galapagos Marine Reserve
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Jon Witman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2006
* USD 480,000.00

The foundation of community ecology has been constructed from studies conducted
on relatively small spatial scales. In marine ecology, the building blocks of
the foundation are analyses of species interactions at focal sites that are
bathed by currents transporting nutrients, food and reproductive propagules of
the next generation of organisms. Thus, the communities living at local sites
are linked to some extent on larger spatial scales by oceanographic processes.
Understanding the extent and scale of such linkages is essential for the growth
of community ecology as an intellectual endeavor and also for predicting how
local biota of coastal marine ecosystems will be modified by an increasing pace
of global change. The latter situation applies because global atmospheric
processes regulate the oceanic currents that couple local sites. Although the
need to expand the spatial scale of marine research has been recognized for
nearly two decades, progress in developing a regional oceanographic perspective
in marine benthic ecology has been slow, particularly for sub-tidal ecosystems.

This project herein relates to these broader goals by developing a regional
context for benthic communities living on steep underwater sides of islands
(rock walls) in the Galapagos Marine Reserve, (GMR) the second largest marine
protected area in the world (Bustamente et al 2000). Due to nutritive upwelling
currents and marine food webs that are nearly intact, GMR subtidal ecosystems
provide an excellent opportunity to investigate the importance of bottom ?up
(i.e. driven by food resources) vs top?down (predatory) regulation of benthic
communities. Preliminary research by the project team indicates that the pace of
community change is especially rapid where currents flow up rock walls at some
of highest upwelling velocities reported (to 60 cm s) to date. An experimental
design is used to test the general hypothesis that bottom? up and top ?down
control of rock wall communities varies predictably as a function of upwelling.
Regular measurement of upwelling currents, chlorophyll a, nutrient and
zooplankton concentrations at 8 sites in the central GMR will be placed in a
larger context by comparison to daily, high resolution images of chl a provided
by the new SeaWIFS facility at the Charles Darwin Research Station. Measuring
algal accumulation in treatments protected from and exposed to grazers will
assess a response of benthic algae to the potentially enhanced upwelling
nutrient regime. Because epifaunal. invertebrates feeding on plankton link water
column production to higher trophic levels,, experiments are proposed to measure
the growth and recruitment of 5 epifaunal species and their consumers (snails,
sea urchins) to test the predictions of bottomup and top?down linkage . Key
predators will be enclosed to evaluate the hypothesis that the strength of
species interactions is greatest at upwelling sites while video cameras will
provide another measure of site variation in consumer pressure. Finally, theory
and observation suggest that the highest diversity and turnover of diversity
occurs at upwelling sites due to rapid invertebrate production and high
predation on primary space occupiers. By working at the crossroads of community
ecology, oceanography and conservation biology, the research will increase our
understanding of how productivity and local variation in species interactions
influence species diversity in marine reserves. The broader merits of the
proposal are that it will directly contribute to conservation planning, train a
PhD student and positively impact undergraduate and graduate teaching.

