* 0222040
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Process of Agricultural Transformation among the Coastal Osmore Springs of Southern Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Garth Bawden, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2004
* USD 12,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, Mr Gregory Zaro will conduct doctoral
disserrtation research on the far south coast of Peru. The study seeks to
explain the process of agricultural development in the coastal Osmore region of
southern Peru between AD 300 and 1700 by understanding the interplay of both
cultural and ecological variables that condition agricultural decisions.
Previous research suggests the coastal Osmore springs fell in and out of
production throughout the period of investigation, and today some remain under
cultivation while others lie completely abandoned. For millennia the climate of
this typically dry region has experienced punctuated interruptions in the form
of periodic el Nino events, tectonic activity, and gradual oscillating periods
of above- and below-normal highland precipitation. The Osmore drainage also
played host to a complex history that witnessed the rise and fall of ancient
political powers such as Tiwanaku and Wari. An adequate understanding of how
agriculture transformed along this hyper-arid coastline requires archaeologists
to first identify the often-ephemeral indicators of past agrarian activities and
situate them in their cultural and ecological contexts.

For this study, emphasis is placed on the well-preserved site of Wawakiki, one
of a series of prehistoric/historic spring-fed agricultural systems along the
desert coast. The project will document diachronic changes in agricultural
infrastructure and crop selection at Wawakiki, and place them in the context of
wider patterns of resource exploitation among its neighboring spring systems
north of the Osmore River. The resulting data will be analyzed using ESRI ArcGIS
Desktop and ultimately interpreted against already defined sociocultural and
environmental sequences from the main Osmore River valley. Excavations at
Wawakiki are designed to generate data pertaining to the chronology of
agricultural infrastructure and crop selection at Wawakiki, while analyses of
semi-regional patterns of resource exploitation along the coast will be achieved
using a survey database generated by Peruvian archaeologist Adan Umire. Wawakiki
exhibits a well-preserved array of stone-faced terraces, furrows, seedling beds,
and water impoundment tanks, and chronological development of these features
represents agrarian technology, engineering skills, and the relative amounts of
labor invested at a site. In addition, plant materials in archaeological
contexts may provide direct insight into the nature of prehistoric agricultural
production activities. Changes in crop selection reflect changing emphases on
subsistence crops (e.g., maize), industrial crops (e.g., cotton), or both, and
relative proportions of specific plants suggest the degree to which farmers
specialized their production of particular cultigens. To determine the kinds of
plants cultivated prehistorically, phytoliths, pollen, and macrobotanical
remains from ancient fields at Wawakiki will be analyzed. Finally, these data
will be contextualized within the regional sociopolitical and environmental
setting of the Osmore drainage to understand the interplay of cultural and
ecological variables that shape agricultural decisions at the local level. This
research is important for several reasons. It will highlight the manners in
which local communities sustained themselves agriculturally in this hyper-arid
environment, and explain the degree to which cultural and natural factors
contributed to agricultural decline and rebirth among the coastal Osmore
springs.