* 0222819
* VISUALIZATION:  Efficient Out-of-Core Isosurface Extraction from Large Datasets
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2002,05/31/2007
* Timothy Newman, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2007
* USD 160,782.00

Isosurface extraction and rendering is a useful and popular method for exploring
volume datasets.&lt;br/&gt;While many studies of extraction techniques have been
presented, few researchers have considered how to perform isosurface extraction
from very large datasets in a way that utilizes parallel computation while also
effectively managing memory access. For out-of-core datasets (i.e., those too
large to be processed entirely in main memory), delays from access of secondary
storage must be minimized if high performance is to be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, an investigation of new techniques for parallel, out-of-core
isosurface extraction are conducted. The work seeks to exploit multiple types of
parallelism, effectively organize memory access to minimize access penalties,
and to effectively manage inter-process communication. A hallmark of the workis
that it focuses on total system performance rather than attempting to only
maximize intermediary measures of a single aspect of performance. One primary
target platform for testing of the techniques is cluster computation
environments comprised of commodity CPUs.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The
proposed activity can benefit multiple disciplines. Many scientific and
engineering enterprises generate and/or wish to use large datasets. Some finance
and consumer applications also desire to effectively utilize large collections
of business data. Discovery of trends, phenomena, and structures in those
datasets can be aided by more efficient visualization. In particular, for large
datasets too large to be processed in-core, the time to compute a visualization
is likely to be very high due to the relatively slow access times of the
secondary storage. Reduction of these times by resource (memory, CPU, and
communication)-effective processing will increase productivity among scientific
visualization users and consumers. In addition, reduction of processing times
may make tractable the consideration of certain very large problems. The
proposed activity builds upon prior work of the PI and of the other experiences
with parallel out-of-core isosurface extraction. The PI has access to the
necessary computer resources to complete the work, including access to cluster
computers at three sites and to supercomputers at three other
sites.&lt;br/&gt;Due to the impact of the proposed activity on visualization
methods that are used across the scientific community, society at large is
likely to benefit via new knowledge discovery by the&lt;br/&gt;discipline
science that this project aids. In addition, the proposed work will be
beneficial in managing and understanding the increasing body of data being
collected about scientific, engineering, and business phenomena. The project's
results will be disseminated via publication in&lt;br/&gt;the open literature,
in conferences, and on the web. Through the PI's partnerships with NASA, NIH,
and other researchers, the results of the work have a high probability of
producing an impact in multiple disciplines. The project will also aid
undergraduate and graduate student training and development via (1) PI-mentoring
of the graduate student supported on the project, (2) presentation, discussion,
and analysis of results at a regular research forum, and (3) integration of
research findings in graduate computer graphics/visualization courses taught by
the PI. &lt;br/&gt;