* 0223157
* Collaborative Research: Climate controls over ecosystem respiration: Using isotopes to determine the sources and age of respired carbon
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2002,11/30/2003
* James Randerson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 11/30/2003
* USD 105,512.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon enters ecosystems through a single process,
photosynthesis, and nearly all is returned to the atmosphere through
respiration, some 50-80% of which occurs below ground. Soil respiration
integrates root metabolism and the activity of decomposer organisms. While the
major processes affecting plant metabolic (autotrophic) respiration and
decomposition rates (heterotrophic respiration) are known, the ability to
predict variations in soil respiration in space and time is limited - a major
uncertainty in the current and future carbon cycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work proposed here will combine new measurement and modeling approaches for
separating autotrophic and heterotrophic respiration, and determining the age of
C respired from soils. At field sites in the Ameriflux network that span a range
of North American biomes and climates, these methods will include: (1) frequent,
automated, measurements of soil respiration and related factors; (2) isotope
mass balance methods based on measurements of stable isotopes and radiocarbon in
respired CO2; and (3) incubations to determine responses of heterotrophic
respiration components to changing soil conditions; and (4) at some sites,
manipulation of soil moisture content through rainfall exclusion. The data
generated will be used to partition soil respired C into autotrophic and
heterotrophic components, to determine the age of heterotrophically respired C
and identify the components of soil organic matter contributing to its
production, and to determine how these relationships chance with controlling
variables&lt;br/&gt;(photosynthesis rate, soil conditions, etc). The results
will be used to parameterize a new&lt;br/&gt;autotrophic respiration component
of the CASA ecosystem model, and to test how well the model predicts the balance
of sources of heterotrophic respiration on seasonal to interannual timescales.
Predictions of the CASA model will be further tested across regional gradients
spanning (1) a climosequence and (2) a suite of sites from tropical forest to
tundra. We will use atmospheric records of seasonal variation in C isotopes (13C
at the global network sites and 14C in atmospheric CO2 at Point Barrow, Alaska)
as a global test of the CASA model's ability to determine the seasonal to
interannual exchange of C between northern hemisphere terrestrial ecosystems and
the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Separating the
components of ecosystem respiration is one of the fundamentally important
research challenges in ecosystem science. This activity will use new tools, in
particular, innovative use of the radiocarbon tracer in measurements and models,
to develop process level understanding of C fluxes at selected Ameriflux
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This work will advance fundamental
understanding of how terrestrial ecosystems influence the global carbon cycle,
and will improve projections of future atmospheric concentrations of carbon
dioxide by showing how heterotrophic respiration will respond to changes in
temperature and moisture. Our program to educate students through a short course
in radiocarbon at the W.M. Keck Carbon Cycle Accelerator Mass Spectrometry
facility will train the next generation of scientists in the applications of
radiocarbon to study land and ocean C cycling.&lt;br/&gt;