* 0223992
* BE/MUSE:  Towards a Sustainable Potable Water Infrastructure- Ecology, Aesthetics and Economics of Corrosion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2003
* G. Loganathan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 08/31/2003
* USD 109,999.00

0223992 Edwards This MUSES project will build an interdisciplinary team to
comprehensively address drinking water infrastructure corrosion, which is a
multi-billion dollar world-wide problem plaguing water suppliers and home
owners. Corrosion is devastating due to the economic burden of replacing
plumbing, potential adverse health effects of corrosion by-products, and
unwanted and fear-producing aesthetic problems including discolored water and
off tastes and odors. The interdisciplinary team will synthesize a better
understanding of corrosion through discussions of: chemical and biological
causes of corrosion in pipes; economic models that assess costs of
infrastructure damage and replacement; sensory properties of metals and sensory
evaluation methods; health, consumer, and regulatory issues related to drinking
water. The participating research professionals and students represent six
disciplines (Civil and Environmental Engineering, Economics, Food and Sensory
Science, Public Health, Regulatory Affairs, Water Treatment and Supply), three
countries, six different national agencies and associations, and three
universities. Participation of these diverse groups will produce the scientific
and engineering insights necessary for improving safe water in a manner that is
tempered by societal and regulatory needs.&lt;br/&gt;The project's impacts will
be broader than just its technical discoveries. The participants are committed
to scientific and public dissemination of their knowledge. Two white papers will
be submitted for publication in scientific journals. The public will be directly
served by involving a citizen's group in discussions, preparing public interest
out-reach materials for a consumer-based website, and other non-technical
articles will appear in Op-Flow (a widely read water industry publication for
utility workers).&lt;br/&gt;