* 0223279
* The Physical and Chemical Mechanisms Responsible for Carbon Sequestration in Soil Microaggregates
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Julie Jastrow, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2006
* USD 150,000.00

ABSTRACT

The dynamics of soil aggregate formation and stability have profound
implications to understanding and enhancing C sequestration in soil. Soil
microaggregates are particularly crucial to long-term sequestration because they
protect C against decomposition, resulting in much longer residence times for C.
However, the reasons why organic carbon in soil microaggregates has such long
residence times is not well understood. The goal of this research is to
determine the structural and chemical bases of soil microaggregate formation and
stability. This goal will be accomplished by investigating the internal surface
morphology of microaggregates and the distribution of C within microaggregates,
as well as the nanoscale organomineral associations underlying microaggregate
structure and stability. The evolution of these features will be examined in a
series of soils representing agronomic management systems that affect C
accumulation (till versus no-till, conventional versus organic), as well as
land-use options for enhanced C storage (prairie restoration, forage management
systems).

This proposal focuses on microaggregates; however, the value and significance of
the proposed research will be leveraged by collaborations with several
investigators who are working on the evolution of soil aggregates at the same
field sites. Their participation links the results of our study to quantitative
and qualitative changes in carbon storage, as affected by management practices.
Conversely, our process-level insights will provide a mechanistic explanation
for the changes they observe in accumulation or loss of soil carbon under
different agronomic systems or land use options.

Hypotheses relating aggregate structure to C accumulation and management
practices will be tested using multiple state-of-science techniques including
(1) N2 adsorption to determine the accessible surface area within
microaggregates and assess whether exposed surfaces are organic or inorganic,
(2) Small Angle Neutron and X-Ray Scattering to characterize the surface area
and size distribution of the total porosity, and, using contrast matching
techniques, determine the accessibility of internal porosity to microbes,
exocellular enzymes, and nutrients, (3) Scanning Electron Microscopy to
visualize intact microaggregates and help interpret N2 adsorption and scattering
data, and (4) Scanning Transmission X-ray Microscopy that allows for collection
of X-ray spectral data to evaluate the chemical composition of intra-aggregate
OM and identify the presence of inherently recalcitrant molecules, or show
preservation of labile compounds. Data from all four techniques will be
interpreted in the context of a fractal model of pore space geometries.

By comparing differences in the mechanisms influencing microaggregate formation
and stability, coupled with information from collaborators on the size and
dynamics of soil carbon pools, the emerging patterns will be broadly relevant to
identifying major mechanisms controlling rates of carbon transfer in soils. This
enhanced understanding will provide a scientific basis for developing effective
management strategies to enhance C sequestration in terrestrial systems, which
is one of the major goals of the Carbon Cycle Science Plan. Specifically, the
proposal focuses on process-level studies to define and quantify key mechanisms
for carbon transformation and retention in soil. The project will integrate
research and education through participation of a student and postdoctoral
fellow. Their scientific perspectives will be further broadened and enhanced by
their interactions with our diverse group of collaborators. The students'
experiences in this project will position them to be leaders who will make major
contributions to the long-term effort to understand the global carbon cycle.