* 0223312
* CaRTE Workshop: Carbon Respiration from Terrestrial Ecosystems - Reducing Uncertainties in the role played by respiration in the global carbon cycle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Susan Trumbore, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2006
* USD 72,277.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to conduct a workshop that will
synthesize and advance understanding of terrestrial ecosystem respiration.
Carbon enters ecosystems through a single process, photosynthesis, and nearly
all is returned to the atmosphere through respiration. Respiration spans the
activity of many organisms, from the plants that fixed the carbon to soil fauna
decomposing plant tissue residues, and the time carbon spends in an ecosystem
can vary from minutes to millennia. While the major processes affecting plant
metabolic (autotrophic) respiration and decomposition rates (heterotrophic
respiration) are known, our ability to predict the variation in soil respiration
in space and time is limited. - a major uncertainty in the current and future
carbon cycle. To reduce this uncertainty this workshop will bring up to 50
ecosystem, soil, and carbon cycle scientists together to 1) identify the current
disparities and limitations in various measurement methods, 2) identify the key
processes controlling autotrophic and heterotrophic that should be incorporated
in models, 3) plan new observational, experimental, and modeling activities
based on the new questions that emerge from a synthesis of our current
understanding. This workshop will produce a group of synthesis papers that will
constitute a journal special feature on trends and uncertainties in
understanding and predicting ecosystem respiration. Recent advances in
methodology and modeling have focused research in terrestrial ecosystem
respiration on a few key topics, which are the ones this workshop will
address:&lt;br/&gt;What factors control how total ecosystem respiration
partitioned into (a) aboveground and belowground components and (b) autotrophic
versus heterotrophic sources in a range of space and time scales? How do the
different fractions of organic matter that contribute to heterotrophic
respiration change with factors like temperature and moisture and how will these
potentially provide feedbacks to climate change? What is the role of time lags
and site history in determining the magnitude and variability of fluxes on
seasonal, interannual and decadal timescales?&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.
Terrestrial ecosystem respiration remains one of the key elements of the global
carbon cycle that limits our ability to predict future CO2 concentrations. This
workshop will provide a plan for the community to resolve current areas of
controversy, such as the potential for increased heterotrophic respiration to
act as a feedback to global warming.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. By producing a
series of papers on this topic in a peer-reviewed journal special issue, the
workshop will have broad impact and influence future research planned in this
area. The workshop will provide a venue for international exchange of ideas, and
student participation in the workshop will be encouraged.&lt;br/&gt;