* 0223488
* Exploratory Research: A New Paradigm for the Design of Retail Facilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Georgia-Ann Klutke, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Realff
* 02/28/2005
* USD 150,000.00

Manufacturing and service enterprises invest significant resources in the design
and operation of factories and warehouses. If properly executed, the physical
configuration of these facilities can simplify the flow of material and
products. If poorly executed, it can lead to severe inefficiencies, high
operating costs, and poor quality. Over the years, much attention has been
focused on effectively planning the layout of manufacturing and logistical
facilities. In contrast, the design and planning of retail facilities has been
given little attention despite the importance of the retail sector to the
overall economy. Retail layout problems differ from manufacturing/logistics
layout problems in several significant ways: (1) the objective of retail
facilities is to maximize sales rather than to minimize travel time or material
moves; (2) customer demand is both highly variable and unpredictable; (3)
customers often augment an initial shopping list with impulse items that they
encounter in their sojourn through the facility; &lt;br/&gt;(4) retail
facilities are essentially self service facilities; (5) and except for checkout,
customers are an integral part of the service
mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop a
framework for a quantitative approach to the design of retail facilities. Our
activities are focused on modeling customer demand, characterizing customer
flow, and formulating suitable optimization problem(s), including specifying an
appropriate objective function and constraints for both the physical layout of
customer paths and the sequencing of product families in the facility. We intend
to focus on non-traditional layouts that we believe may significantly outperform
traditional aisle-based layouts commonly found in many retail facilities. While
this research is exploratory in nature, it will build on the long history of
research in layout for manufacturing facilities. Moreover, we believe this
research has the potential to extend operations research techniques to an
important economic sector that has been overlooked in the past. Additionally,
this research will open a new area for teaching facility design. It will provide
the foundation for introducing retail facility layout into facility design
courses, which are common core courses in industrial engineering
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;