* 0223655
* SGER: Vasotiinergic Mechanisms Associated with the Control of Social Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Richmond Thompson, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2003
* USD 88,906.00

There are two closely related peptide hormones called arginine vasotocin
&lt;br/&gt;(AVT) and arginine vasopressin (AVP) that have been implicated in
several &lt;br/&gt;vertebrates as modulators of social behavior, including
courtship, pair-bonding, &lt;br/&gt;parenting, and aggression. The mechanisms by
which these molecules act in &lt;br/&gt;the brain to produce these behavioral
effects remain unclear, but their &lt;br/&gt;widespread distribution suggests
they are evolutionarily conserved. It has been &lt;br/&gt;suggested that AVT/AVP
may affect the processing of species-typical social &lt;br/&gt;releasing stimuli
such as courtship calls, visual displays, or chemical signals. It is
&lt;br/&gt;important to take a comparative approach to this question, to
determine whether &lt;br/&gt;or not AVT/AVP can selectively influence behavioral
and brain responses to the &lt;br/&gt;specific releasing stimuli that have
evolved in different groups of animals for &lt;br/&gt;social communication. This
project is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research to &lt;br/&gt;test this
hypothesis directly using goldfish, because the exact chemical stimuli
&lt;br/&gt;important for courtship and aggressive communication signals in this
species are &lt;br/&gt;uniquely identified and can be delivered quantitatively.
The project is exploratory &lt;br/&gt;because it is not yet clear whether AVT
will influence social behavior in goldfish, &lt;br/&gt;although AVT effects on
social behavior have been shown in other teleost fish, &lt;br/&gt;and some
AVT/AVP effects are known for diverse other vertebrates. &lt;br/&gt;Experiments
manipulating AVT levels in the brain will measure effects on
&lt;br/&gt;courtship and aggressive behaviors in male goldfish during responses
to &lt;br/&gt;particular chemosensory social stimuli that release those
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt; This is a high-impact/high-risk project because the
outcome is not clear, but &lt;br/&gt;the potential impact of success is wide-
ranging. If successful, the results will &lt;br/&gt;lead to further studies on
social regulatory functions of hormones, will have an &lt;br/&gt;impact beyond
behavioral neuroendocrinology to brain neurochemistry, animal
&lt;br/&gt;behavior, and evolutionary neuroscience, and could have an impact on
&lt;br/&gt;applications in aquaculture and fisheries
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;