* 0223943
* SPIN ELECTRONICS:  Spintronics in Y-junction carbon nanotubes
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Jimmy Xu, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 09/30/2006
* USD 300,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
Century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on
spin dependent transport and spintronics functionality in a unique
nanostructured system - Y-junction Carbon Nanotubes.&lt;br/&gt;The Y-junction
nanotubes, first fabricated by one of the PIs (JMX)-combine the attractive
properties of carbon nanotubes (effectively 1D electronic transport with long
ballistic mean free paths and exceptionally high current densities)with a three-
terminal geometry and a built-in heterojunction barrier at the Y-branching
point. Spin transport in ordinary, straight ferromagnetically contacted multi-
walled carbon nanotubes, first studied by another of the PIs, has yielded
excellent spin-polarized injection efficiencies and long spin-scattering lengths
on the order of 0.25 um, making ferromagnet-nanotube hybrids a promising
spintronics platform. The spin transport in a Y-junction with the built-in
heterobarrier is already interesting and unexplored. But what makes the proposed
devices unique is the possibility applying both ferromagnetic and normal metal
contacts to the three terminals of the Y-junction, as well as using different
ferromagnetic materials (with separately switchable magnetizations)for contacts
to the same device. This unprecedented flexibility will enable us, for example,
to clearly distinguish spin-mediated injection and extraction of currents from
ordinary injection, tune the transmission of spin up and spin down electrons by
means of a control voltage on the third terminal, witch the spin-coherent
current from one Y-junction arm to another by switching the magnetization with
an external field, and more generally produce a true three-terminal spintronic
transistor.&lt;br/&gt; However great the potential of this new nanostructured
system may be, a great amount of challenging work, from fabrication of the
Y-junction nanotubes to fabrication of nano-scale contacts to cryogenic
measurements of the contacted Y-junctions in the presence of magnetic fields
externally modulated, will have to done first to prove the concepts. This NSF
project is launched for these proof-of-concept explorations, and for paving the
pathway to this new and exciting field of opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;