* 0223869
* Collaborative Research:  Global Ocean Repeat Hydrography, Carbon, and Tracer Measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2010
* Lynne Talley, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 12/31/2010
* USD 3,848,561.00

A systematic and global re-occupation of select hydrographic sections will be
conducted with the objective of quantifying changes in storage and transport of
heat, fresh water, carbon dioxide (CO2) and related parameters. The program is
in support of the CLImate VARiability and predictability (CLIVAR) and Carbon
Science Programs, and is a component of a global observing system for the
physical climate and carbon system. By integrating the scientific needs of the
carbon and hydrography/tracer communities, major synergies and cost savings will
be achieved. In addition to efficiency, a coordinated approach will produce
scientific advances that exceed those of having individual programs. These
advances will contribute to the following overlapping scientific objectives:
Data for Model Calibration, Validation and Model Based Synthesis; Carbon System
Studies; Heat and Freshwater Storage and Flux Studies; Deep and Shallow Water
Mass and Ventilation Studies; and Calibration of Autonomous Sensors. A joint
study of the ocean carbon cycle and circulation will help identify critical
areas where potential changes in ocean circulation could have serious
consequences for future anthropogenic uptake. Global warming-induced changes in
the ocean's transport of heat and freshwater, which could affect the
circulation, can be followed through long-term measurements. The sections
proposed consist of approximately two meridional and two zonal lines in each
ocean, for a total of 10 sections over 6 field years. The core measurements
include hydrography (CTD, salinity, oxygen, nutrients, L/ADCP, Underway T, S,
pCO2, bathymetry, navigation), carbon system (DIC, pCO2. TAlk, pH, DOC, DON),
and transient tracers (CFCs, tritium/3He). In addition to the collection of the
data, quality control measures will be routinely carried out by providers of
reference-quality data. Post-cruise data updates, distribution, and archive will
be managed by groups with separate funding. The field work will be integrated
with a larger international effort to monitor the ocean's response to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results will be disseminated
broadly to enhance scientific and technological understanding. The program is
based on the fundamental concept that data collected belong to the community,
and are available to the community at large rather than being proprietary for
the investigators involved in the project. The data policy proposed will be
stringent and geared towards rapid and open dissemination, and with a clear
structure for all data to undergo thorough quality control. Such an ambitious
goal requiring this degree of openness has not been tried on a large scale
before. The program benefits to society include the collection of a high quality
data set, and use of the data to assess climate change. The global program will
provide full water column data of climatically significant parameters with
decadal coverage. These data will be used to assess climate change by
quantifying the uptake and storage of anthropogenic CO2 by the ocean, and
contributing to an understanding and models of the processes that control the
uptake and transport of CO2 into the ocean's interior. Since these are likely to
be the only systematic observations below 2000 m, they will be used to document
long term trends in ocean warming, and heat and freshwater fluxes. The data will
be a resource for model calibration of the climate system. The proposed program
will promote training and learning. It will serve as a community resource for
training and entraining graduate students, postdoctoral scientists, and new
scientists. Funds are budgeted in the lead proposal for graduate students, post-
docs, and young, non-seagoing scientists to participate in each cruise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;