* 0223817
* Collaborative Research:  Spin-electronic Dynamics in Three Terminal Couples Quantum Structures
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Eric Altman, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2006
* USD 205,415.00

Eric I. Altman, Yale University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Spin-electronic Dynamics
in Three Terminal Coupled Quantum Structures"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on exploring enabling technologies to allow the spin degree of freedom
to be used as the controlling mechanism for quantum communication and computing.
The principal investigators will fabricate and study coupled quantum-dot (QD)
systems consisting of closely spaced III-V semiconductor, gallium arsenide
(GaAs) quantum dots controlled by separated electrodes. The systems will be
designed to transmit spin charges into QDs and to couple them in the neighboring
dots by exchange interaction. Such a system is the first step toward building
quantum logic gates, because the spin of one dot affects the electronic charge
transport in the other dots by the exchange coulomb blockage effect. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The spin states and the degree of coupling between the quantum dots
can also be controlled by applied magnetic and/or electric fields. Magnetic
contacts will serve as spin sources to provide carriers with particular spin
orientation. The tunneling of these carriers through a particular dot will
depend on the available spin state in the dot. This provides a convenient and
practical way of determining the spin orientation of a particular dot and thus
the variation of the spin in this dot after a certain time interval. Studying
the spin dynamics in the context of manipulating and controlling individual spin
states in each dot, and collectively in coupled quantum dots provides basic
technology for fabricating quantum transistors and logic gates for quantum
computing and communication devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful
fabrication of coupled dot systems requires employing state of the art synthetic
methods at SUNY Binghamton. The fabrication of electrode structures at nanometer
scales will use lithography on metallic thin films. The preparation of
semiconductor quantum dots, such as GaAs, in the nanometer scales will utilize
various synthetic, processing and assembling strategies. Methods will also be
developed to produce GaAs:Mn nanoparticles; the manganese (Mn) doping can
enhance spin state operating temperature in quantum dots. These semiconductor
nanoparticles will be characterized using spectroscopic and microscopic
techniques at both Yale and Binghamton. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spin charge
exchange interaction between neighboring QDs will be studied by producing highly
monodispersed III-V semiconductor nanoparticles self-assembled in a narrow gap
about hundreds of nanometers wide between two metallic electrodes made by
lithography. The study of detailed tunneling characteristics as a function of
temperature and bias will be carried out in a magnetic cryostat at Binghamton.
At Yale, scanning tunneling microscopy will be used to characterize the size,
morphology, and electronic properties of the nanoparticles and their positioning
between the electrodes. Magneto-infrared spectroscopy will be carried out on
self-assembled semiconductor nano-particle arrays to examine spin exchange
coupling between QDs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This research will
strongly impact future technologies in new functional devices based on spin
degree of freedom, particularly providing assistance to the development of
three-terminal spin field-effect-transistors using the developed techniques.
These activities will allow the graduate students involved to learn and prepare
themselves to become future technologists for developing next generation
communication and computing devices. The integration of the nanostructure and
novel computing technology into the curricula will provide interdisciplinary
experiences for better career training for the students involved. &lt;br/&gt;