* 0223848
* Studies of Spin-Electronic Materials Using Synchrotron Radiation
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Yi-Han Kao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 12/31/2006
* USD 239,997.00

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on
x-ray studies of spin-electronic materials using synchrotron radiation.
Systematic investigation of short-range-order structure, chemical valency, and
local magnetic moment around constituent atoms in magnetic semiconductors will
be carried out using state-of-the-art synchrotron radiation techniques including
extended x-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS), near-edge x-ray absorption
fine structure (NEXAFS) and x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD). In
addition, interface morphology, compositional intermixing and diffusion depth
profile of magnetic ions in various heterostructures used in spin-injection
devices will also be investigated by grazing incidence x-ray scattering (GIXS)
and angular dependence of x-ray fluorescence (ADXRF) techniques. The
nanostructure information obtained from these x-ray experiments is important for
understanding the mechanisms responsible for the special electronic and magnetic
properties of innovative spin-electronic materials for device applications. The
materials to be studied include digital alloys and random alloys of III-V
magnetic semiconductors, some have already been found with a Curie temperature
above the room temperature. Other magnetic compound semiconductors such as II-
VI, II-IV-V2, and II-VI2 systems with room-temperature ferromagnetism will also
be investigated. These experimental approaches are based on this research team's
extensive experience in the past decade of using x-ray scattering, fluorescence,
and absorption techniques for nondestructive characterization of III-V magnetic
alloy semiconductors and heterostructures. This group makes use of both soft and
hard x-rays with both linear and circular polarization for materials research.
Not many other x-ray research teams are doing experiments in both wavelength
regimes with both types of polarization. The nanostructure information obtained
in these experiments will be used as a feedback to crystal/epilayer growers for
nondestructive evaluation of the materials, and from which to select more
appropriate conditions for improving the material characteristics to meet device
requirements. For the upcoming fiscal years 2002-2004, this research program
will emphasize on the following areas: (i) local structures around magnetic ions
in magnetic alloy semiconductors and magnetic digital alloys, and (ii) interface
morphology, compositional intermixing and diffusion depth profile of magnetic
ions in heterostructures of magnetic semiconductors and metals/alloys as well as
their relation with spin-injection efficiency. The proposed research is expected
to make significant contributions to both fundamental understanding of layered
magnetic semiconductors and applications of the new magnetic materials in the
exciting field of spin-electronics.



