* 0223987
* MUSES:    Disposable and Reusable Textile Materials in Healthcare Facilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Susan Kaiser, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 08/31/2004
* USD 110,000.00

This Biocomplexity in the Environment (BE) for Materials Use: Science,
Engineering, and Society (MUSES) incubation activity will investigate the
physical, sociological, and economic impacts of disposable and reusable textiles
used in healthcare facilities. Exploratory research conducted by an
interdisciplinary team consisting of a polymer chemist, a marketing expert and a
social psychologist, intends to address questions raised about textile materials
currently being used in healthcare facilities and to reassess economic and
environmental consequences of using the materials. The analysis of the
acceptance and potential impacts of new materials and technologies that are
environmentally benign in the healthcare arena is the longer-term objective.
Protective clothing and textiles in the medical sphere include surgical gowns,
gloves, drapes, wraps, sheets, covers, and facemasks; these are composed of two
different textile materials--disposable and reusable fabrics-that serve
primarily to impede the transmission of pathogens in healthcare facilities.
Disposables, also called non-woven fabrics, are mostly produced from
polyethylene, polypropylene, and their blends. After usage, they should be
immediately disposed of as bio-hazardous materials. In contrast, reusable
textiles, such as those comprised of pure cotton fibers and certain polyesters,
can be repeatedly used in healthcare facilities.

Specific research tasks include: (1) to determine the most effective, multi-
functional (biocidal and water-repellent) materials for medical applications;
(2) to assess the economic and environmental impact of using reusable biocidal
textiles in the healthcare industry; (3) to determine the social and
psychological factors affecting the acceptance of the new technology by
healthcare workers. Educational activities include a) involving undergraduate
and graduate student in the research and to incorporate the research results
into a senior undergraduate course; b) providing educational materials to
workers in healthcare community and other hazardous Cupertino as was as to
manufacturers of textile materials; c) educating the public about the
environmental and economic impacts as well as protective properties of the
different textile materials in healthcare facilities. The results of this
research will be used to make recommendations regarding materials that are
environmentally benign, protect against pathogens and are acceptable to
healthcare workers.