* 0223117
* ESS:  Outsourcing Warranty and Repair Services
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Jayashankar Swaminathan, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Realff
* 01/31/2005
* USD 149,820.00

The service sector is the largest and a fast growing sector of the US economy
accounting for 80% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Specifically, warranty
and repair services form a major component of the manufacturing and retail
industry and there has been a rising trend to outsourcing the warranty services.
This provides an opportunity for the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) to
improve turnaround times by using the core competencies of the vendors
specializing in repairs and maintenance. However, it also poses downward risks
in terms of customer satisfaction, particularly in cases where poor experience
in repair services may translate into future lost sales. The investigators plan
to explore the following main issues faced by the OEMs. (1) Contract: The
original manufacturer's contract with the service provider could be based on a
fixed or variable fee per repair, or a lump sum amount of money per customer for
the duration of the contract or other combinations. The contracts could have
quality of service requirements associated with it. The OEM also has to
determine how many service providers to contract with and whether or not to
treat all of them in an identical fashion. Furthermore, the vendors of warranty
services typically compete among themselves for the outsourcing business from
the OEM. The OEM needs to understand the implication of this competition while
designing contracts. (2) Allocation: How should the OEM allocate its customers
to the different service providers? One commonly used approach is to perform
static allocation of customers based on costs, proximity, etc. Another approach
is to route the customer (in need of service) to an appropriate service provider
based on the current workload of all providers. A third option is to
differentiate the customers based on priorities and treat them accordingly.
While performing the allocation the manufacturer needs to balance the cost
benefits of allocating more jobs to less expensive service provider with the
service delays customers may experience when there is congestion at a service
provider.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by interaction with the PC industry,
the investigators plan to model and optimize the contracts and allocations. The
investigators strongly believe that this research will provide novel qualitative
insights on effectively outsourcing warranty and repair services. In addition,
the investigators plan to develop fast solution methods that can handle industry
size problems and can provide a real-time decision support for
managers.&lt;br/&gt;