* 0223200
* Photochemical Formation of Carbon Dioxide from Dissolved Organic Matter: A New Approach to Constraining a Major Term in Marine Carbon Cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Oliver Zafiriou, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2007
* USD 399,972.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0223200&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
discoveries have shown that photoxidation of colored dissolved organic matter
(CDOM) also lead to the formation of dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) or photo-
CO2. Fluxes of photo-CO2 are estimated to produce one to several gigatons of
CO2-C per year globally. A PI from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution proposes
to constrain photo-CO2 production using the Pool Isotopic Exchange (PIE) method,
a technique which does not require perturbing the sample as occurs in currently
available methods (i.e., changing pH, removing carbonate system, bubbling of
sample). In the PIE method, the DI12C pool in seawater is replaced via exchange
with DI13CO2 during incubation of the samples; thus, the DI12C pool which
dilutes the newly formed 12CO2 (DI12C) from dissolved organic carbon (DOC) is
minimized without major perturbations of the physical and chemical properties of
the sample. The rates of formation of DI12C as a result of photoxidation will be
measured by isotope ratio mass spectrometry (IRMS). The objectives of the
proposal are to develop, test and optimize the PIE approach both in the
laboratory and in the field. In addition, the PI will apply the PIE method and
compare his results with those obtained by a collaborator from the State
University of New York, Stony Brook using the Pool Depletion (PD) technique on
the same samples recovered from waters enriched in CDOM. Lastly, the PI plans to
resolve any potential discrepancies obtained via the PIE and PD methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;