* 0223770
* Optical Properties of Terahertz-Modulated Quantum Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/16/2001,07/31/2003
* David Citrin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/2003
* USD 203,460.00

0073364 Citrin This research grant focuses on the optical properties of
semiconductor heterostructures, including quantum wells (QW's), quantum wires
(QWR's), quantum dots (QD's) and microcavities (MC's), in the presence of
terahertz (THz) electromagnetic fields. This research area, in addition to being
of fundamental interest, has received a two-fold impetus from high-speed
electronics and from high-bandwidth optical communications. Of particular
interest to this research is the regime of low carrier density in which few
electrons or holes are excited by the optical beam; the coherence properties of
the carriers play an essential role.

Previous reseach considered the dynamics of electron-hole (e-h) pairs excited by
ultrafast optical pulses in the presence of THz fields. Because the bandwidth of
a sub-ps optical pulse can be in excess of 10 meV, e-h pairs with varying
degrees of excess energy (or excitons in different states of their internal
motion) are excited by the optical pulse forming a wavepacket. Such studies
provide an analogy to several atomic physics phenomena, including the dynamics
of Rydberg wavepackets, above-threshold ionization, and high-field harmonic
generation. The focus of the proposed work is to explore this analogy further,
but more so to push into the domain where intrinsic solid state effects, such as
many-body effects and carrier-phonon scattering, begin to make their presence
felt by leading to dephasing of the optically excited e-h pairs. Thus, the first
optical nonlinearities that kick in as the optical intensity is increased beyond
the linear optical regime will be studied. Specifically, how do carrier-carrier
and carrier-phonon scattering lead to dephasing of the optically excited
electronic excitations, and how does this dephasing modify the spatial motion of
e-h wavepackets excited by short optical pulses and driven by THz fields? What
is the nature of phonons emitted by such wavepackets; can coherent wavepackets
of phonons be launched by THz-driven e-h wavepackets? Can scattering rates
themselves be modified by the dynamics of the THz-driven e-h wavepackets?

In addition to being an untapped area of fundamental importance in the
spectroscopy of semiconductors, light propagation through THz-modulated quantum
wells povides an optical analog for a class of time-domain single-particle
quantum tranport phenomena that are otherwise infeasible to study. In
particular, tracking the temporal evolution of coherent wavepackets during the
tunneling process is of fundamental interest and yet difficult, if not in
practice impossible, to access in quantum transport experiments. Fortuitously,
there is a close analogy between the scalar classical electromagnetic wave
equation and the single-particle Schroedinger equation. This means that in a
certain regime one can model by correspondence the quantum mechanical dynamics
of a particle by an appropriate light-propagation experiment. This
correspondence extends to the phase, i.e., quantum mechanical phase maps to
optical phase. Clearly, interferometric experiments are routine in optics but
require a tour de force effort in quantum transport. A particularly interesting
class of phenomena involves quantum tunneling through a time-modulated
potential. The connections between the same type of processes that are
associated with the formation of THz sidebands on optical spectra of THz
illuminated semiconductors with quantum transport phenomena.

The theoretical research will focus on regimes where neither the QW/atom or
optical/transport analogies entirely hold, such as the nonlinear optical regime
- where THz-modulated semiconductor heterostructures present new possibilities.
Specifically, the propagation of cw and ultrafast optical pulses through
heterostructures subjected to pulsed or narrow-band THz fields will be studied.
%%% This research grant focuses on the optical properties of semiconductor
heterostructures, including quantum wells (QW's), quantum wires (QWR's), quantum
dots (QD's) and microcavities (MC's), in the presence of terahertz (THz)
electromagnetic fields. This research area, in addition to being of fundamental
interest, has received a two-fold impetus from high-speed electronics and from
high-bandwidth optical communications. Of particular interest to this research
is the regime of low carrier density in which few electrons or holes are excited
by the optical beam; the coherence properties of the carriers play an essential
role. ***

