* 0223692
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  The Production and Use of Ground and Polished Stone Tools in Lianchengzhen, China
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Anne Underhill, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2003
* USD 11,994.00

With the support of the National Science Foundation, Geoffrey Cunnar will
conduct his dissertation research on the Liangchengzhen site, one of the largest
known Longshan Period (2,600-1,900 BC) archaeological sites on the east coast of
Shandong Province, China. The Longshan period existed just before the rise of
Xia and Shang dynasties when numerous types of Longshan groups spread throughout
a vast area of eastern China and appear to have consisted of well stratified,
competitive, territorial polities, which often engaged in regional exchange of
wealth items and warfare. Specialized production and exchange of ceramics, jade
and other wealth items, along with the appearance of large towns, proto-writing
and incipient bronze metallurgy are seen as hallmarks of the period. Seven years
of collaborative systematic survey in the eastern Shandong region and three
seasons of collaborative excavations (1999-2001), supported by the National
Science Foundation and directed by Dr. Anne Underhill and Dr. Gary Feinman and
their colleagues at Shandong University, have identified Liangchengzhen as the
center of a multi-tiered settlement hierarchy. The excavation team has uncovered
numerous important finds from the Late Neolithic period including houses, burial
remains, and finely made craft goods. Analysis of these finds will enable the
project to achieve their goal of understanding the origins and development of
civilization in the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Cunnar's dissertation work
focuses on the production and use of ground and polished stone tools. By the
Late Neolithic period in China, ground and polished stone tools appear to have
become the dominant form of stone tools. In an effort to better understand the
role of stone tools in Longshan society, Mr. Cunnar's research will focus on
three questions: 1. How were stone tools used? 2. Where were stone tools made
and what type of stone were they made from? 3. What was the organization of
production? Mr. Cunnar will replicate and then use many of the ancient tool
forms. The use of the tools will be guided in part by ethnographic observations
of modern Chinese farmers in the region and their use of contemporary hand
tools. The microscarring and polish formation on the edges of the replicated
tools will be compared to that present on the ancient tools. Such a systematic
study will aid in determining the use of ancient tools and elucidating the
ancient manufacturing methods. A number of studies have proposed that elite
control over economic systems is a major causal factor in the development of
complex societies. Typically, "elites" hold the highest valued positions from
which they control significant portions of the economy serving to bolster their
own status, prestige and authority. Mr. Cunnar's research will explore what
control, if any, the elite population might have exerted of the production of
stone tools such as ritual battle-axes. The recent excavations systematically
employed the use of screens and the collection of numerous soil samples. These
procedures have resulted in the recovery of a very large amount of stone tools
and tool fragments, a first for Shandong archaeology. Typological and contextual
analysis of the several thousand stone tools will help understand where tools
were being manufactured, what types of tools were made, and who was making them.
The stone raw materials will be identified. These data can be correlated with
the materials corresponding source location and frequency of use to understand
the relative importance and role of the various stone types in the Longshan
economy. Collaborative research projects are in their infancy in China. The
results of this research will provide data of interest to many scholars studying
the development of complex society in
China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;