* 0223670
* MUSE:   Industrial Solvents and Working Fluids-Industrial Ecology of Organic Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Michael Overcash, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2004
* USD 129,995.00

This one-year MUSES pilot study of industrial ecology is designed to define a
workable framework for the analysis of new or environmentally beneficial
solvents, considering the life cycle of industrial solvents and working fluids,
the supply chain implications, and the factors that influence organizations'
decisions to adopt new solvent technologies that improve the environment. In
contrast to many organics, which are reacted, formed, or consumed in
manufacturing, industrial solvents and working fluids are generally recycled
within a process, and therefore have a clear, extended life cycle. Over this
life cycle, the influences on human and ecological systems occur from chemical
losses and from energy emissions, and are both local and global. Economic
influences are also manifested over the entire life cycle supply chain and
affect decisions regarding particular solvents and working fluids.

This planning project will 1) evaluate specific tools that are available or need
to be developed in order to determine the environmental emissions and energy
requirements for the five subsystems of the manufacturing industrial ecology
system, 2) establish a set of chemical, material, or technology alternatives
that have environmental benefits for a case facility's product, 3) identify
pivotal factors that influence organizational decisions regarding the use of
environmentally friendly inputs. With respect to these organizational decisions,
we will consider how various factors influence organizations to green their
supply chains and improve human and ecological environment, assessing how
environmental information is used over the supply chain to achieve economic
improvement. Educational planning includes cross-training of students in this
interdisciplinary topic.