* 0223006
* Using Force Feedback Devices to Train and Assess Recognition of Force Signals as a Component of Professional Skill
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Geb Thomas, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2005
* USD 330,225.00

This research is intended to develop and evaluate a haptic simulator suitable
for training people to detect very small features in a physical surface such as
a human tooth. A driving force behind the apparent demise of professional haptic
skill in recent years may simply be a failure to develop and maintain
sufficiently rigorous standards of skill specification, training and assessment.
Haptic information is not readily amenable to either verbal or visual
clarification, and yet professionals such as dentists, jewelers and engravers
must learn haptic skills. Limitations of our language make it difficult to
accurately describe haptic techniques; our haptic vocabulary consists of vague
words such as "tough," "spongy," and "sticky." It is also difficult to visually
demonstrate or assess haptic skills. Instructors are unable to see exactly how
hard a student presses. Unlike visual information, instructors are generally
unable to share a haptic experience with a student. The salvation of haptic
skills may lie with computers, strain gauges and motors. These devices can
accurately record, visually display, and endlessly reproduce haptic signals.
Together, these technologies present an opportunity to reestablish a robust,
rewarding culture of haptic skill in the professional workplace. Such a
workplace would more productively and thoroughly engage the whole scope of human
capability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training dentists to elicit and recognize
force signals is the primary design challenge for the simulator. It will be
refined and developed around this simple criterion, placing force signal
fidelity above all other competing design criteria including: 1) the geometry of
the tooth surface, 2) the visual appearance of the tooth, 3) the precise shape
and feel of the dental tool handle, 4) the spatial resolution of the simulator
device and 5) the simulated hardness of the tooth itself. Ultimately the project
will compare the clinical performance of dentists trained with the simulator
against those trained with traditional methods. This work will provide an
important contribution to the field of haptic simulation by suggesting a method
to empirically identify force signals, benchmark a simulator's performance for
reproducing these signals, and demonstrating a tangible, practical benefit to
haptic simulator training. &lt;br/&gt;