* 0223125
* Collaborative Research:  Biocomplexity of Aquatic Microbial Systems: Relating Diversity of Microorganisms to Ecosystem Function
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Jackie Collier, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/2007
* USD 365,965.00

BIOCOMPLEXITY: Collaborative Research: Biocomplexity of aquatic microbial
systems -- relating diversity of microorganisms to ecosystem
function&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial biogeochemical cycling of the elements
regulates a dynamic environment in which the cycles of different elements are
linked through the physiology of microorganisms. While a certain degree of
understanding can be gained through physical/chemical approaches to measurement
and modeling of the net transformations, these approaches necessarily rely on
gross simplifications about the role and regulation of the various functional
groups (guilds) involved. Recent advances in molecular microbial ecology have
shown the microbial world to contain immense diversity and complexity at every
level: redundancy and duplication of functional genes within a single organism;
molecular diversity among functional genes that encode the same process in
different organisms; large genetic diversity among different organisms
apparently engaged in the same biogeochemical function within single
communities; great variability in the species composition of different
communities that apparently perform equally well. The goal of this project is to
investigate the functional relationship between complexity in microbial
communities and the physical/chemical environment at a range of biological and
ecological scales. Previously, such analysis was technologically limited by the
inability to assay large numbers of samples simultaneously for a large number of
genes and phylotypes. Using gene array technology, the researchers will be able
to detect the distribution and differential expression of functional genes in
natural systems. The results of this study will constitute the first step
towards application of DNA chip technology for gene expression of "exotic"
(i.e., not of biomedical importance) processes and organisms in the environment.
The gene arrays, along with a full suite of ecosystem process measurements, will
be deployed along a transect that spans the eutrophic - oligotrophic gradient
from the inland waters of the Chesapeake Bay out to the Sargasso Sea.
Experiments and functional gene studies will focus on key transformations in the
carbon and nitrogen cycles (C fixation, N fixation, nitrification,
denitrification, urea assimilation). The diversity of guilds will be interpreted
in terms of ecosystem function, assessed using geochemical data and tracer
experiments. In addition to field studies designed to investigate and dissect
the natural system, the group of collaborating scientists will also perform
perturbation experiments using mesocosms. The goal of these experiments is to
determine how microbial species diversity affects the major energy and nutrient
flows within ecosystems, and to assess the degree of stability or instability
associated with changes in redundancy within guilds of microorganisms
responsible for major nitrogen and carbon pathways.&lt;br/&gt;