* 0223704
* SPIN ELECTRONICS:   Band-Offset and Time-Resolved Nonlinear-Optical Studies of Magnetic Heterostructure Interfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Gunter Luepke, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 08/31/2005
* USD 275,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics of the 21st
Century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on
spin-dependent transport and magnetic phenomena at interfaces of magnetic
semiconductor quantum well structures and magnetic tunneling diodes which have
potent ml applications in spin electronics. As interfaces in these
heterostructures appear to play an essential role for the device
characteristics, a detailed study of the electronic and magnetic interface
properties as well as split transport across the heterojunctions is needed. The
objective of our experimental program is to resolve fundamental questions
regarding spin scattering, the magnetic state and the hand alignment at the
buried heterointerfaces. The effects of compound formation (intermixing),
roughness, magnetic state and defects will be studied and correlated with growth
conditions, structural properties and magneto-transport measurements. Spin
lifetimes and decoherence times will he measured by femtosecondresolved pump-
probe linear and nonlinear magneto-optical experiments to elucidate spin
scattering and spin relaxation processes at the buried heterointerfaces. Both
electrical (via a photoconductive switch) and optical injection (with linear and
circular-polarized ultrafast pulses) will be used to excite a spin population.
Internal photoemission experiments (with circular polarization) will be employed
to map the alignment of the spin-hands at the heterojunctions. The magnetization
dynamics at the buried interface will be measured using the surface-sensitive
magnetization-induced second-harmonic generation (MSGH) technique. Spectroscopic
MSGH studies will he performed to reveal interface states, which may act as spin
scattering centers at the heterojunctions. These measurements will he performed
as a function of: temperature, applied magnetic field, applied electrical bias,
composition, well thickness and/or harrier height, built-in strain and growth
conditions. The information on the spin-hand alignment obtained from these
measurements can be used to tune into resonant states thereby enhancing the
efficiency of the spin-injection process. A major focus of our program will be
the education of graduate and undergraduate students in the nascent field of
spin electronics. The students will benefit from the proposed research program,
providing them with excellent training in an interdisciplinary field including
optics and electronic materials and devices.