* 0223311
* Carbon Cycle Variations during the Last Glacial Period Based on Atmospheric Delta 14C
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Warren Beck, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2006
* USD 289,223.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;We have recently generated a long record of atmospheric
between 11-45 ka BP using coupled AMS 14C and TIMS U/Th and U/Pa dating of a
stalagmite recovered from a cave in the Bahamas (Beck et al.,2001;Richards et
al., in Press).This record reveals highly elevated 14 C during the last glacial
period, especially between 45 and 33 ka BP.&lt;br/&gt;Superimposed on this broad
peak of 14 C are numerous rapid excursions, the largest of which occurs between
44.3 and 43.3 ka. While some of the structure revealed in this record is clearly
linked to variations in the terrestrial magnetic field, other structures appear
to be correlated with Dansgaard/Oeschger variations revealed in the GISP2 18O
record, or linked to Heinrich events H1-H5.Carbon cycle box models suggest that
the major features of this record cannot be produced with solar or terrestrial
magnetic field modulation alone, but also require significant fluctuations in
the global carbon cycle as well. In this proposal, we plan to validate this
existing atmospheric 14 C record by generating additional speleothem D14C
records, and to further explore the causes of the observed fluctuations using
carbon cycle box models using appropriate inputs from sedimentary Cd/Ca,Ba/Ca,,
C, 15N and ice core 18 O to constrain ocean ventilation rates and biological
pump variability. Existing ice core records of 36Cl and 10Be will be used in
conjunction with the SINT-200 and NAPIS-75 paleomagnetic records, and with new
stalagmite 10 Be and 129 I records to constrain 14 C fluctuations stemming from
solar and magnetic forcing. A particular focus of these efforts will be
evaluation of climate induced changes in the carbon cycle that may have
accompanied Heinrich events H1,H2,&lt;br/&gt;H3, H4 and H5 and
Dansgaard/Oeschger cycles 1-12. Among the broader impacts of this proposed work
is a better understanding of the potential linkages between climate and the
carbon cycle for conditions of enhanced freshwater flux to the polar
oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will be conducted in collaboration with
researchers at the University of Bristol, England, and Royal Holloway,
University of London, England. This collaborative effort will utilize
stalagmites already in the Bristol collection and identified as good candidates
in the appropriate age range for this exercise. Separate funding for the UK
portion of this research for generation of TIMS U/Th chronology, stable isotope
records, and part of the modeling effort has already been procured through
grants from NERC and the Leverhulme Trust foundation (see letter of support).
Stalagmite 18O records will also be generated as part of the UK effort, to be
used for correlating 14 C fluctuations with GISP2 climate records (Wang et
al.,2001; Dorale et al.,1998). Funds are requested in this proposal to only
support the AMS 14 C measurement component of this effort, and to support the
University of Arizona component of the coupled carbon cycle modeling
effort.&lt;br/&gt;