* 0223760
* CCR: The First Annual Conference on Verification, Model Checking and Abstract Interpretation 2003
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Lenore Zuck, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2003
* USD 6,500.00

Embedded software is playing an important role in economy, government, and
military. Since such software is often deployed in safety critical applications,
correctness and reliability have become issues of utmost importance. Techniques
for verification and validation traditionally fall into two main categories. One
is formal verification, i.e., model checking and proof methodology. The other is
abstract interpretation and static analysis. The goal of formal Verification is
to prove that designs meet their specifications. Model Checking an automatic
approach to verification, mainly useful when dealing with finite-state systems.
Abstract Interpretation is a method for designing and comparing semantics of
programs. It has been successfully used to infer run-time program properties
that are instrumental for program optimization purposes.&lt;br/&gt;There are no
clear dividing lines in between these different methodologies. In fact, they can
be combined. An example is the exciting new research direction that combines
abstraction (of infinite-state programs into finite-state ones) with model
checking (of the finite-state system), that had produced formal and automatic
verification of many complex systems. There is a growing conviction in the
research community that hybrid methodologies are imperative for the process of
formally verifying analyzing full-fledged reactive systems.&lt;br/&gt;