* 0223119
* Processes controlling organic carbon turnover and sequestration in the land-ocean margin off the Atchafalaya River/Louisiana Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Miguel Goni, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 09/30/2005
* USD 200,028.00

Under this funding, the PI will attempt to determine the role of organic matter
compositions in controlling carbon sequestration and turnover by quantitatively
investigating how different organic carbon (OC) fractions are cycled within a
well-characterized sediment system: the Atchafalaya River/Louisiana Shelf.
Specifically, the study will trace the changes in concentration and composition
of four major OC pools of contrasting origin, particle characteristics (e.g.
density), and reactivity: (i) vascular plant debris, (ii) soil organic matter,
(iii) ancient fossil kerogen, and (iv) marine organic matter remains. The
objectives of the work are to determine the distribution of the four OC pools
within the Atchafalaya River/Louisiana Shelf dispersal system, to follow the
concentration changes and compositional transformations of these OC pools along
the dispersal system, and to determine the sequestration rates and compositional
changes of the four OC pools during burial in the Louisiana shelf. The study
consists of field sampling followed by lab studies to determine: (a) density
fractionation of sediments, (b) elemental (carbon, nitrogen) compositions, (c)
stable carbon and radiocarbon isotopic compositions, (d) 13C-NMR
characterization of organic isolates, and (e) biomarker concentrations and
isotopic signatures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;