* 0223255
* Analyzing Critical Infrastructure Dependencies:    Security and Survivability Effects in the Service Sector
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2002,12/31/2004
* H. Scott Matthews, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/2004
* USD 164,247.00

Discussions about infrastructure security and survivability require system-wide
comparisons and interdisciplinary approaches. Our consideration of survivability
focuses on large-scale economic implications of attacks or vulnerabilities on
major infrastructure sectors as defined by the Department of Commerce. We
explore the critical connections between core service infrastructure sectors
(e.g., telecommunications, electricity, and pipelines) using a total supply
chain analysis model originally developed to estimate environmental and energy
effects of production in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to use
publicly available data from the Department of Commerce's Bureau of Economic
Analysis to show the actual economic dependencies between critical
infrastructures and the service economy in general. The input-output tables of
the U.S. economy detail the economic purchases that result between all 500
domestic economic sectors. Specifically, these tables show how much output is
generated by each of the sectors, and the amounts of product other sectors
purchase from each sector. For example, the model can show not only which
sectors use electricity but also how much dollar value of electricity is used to
produce goods or services in that sector. These data are real and tangible
representations of how dependent service sector businesses are to other
businesses within the infrastructure sector and the economy in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of course, the sectors of most interest to us when
discussing vulnerabilities are sectors involved with critical infrastructure
such as the information sector. Analysis of this kind can lead to new approaches
to resource allocation for investments to assure infrastructure capabilities. To
this end, we will contribute to the national dialogue on pending threats and
risks as a result of targeted infrastructure attacks by providing a quantitative
assessment tool that shows the potential connection and failure points present
in the economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;