* 0223772
* Minority Research Opportunities in Science and Engineering at the Naval Research Laboratory
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2005
* Mark Spector, Department of Navy Naval Research Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
* Eddie Chang
* 10/31/2005
* USD 383,075.00

Mark S. Spector, Naval Research Laboratory

"Minority Research Opportunities in Science and Engineering at the Naval
Research Laboratory"

Due to cultural and historic barriers, minorities continue to be
underrepresented in science, mathematics, and engineering. Despite some growth
in the number of minorities receiving undergraduate degrees in science and
engineering, there has been little increase in the number of minorities at the
doctoral level. It is essential for the scientific community to provide training
opportunities and role models for promising young students in order to encourage
them to pursue advanced degrees in science, mathematics, and engineering and
careers in research. The Center for Bio/Molecular Science and Engineering
(CBMSE) at the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) has developed a summer internship
program for minority students that give the interns the opportunity to
experience professional laboratory research first hand. Participation is
essentially focused on undergraduates at the nation's Historically Black
Colleges and Universities, Minority Institutions, and Tribal Colleges and
Universities (HBCU/MI/TCU's). While there are several programs that provide
support for students pursuing careers in health care, this program focuses
uniquely on training future scientists and engineers.

Based upon previous success, it is proposed to renew the program. It is proposes
to increase the number of summer internships to approximately fifteen per year
by placing interns in the NRL's Center for Bio/Molecular Science and
Engineering, Physical Metallurgy Branch, and Surface Modification Branch and
increasing our recruiting effort to pursue students at additional HBCU/MI/TCU's.
It is also proposed to support up to five students per year to continue their
research at their home institute during the following school year as part of a
collaborative effort between NRL scientists and faculty members at
HCBU/MI/TCU's.

The broader impact of this activity is highlighted by the accomplishments
already made. During the first ten years of the program, ninety-three
outstanding students have spent ten weeks working at the Naval Research
Laboratory on exciting projects at the leading edge of science and technology.
This has included 48 women and 45 men from a variety of scientific disciplines:
Biology, Chemical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Physics, Chemistry,
Mathematics, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. Of the students who
have completed their undergraduate degrees, many have gone on to receive
master's degrees and approximately twenty are currently in doctoral programs.