* 0223819
* CAREER: Rapid non-destructive assessment of concrete structures using elastic waves
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/02/2002,06/30/2005
* John Popovics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 06/30/2005
* USD 149,634.00

This proposal offers an approach for rapid and accurate non-destructive
evaluation (NDE) to assess the in-place condition of concrete structures.
Sensitive and practical NDE techniques are of great value to agencies that
govern the infrastructure. However, the time and effort required to perform
current NDE tests and to analyze the results limit widespread application. This
proposal aims to develop a rapid and robust method to collect elastic wave data
from a concrete structure and an approach for imaging structures that
characterizes the location, type and magnitude of damaged areas. The proposed
approach makes use of several innovations including (a) use of surface-guided
waves, (b) sensitive, non-contact wave reception techniques such as air-coupled
transducers and laser interferometry, (c) one-sided, point source, point
receiver NDE measurements such as surface wave transmission and velocity scans,
and (d) an imaging approach that makes use of the developed measurement data. An
educational plan is closely integrated with the proposed research. The intent of
the educational plan is to design an undergraduate and graduate engineering
curriculum at Drexel University that responds to current needs of the
infrastructure industry. The plan also includes additional educational outreach
to encourage inner-city students to pursue a career in engineering.

