* 0223502
* ESS/Collaborative Research: A Methodology for Real Time Train Dispatching in High-Density Rail Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Robert Leachman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Realff
* 06/30/2005
* USD 59,864.00

This Exploratory Research on Engineering the Service Sector (ESS) addresses
real-time dispatching of heavy-haul trains in a high-density complex railway
network with multiple-track configurations, multiple priorities and multiple
speed limits. The research will provide the theory and dynamic control
algorithms for deadlock-free dispatching with minimal total train delay in
complex heavy-haul rail networks that are increasingly common in urban areas.
Determining the optimal dispatch policies that minimizes train delays and
ensures deadlock-free operations is NP-hard. Therefore, most of the research
efforts in this direction have focused on developing heuristics as well as
detailed simulations to plan dispatching policies. Theoretical efforts thus far
have only addressed trackage configurations like single, double, and partially
double rail lines. However complicating entities in a rail system like
junctions, crossovers, sidings, speed limits and goods priorities need to be
considered in order to extend the current theory to large-scale urban rail
networks. To address this need, the research will consist of the following
tasks: (1) theoretical studies focusing on developing a network representation
of this complicated physical system, and characterization of the nonlinear and
stochastic dynamics underlying the operations for laying the foundations of
developing effective dispatching algorithms, (2) development of deadlock-free
and near-optimal algorithms for the real-time dispatching of trains operating in
complex general rail networks, and (3) development of a simulation methodology
to model complicated rail networks akin to Southern California rail networks,
and validate the performance of algorithms and theory using this simulation
model.

As global trade continues to increase, cargo traffic at the nation's ports
continues to increase at dramatic levels. For example, the Ports of Los Angeles
and Long Beach are among the busiest ports in America. Booming trade with
Pacific Rim nations has seen the annual trade in the two ports exceed 100
million tons. The total volume that these ports handle is evenly divided between
transcontinental and local shipments. Furthermore, a large portion of the local
shipments are packaged and sorted at local facilities for shipment across the
continent. Railways form the major means to transcontinentally move these goods.
Forecasts show that volume growth of high-value containerized freight is set to
triple in the next 25 years. The main impact of the research will have a
significant bearing on real-world urban rail operations, many of whose pertinent
complexities have been ignored in theoretical studies thus far.