* 0223785
* Secure Networked Storage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Pierce Cantrell, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

EIA 02-23785&lt;br/&gt;Reddy, A.L. Narasimha&lt;br/&gt;Cantrell, Pierce E.;
&lt;br/&gt;Shi, Weiping&lt;br/&gt;Texas A &amp; M University (TX Engineering
Experimental Station) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CISE RR: Secure Networked
Storage Systems&lt;br/&gt;This proposal, building an experimental testbed for
research on high performance networked storage systems and the resulting issues
in network resources management, builds system level software support for secure
networked storage systems possible through iSCSI type of storage devices that
directly attach to IP networks. Test applications comprise multimedia (i.e.,
videoserver application) and VLSI CAD (distributed fault simulation). An
experimental networked implementing partial state architectures will be
developed. The network element will utilize partial state to provide a better
handle on networked and end-host traffic by regulating high bandwidth flows
through individual state while aggregating the rest of the flows (similar to how
caches are employed in current memory systems). Using realistic VLSI CAD and
multimedia applications, the work will evaluate an integrated system consisting
of storage and network elements. The project will employ video delivery as an
application to evaluate the impact of attaching devices to the network, the
storage services (i.e., third party transfers and data filtering), network
centric issues (e.g., QoS, congestion management, and transport protocols), and
new architectures and mechanisms in protecting storage systems against Denial of
Service (DOS) attacks. Moreover, the equipment will be used for developing the
target applications and for staffing DOS attacks against the new experimental
systems. Specifically the proposed research encompasses: &lt;br/&gt; Providing
third party transfers and&lt;br/&gt; Network security: QoS regulation for
mitigating DOS attacks and security enhancement through partial state network
architectures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure is expected to offer
students valuable training in systems-building, I/O and networked software,
parallel and distributed programming, performance evaluation of real systems and
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;