* 0223686
* Subsurface Exploration of Deep-Sea Archaeological Sites
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Robert Ballard, Sea Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2004
* USD 19,995.00

The abrupt flooding of the Black Sea in 5700 BC submerged wide coastal areas
and human settlements. This catastrophic event and the environmental changes it
would have caused must have influenced the progress of the agricultural
revolution in the Near East and Europe. Apparently well-preserved archaeological
sites pre-dating this flooding have recently been identified along the submerged
ancient coast of the Black Sea. These underwater sites could shed new light on
economic transformations of human society at the time of the spread of
agriculture into Europe. Geologic evidence of the rapid infilling of the Black
Sea basin received support when an ancient beachline was found during our deep
water archaeological survey near Sinop, Turkey in 1999. Bathymetry of the Black
Sea floor off the Turkish coast identified a rolling river valley along a 12
mile wide submerged coastal plain. One hundred sonar anomalies (called targets)
on the sea floor were identified by sonar and examined by remote video. Of
these, four were ancient or historic shipwrecks. One sonar target (no. 82) was
identified as a potential site of human habitation on the basis of its
distinctive outline and size. Site 82, located under 95 m of water, is composed
of large (1 x 1 m) slabs of limestone in a regular rectangular outline in an
area 15 x 6 m. Preliminary testing in 2000 indicated that the surface of Site 82
is covered with approximately 7 cm of modern sediment. A sediment sample taken
from the site had charcoal, seeds, and an elevated phosphate content consistent
with submerged archaeological sites found in other areas of the world.
Archaeological investigations are being coordinated at the University of
Pennsylvania. The Turkish authorities have granted a permit to further
investigate this site in 2003. A grant from the National Science Foundation will
allow mapping, sampling and archaeological excavations at this site, well below
the depths at which divers can work. The methodologies for robotic excavation
are experimental and are being developed in a collaboration between
archaeologists, engineers and oceanographers expressly for this project. A new
ROV which will have the capabilities to carry out archaeological investigations
robotically is being built at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute.
Approximately two weeks will be spent on-site aboard the NSF ship USS Knorr,
which is scheduled to be in the Black Sea in July, 2003. The proposed research
at Site 82 will include: 1) fine scale mapping (to a resolution of 1 cm), 2)
core sampling of sediments on- and off-site, 3) small scale excavation using the
robotic vehicle, and 4) conservation of the site and of samples recovered. The
submerged Black Sea coast appears to be a uniquely well-preserved Neolithic
landscape, unmodified by any subsequent human occupation. Site 82 in its
geographic setting offers us unusual potential for understanding the key
relationship between human history and environmental change. Results of the
investigation at Site 82 should provide detailed information about the ancient
economy and culture of the Black Sea region prior to the flooding, The
associated oceanographic studies should provide answers to questions concerning
the nature and rapidity of environmental change at a critical period in the
transformation of societies of the Near East and Europe. The robotic research
tools being developed for this investigation will open new possibilities for the
study of submerged surfaces, applicable in any shallow or deep water
environment.