* 0223870
* MUSES:   Research and Education in Integrated Assessment Methodologies for Product Design and Strategies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Joel Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 08/31/2003
* USD 110,000.00

The objective of this Biocomplexity in the Environment (BE) for: Materials Use:
Science, Engineering, & Society (MUSES) project is to establish a research
framework for developing an assessment tool for product development that
integrates engineering, economic, regulatory and environmental concerns. While
the analytical elements exist for individual consideration of these concerns,
environmental tools have seen little practical use in product development. This
limited application derives from the absence of methods putting the
environmental analyses into the appropriate engineering, economic and regulatory
contexts so that consistent strategies can be devised. This project focuses on
the automobive industry and the product & process development issues arising
from the environmental challenges confronting these companies. The intention is
to use this area as a testbed for developing general methods of tying
environmental assessment with engineering, economic and regulatory analyses,
forming an integrated product assessment tool.

This effort also emphasizes two long-range educational objectives. One objective
focuses on development of interdisciplinary, case-based courses to demonstrate
the use of the design tools developed through the proposed research. The second
educational objective is the development of the collaborative capabilities of
faculty from disparate fields, including issues of faculty development in these
areas. A key feature of the work is the formation of an interdisciplinary team
that includes experts in the broad range of fields necessary to treat the
multidisciplinary problem of refining the product development process in a large
industrial firm. This planning project is expected to lead to fundamental
research on design of alternative processes, systems, and product development
structures that optimize the use of materials throughout their life cycles.