* 0223076
* Providing Technical Assistance to Grantees and Potential Grantees in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 07/31/2005
* USD 628,495.00

Title: Providing Technical Assistance to Grantees and Potential Grantees in
&lt;br/&gt; the HBCU- UP&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quality Education for Minorities
(QEM) Network&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HRD 0223076&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Shirley
McBay&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support, the Quality
Education for Minorities (QEM) Network will continue to provide technical
assistance in the Foundation's Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCU-UP) Program. The goal of the HBCU-UP Program is to strengthen the Nation's
workforce by enhancing the quality of undergraduate Science, Mathematics,
Engineering and Technology&lt;br/&gt;(SMET) programs at HBCUs. Support from the
Foundation will enable the QEM Network to:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Conduct four proposal
development workshops (two per year), prior to the HBCU-UP Program's annual
deadline, for faculty at eligible institutions to improve the quality of multi-
year and planning grant proposals submitted to the Foundation's HBCU-UP
Program;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Conduct a follow-up workshop for institutions submitting
proposals in the annual competition, whether or not their proposals were
successful, to discuss next steps;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Conduct a workshop for new
grantees focused on performance indicators, data collection, assessment, and
annual reporting requirements as well as assist grantee institutions in
developing an internal capacity for monitoring, assessing, and assisting in both
the internal and external evaluation of their respective projects;&lt;br/&gt;(4)
Provide on-site technical assistance to multi-year HBCU-UP award recipients
linked to critical needs identified during implementation of their respective
HBCU-UP Projects;&lt;br/&gt;(5) Create and maintain at QEM's Website links to
potential sources of federal and non-federal support to assist grantee
institutions in sustaining and institutionalizing the successful elements of
their HBCU-UP projects as HBCU-UP funding ends as well as a listserv for HBCU-UP
Project Directors.&lt;br/&gt;