* 0223158
* A Game Theoretical Pricing Scheme to Allocate the Cost of Empty Railcars to Participating Rail Companies
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Wei Hua Lin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 01/31/2005
* USD 99,822.00

The railroad industry played an important role in industrialization in the
nineteenth century. The industry is characterized by high fixed costs but
relatively low variable costs. Today, with the increased level of congestion on
national highways and the rapid development in automation and computerization,
the potential of the railroad industry is growing again in the service sector of
the United States economy. While research on railcar management, such as
minimization of the total empty car miles, is very extensive, allocation of the
cost incurred from empty miles to a loaded trip, which is an important pricing
problem in freight transportation, has not received adequate attention. The
existing cost distribution schemes to allocate empty miles to loaded trips do
not seem to explicitly take into account the gain and loss incurred in
cooperation and, as a result, do not ensure the fairness in all situations. With
the rapid development in information technologies in recent years, cooperation
at various levels has already become a key factor to success for many service
sectors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop a
cost-allocation scheme of empty car movements for a large-scale network with
many participants. In specific, the cost-allocation scheme to be developed will
reflect the level of participation in cooperation, the costs generated before
and after cooperation, and the benefits obtained by each participant due to
cooperation. The specific research approach adopted in this study is based on
game theory. We will also incorporate the network flow theory of vehicular
traffic into the study to characterize the costs incurred at various level of
cooperation participated by a subset of participants. The advantage and
disadvantage of the proposed pricing scheme will be studied under different
operation settings, strategies and objectives. Though the proposed research is
conducted in the context of the railroad industry, the cost-allocation scheme
developed in this study can be applied, with some modifications, to other
service sectors such as commercial fleet management, supply chains, and public
transportation systems with timed-transfer between different modes. &lt;br/&gt;