* 0223479
* ESS Collaborative Research:  A Methodology for Real-Time Train Dispatching in High Density Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Maged Dessouky, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Realff
* 06/30/2005
* USD 89,999.00

This research addresses real-time dispatching of heavy-haul trains in a high-
density complex railway network with multiple-track configurations, multiple
priorities and multiple speed limits. The research will provide the theory and
dynamic control algorithms for deadlock-free dispatching with minimal total
train delay in complex heavy-haul rail networks that are increasingly common in
urban areas. Determining the optimal dispatch policies that minimizes train
delays and ensures deadlock-free operations is NP-hard. Therefore, most of the
research efforts in this direction have focused on developing heuristics as well
as detailed simulations to plan dispatching policies. Theoretical efforts thus
far have only addressed trackage configurations like single, double, and
partially double rail lines. However complicating entities in a rail system like
junctions, crossovers, sidings, speed limits and goods priorities need to be
considered in order to extend the current theory to large-scale urban rail
networks. To address this need, our research will consist of the following
tasks: (1) theoretical studies focusing on developing a network representation
of this complicated physical system, and characterization of the nonlinear and
stochastic dynamics underlying the operations for laying the foundations of
developing effective dispatching algorithms, (2) development of deadlock-free
and near-optimal algorithms for the real-time dispatching of trains operating in
complex general rail networks, and (3) development of a simulation methodology
to model complicated rail networks akin to Southern California rail networks,
and validate the performance of algorithms and theory using this simulation
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As global trade continues to increase, cargo traffic
at the nation's ports continues to increase at dramatic levels. For example, the
Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach are among the busiest ports in America.
Booming trade with Pacific Rim nations has seen the annual trade in the two
ports exceed 100 million tons. The total volume that these ports handle is
evenly divided between transcontinental and local shipments. Furthermore, a
large portion of the local shipments are packaged and sorted at local facilities
for shipment across the continent. Railways form the major means to
transcontinentally move these goods. Forecasts show that volume growth of high-
value containerized freight is set to triple in the next 25 years. The main
impact of the proposed research will have a significant bearing on real-world
urban rail operations, many of whose pertinent complexities have been ignored in
theoretical studies thus far. &lt;br/&gt;