* 0223198
* The TMSA hypothesis: Do clay-mineral interlayer surfaces provide an unrecognized sink for organic carbon in the geological record?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Martin Kennedy, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2006
* USD 169,999.00

This research will test the hypothesis that the adsorption of organic carbon
onto the interlayer surfaces of smectitic clay minerals comprises a significant
mode of carbon sequestration and preservation in the geologic record. This model
provides a unifying theory for organic carbon burial and the formation of some
black shale deposits in which dissolved organic carbon present in natural waters
and pore fluids is attracted to charged mineral surfaces of detrital clay
minerals, and preserved from microbial degradation by physical sheltering. Upon
burial, mineral surfaces may act to coordinate polymerization of complex organic
substances such as kerogen and catalyze cracking during catagenesis. The
proposed research will: 1) determine the geological extent of the relationship
between interlayer mineral surface area and total organic carbon in a range of
black shale deposits, economically important source rocks, and modern sediments,
2) establish or dismiss the presence of organic matter within the smectite
interlayer sites of these deposits using X-ray diffraction (XRD) techniques and
high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) imaging of crystal
edges and determine whether there is amorphous kerogen that is mineral
associated, and 3) measure the compositional differences of OM associated with
mineral surfaces versus the total bulk TOC and particulate fraction separated
using density and centrifugation techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;