* 0223504
* Collaborative Research: Global Ocean Survey of Dissolved Iron and Aluminum and Aerosol Iron and Aluminum Solubility Supporting the Repeat Hydrography (CO2) Project
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Joseph Resing, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2007
* USD 81,424.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0223378&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0223397&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0223504&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A scientist from Florida State
University in collaboration with colleagues from the University of Hawaii and
the University of Washington will collect a suite of dissolved and particulate
samples from surface waters and vertical profiles (12 depths), as well as
atmospheric aerosol and rainwater samples during selected legs of the Repeat
Hydrography CO2 cruises. The PIs plan to participate in the following four
cruises: (1) the North Atlantic Ocean meridional section (20-25'W) during 2003;
(2) the Pacific Ocean zonal section at 30'N during 2004; (3) the South Atlantic
Ocean meridional section (20-25'W) in 2005; and (4) the South Pacific Ocean
meridional section (150W) in 2005. Samples recovered during these cruises will
be analyzed for Fe and Al. In addition, aerosol samples will be subjected to an
ultrapure water leach to assess the fractional solubility of Fe and Al. This
team of PIs also plans to collect and archive filtered and unfiltered water
samples and aerosols for analysis by other scientists in the trace metal and
tracer community. The primary objectives of this study is to generate an
extensive database of Fe and Al concentrations in water and aerosol samples that
can constrain global and regional dust deposition models and determine the role
that atmospheric Fe depositions have in delivering Fe to surface waters in the
major basins of the world's oceans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;