* 0223354
* Collaborative Research:   High-Performance Computational Methods for Continuous-Time Markov Processes in Financial Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2002,02/28/2005
* John Birge, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 02/28/2005
* USD 99,129.00

The project focuses on the development of high-performance computational
&lt;br/&gt;tools for financial engineering. The goal is to develop computational
&lt;br/&gt;methods to evaluate complex financial products used to manage foreign
&lt;br/&gt;exchange, interest rate, equity, commodity and energy price risks and
credit &lt;br/&gt;risk, and manage large portfolios of assets. The methodology
is based on &lt;br/&gt;extensions to financial engineering of finite-element
methods successfully &lt;br/&gt;used in diverse branches of engineering to solve
numerically multi-&lt;br/&gt;dimensional partial differential and integral
equations. Partial integro-&lt;br/&gt;differential equations arise in the study
of Markov jump-diffusion processes &lt;br/&gt;and associated optimal stopping
and stochastic control problems in financial &lt;br/&gt;engineering. The aim of
the present proposal is to develop both the &lt;br/&gt;necessary mathematical
theory to extend finite element methods to jump-&lt;br/&gt;diffusion processes
and develop high-performance computational tools &lt;br/&gt;based on these
methods that can be effectively implemented and used by &lt;br/&gt;industry
practitioners in the financial services, as well as researchers in
&lt;br/&gt;financial engineering, applied probability and branches of operations
&lt;br/&gt;research that use continuous-time Markov processes. Specific
challenges in &lt;br/&gt;financial engineering to be addressed in the project
include high &lt;br/&gt;dimensionality and
jumps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methodologies developed in this project will help
financial institutions, &lt;br/&gt;corporate treasuries and energy companies
accurately value complex &lt;br/&gt;financial instruments, efficiently manage
risk of financial transactions, and &lt;br/&gt;dynamically manage portfolios of
assets. In addition to financial &lt;br/&gt;engineering, we anticipate that this
project will have a broader impact on &lt;br/&gt;research and application areas
that use continuous-time Markov processes as &lt;br/&gt;a modeling framework.
Constructive approximations and computational &lt;br/&gt;algorithms for jump-
diffusion processes developed in this project should &lt;br/&gt;prove useful for
diverse areas of application that use jump-diffusion &lt;br/&gt;processes. This
proposal will support the new Ph.D. major in financial &lt;br/&gt;engineering at
Northwestern University. This new Ph.D. major will result in &lt;br/&gt;training
of highly qualified researchers in financial engineering. This project
&lt;br/&gt;is a part of the long-term development effort at Northwestern
University in &lt;br/&gt;the area of financial engineering. This project will
also help the Department &lt;br/&gt;of Mathematical Sciences at the University
of Nevada Las Vegas establish a &lt;br/&gt;research program in financial
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;