* 0223334
* Collaborative Research: How temporal changes in river discharge and storms affect the source and age distribution of sedimentary organic carbon across a river-dominated margin
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Thomas Bianchi, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 03/31/2005
* USD 275,000.00

Continental margins are dynamic regions that receive inputs of organic carbon
derived from both terrestrial and marine sources. Once introduced by the
Mississippi or fixed on the Louisiana shelf, POC is carried along the shelf,
decomposed, buried, or transported to deeper regions in the Gulf of Mexico.
Based on coastal primary production estimates and riverine inputs, only 20-50%
of the organic carbon in coastal waters off the Mississippi is actually buried
in Louisiana shelf sediments, and &lt;40% of that buried carbon is of
terrestrial origin. Thus, the fate of 50-80% of the carbon fraction delivered by
the Mississippi that cannot be accounted for in shelf sediments remains a key
question in developing a North American carbon budget. Under this funding, the
PIs propose a combined approach of compound-specific stable and radiocarbon
isotopic techniques and biomarker distributions to evaluate fates and transport
of organic carbon in the Mississippi River delta shelf and slope. The working
hypothesis of this study is that seasonal changes in the composition and age of
SOC across the Louisiana shelf/slope are largely determined by pulses in
terrestrially- and marine-derived organic carbon which occur at distinct time
periods controlled by changes in Mississippi River discharge and storm energy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;