* 0223050
* Feasibility Study of Polymer-based MEMS Low-Frequency Sensing Technology for Health Monitoring of Civil Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Andrei Shkel, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 06/30/2004
* USD 59,949.00

The objective of this proposal is to evaluate existing off-the-shelf sensing
technologies and launch an exploratory research that will lead to a new class of
low-cost micro-electro-mechanical sensors uniquely suited for health monitoring
of civil structures. This one year exploratory project will include two phases.
In the first phase, we will perform a comprehensive literature survey on the
available off-the-shelf sensors that could be potentially used for health
monitoring of civil structures. The comparison will be made against sensors'
cost, sensitivity, drift, dynamic range, size, weight, etc. This phase of
research will be carried out in a close collaboration and consultations with
leading experts in the field of health monitoring of civil structures. The
result of this study will be a review paper on the state-of-the-art sensor
technologies for structural health monitoring of civil structures which will be
prepared and submitted to a journal for publication (the results will be also
reported at the relevant NSF workshop). In the second phase, we will start
preliminary development, design, and fabrication of prototype MEMS sensors that
will meet the identified in Phase 1 performance requirements. Our approach will
be based on a fundamentally new micro-fabrication technology that utilizes the
processing of low Young's Modulus polymers, deposition of thin film dielectric
coating, silicon surface micromachining, silicon bulk micromachining, and
integration of Febry-Perot interferometeric techniques. The first version of the
sensor prototype will be attempted by the end of this one year exploratory
project. The background material gathered during this one year exploratory
project will be used as a basis for a full three year proposal on development of
novel sensors uniquely suited for civil engineering applications.