* 0223581
* Partial Support for a Symposium on the Role  of the Public Domain in Scientific and Technical Information
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Paul Uhlir, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Louis B. Brown
* 12/31/2003
* USD 60,000.00

The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) will convene a symposium to address the
role that the public domain plays now and may play in the future in both
promoting and protecting the exchange of scientific data and information. The
symposium will bring together 150 experts on scientific data and information;
professionals experienced in management of such data and information; and
scientists, from both the public and private sector. The symposium will evaluate
the present role that the public domain plays in support of science, including
research, and education; identify and quantify the various pressures on the
public domain; discuss existing and prospective approaches for preserving the
public domain in the face of such pressures; identify issues in these areas that
may warrant further study; and recommend ways in which such issues might be
addressed most effectively. Increasing legal, economic and technological
pressures threaten to reduce the flow of scientific data and information to the
public domain and thus constrain the ability of research scientists to draw data
and information from the public domain and utilize it in their research.
Scientific data and information in the public domain has been and remains
essential to the conduct of scientific research. Similarly, the release into the
public domain of data and information generated in the course of such scientific
research also is essential to evaluation, verification and criticism of the
results of such research. The proceedings of the symposium will be made
available in both electronic and hard copy formats within twelve months of the
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;