* 0223095
* Conference: 2002 FASEB Summer Research Conference on Calcium Oxalate in Biological Systems;  Saxtons River, Vermont
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Mary Webb, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 07/31/2003
* USD 5,000.00

Conference FASEB Summer Research Conference on Calcium Oxalate in Biological
Systems will be held from August 3 - 8, 2002 at the Vermont Academy in Saxtons
River, Vermont. The primary goal of this conference is to provide a
multidisciplinary forum to discuss recent advances and future directions for
research on all manner of calcium oxalate crystallization that occur in nature.
More than 100 scientists are expected to attend this conference. Specific
objectives of the conference include the following: 1) to promote scientific
exchange of ideas, information, and methodologies among scientists from diverse
disciplines whose common focus is calcium oxalate, 2) to discuss areas of
controversy and to identify new areas requiring investigation in calcium oxalate
research, 3) to foster cross-fertilization of ideas and facilitate
interdisciplinary collaborations, 4) to integrate information from diverse
systems encompassed by the topics and disciplines of conference participants,
and 5) to promote and encourage entry of young and new investigators into all
areas of calcium oxalate research. Special efforts have been made to include new
young investigators and scientists from underrepresented groups in the
conference program. Seventeen of the scheduled speakers are new young
investigators, including nine women, comprising 37% of the total program. In
addition, the conference program includes a total of fourteen women, including
two of the three organizers, a substantial increase over the previous conference
on this topic. Funds requested by this proposal will be applied specifically to
support the participation of young investigators and underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;