* 0223372
* Biological Oxygen Production in the Pacific Subtropical Gyres using Glider Surveys
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Steven Emerson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2006
* USD 353,998.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0223372&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental
evaluations of the organic carbon export from the euphotic zone of the ocean are
essential for verifying and calibrating estimates of the ocean's biological pump
by both satellite color and Global Circulation Models. Studies of upper ocean
oxygen mass balance have shown that carbon export from the euphotic zone can be
accurately estimated by determining net annual biological oxygen production at
locations where there are time-series measurements. Growing awareness of the
present importance of nitrogen fixation in the subtropical North Atlantic and
Pacific Oceans has lead to the suggestion that ocean productivity, and perhaps
the organic carbon export, in these areas is limited by the wind blown flux of
iron to the surface waters. One could evaluate the importance of this process in
the subtropical ocean without the expense of an iron fertilization experiment by
determining the net biological oxygen production in locations that receive very
different atmospheric loading of iron. The ideal locations to contrast in this
regard are the North and South Pacific Ocean; however, it has not been possible
to carry out a time-series study south of the equator in the Pacific because it
is too remote. The advent of glider technology and the evolution of our ability
to quantify air-water gas exchange in the subtropical oceans make it now
possible to study the oxygen mass balance by remotely measuring the T, S, and O2
concentrations in the upper ocean. In this study, investigators at the
University of Washington will develop this new technology to determine the net
biological oxygen production in the North and South Pacific. The subtropical
oceans are ideal for introducing a glider study of upper ocean heat, fresh water
and oxygen budgets because the relatively steady and slow surface
currents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the goals of this research are to
demonstrate the utility of gliders to determine accurate and precise T, S and O2
concentrations in the open ocean from which budgets can be calculated and to
contrast the net biological oxygen production in the North and South Pacific
subtropical gyres. The research team will carry out glider surveys of the upper
ocean at the Hawaii Ocean time series (HOT). The team will calibrate instruments
on the glider against monthly measurements by the time-series scientists so that
it will be possible to verify accuracies and make adjustments to improve
results. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;