* 0223340
* Continental drying and carbon sequestration along a subambient to elevated CO2 gradient
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Robert Jackson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2006
* USD 388,089.00

The concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere has increased dramatically since the
last glacial maximum. A major focus of ongoing research is the current and
future role of terrestrial ecosystems in sequestering CO2. In grasslands, which
are North America 's largest potential vegetation type, the interactions of
water availability with increased CO2 can be as important as the direct effects
of CO2 in shaping primary production, decomposition, and C storage. The proposed
research and modeling synthesis is a collaboration among Duke (Jackson,
Maherali), Colorado State (Parton), and Kansas State (Owensby) Universities and
the USDA-ARS (Polley, Johnson) to predict the consequences of increased
atmospheric CO2 concentrations and climate change (increased summer drought) for
the Southern Great Plains region of the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;The field experiment in
an intact C3/C4 grassland in central Texas is unique in providing a continuous
gradient of Ca from 200 to 550 umol mol -1, allowing the examination of critical
threshold and nonlinear responses to past, present, and future atmospheric CO2.
Nested within the CO2 gradient is a replicated factorial water manipulation of
ambient and 60% ambient precipitation, the latter consistent with the summer
droughts predicted for the central U.S. by general circulation models (GCMs) in
the coming century and similar to an extended historical drought from the 1950s
in the region. The experiments described in this proposal will permit rigorous
accounting of CO2 effects on carbon sequestration and the soil water balance, a
factor that has emerged from previous studies as critical in explaining the
integrated effects of CO2 enrichment on grasslands.&lt;br/&gt;Key hypotheses to
be addressed include:&lt;br/&gt;H-1 Ecosystems respond nonlinearly to
atmospheric CO2, with less carbon sequestration at future CO2 concentrations
than observed in the recent past.&lt;br/&gt;H-2 Although the stimulation of
plant production with increasing CO2 will be greater under the summer droughts
predicted by GCMs for the central U.S., carbon storage will ultimately depend on
the balance of soil water availability and decomposition.&lt;br/&gt;H-3 Water
availability plays a key role in grassland carbon sequestration with CO2 through
interactions with soil N availability.&lt;br/&gt;The DAYCENT ecosystem model
will be used to evaluate the potential long-term impact of increasing
atmospheric CO2 and climate change for grasslands in the Southern Great Plains.
A substantial amount of data is already available to describe the potential
impact of increasing atmospheric CO2 on grassland ecosystems in the Southern
Great Plains from long-term CO2 experiments in Texas, Colorado, and Kansas. The
impact of different environmental conditions and climate change will be
evaluated for above-and belowground plant production, soil C and N levels, and
net ecosystem production. Therefore, the proposed research and modeling
integration directly addresses the ability of ecosystems to continue as carbon
sinks in the coming century.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is relevant to three
of the five goals outlined in the U.S. Carbon Cycle Science Plan (CCSP): 1)
Improve projections of future atmospheric concentrations of CO2 through a
combination of manipulative experiments and model development, 2) Establish
accurate estimates of the impact of historical and current land use patterns and
trends on the evolving C budget, and 3) Establish accurate estimates of the
potential Northern Hemisphere terrestrial C sink and the underlying mechanisms
that regulate it. The proposed research also contributes to the Global Change
and Terrestrial Ecosystems (GCTE) and Biospheric Aspects of the Hydrological
Cycle (BAHC) core projects of the International Geosphere Biosphere Programme
(IGBP).&lt;br/&gt;