* 0224779
* EPNES:    Foreward Contracts, Multisettlement Equilibrium and Risk Management in Competitive Electricity Markets
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Sheldon Ross, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 09/30/2007
* USD 419,849.00

Forward contracts arid financial risk management instruments are essential
elements of competitive electricity markets. They mitigate market power,
suppress price volatility and ensure system reliability through market
mechanisms. The design and study of such mechanisms in the context of
electricity requires an interdisciplinary approach that capitalizes on
developments in economics, operations research, and financial engineering while
adapting and extending the existing knowledge in these areas to match the
physical realities of electricity systems. This research project will develop
such an interdisciplinary approach by bringing together a research team with
expertise in power economics, optimization and financial mathematics. The
project consist of three main technical components: Analysis of two settlement
electricity markets through sequential Nash equilibrium models on DC power
networks; Development of computational methods for calculating realistic two
settlement equilibrium models as simultaneous optimization problems subject to
equilibrium constraints; and Development of pricing methodologies for specific
forward contracts and options under stochastic price movements. This research
will help address technical and policy issues prompted by the restructuring of
the electricity industry and will train graduate students participating in the
research to cope with the multidisciplinary challenges facing that industry. The
computational techniques developed under this project will be tested on
realistic commercial models of the California market. New knowledge resulting
from this project will be integrated through teaching modules into a broad
spectrum of graduate and undergraduate courses offered to industrial engineering
and to electrical engineering students.