* 0224221
* fMRI of Hormonal Variation in Cognitive-Affective Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* Turhan Canli, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Stacia Friedman-Hill
* 08/31/2008
* USD 638,658.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Canli and colleagues will conduct
a three-year investigation into how changes in hormonal state affect brain
activation patterns during cognitive and emotion-related psychological
processes. Specifically, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) will be
used to record brain activation patterns in response to cognitive and emotional
stimuli in two groups of women. One group will consist of women who will be
scanned at different times in the naturally occurring menstrual cycle. The other
group will consist of post-menopausal women who will be scanned during a three-
week period of estrogen/progesterone or placebo (sugar pill) administration. The
results of these studies will illuminate our understanding of hormonal
regulation of mood and the neural structures that underlie these states. Very
little is known about some fundamental aspects of brain function as a function
of gender, as suggested by a call by the National Academy of Sciences to devote
more biomedical research to sex differences. This work will not only fill a
knowledge gap in basic neuroscience, but may also guide future clinical studies
to understand the striking sex differences in the incidence of mood disorders
such as depression, which strikes as many as four times as many women than men.
Furthermore, the proposed work may be of benefit for postmenopausal women
weighing the consequences of hormone replacement therapy on brain function. Such
decisions will likely be contemplated by large segments of the population, as it
is estimated that the average woman will spend at least half her adult life with
decreased levels of circulating estrogen.