* 0224635
* Expansion of the Housing Facilities for Guest Researchers at The University of Oklahoma Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Karl Hambright, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 07/31/2005
* USD 187,500.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Oklahoma Biological Station
(UOBS), under the direction of Dr. Lawrence J. Weider, to construct a triplex
housing facility to expand and enhance housing accommodations for guest
researchers and students. UOBS is located on the north-shore of Lake Texoma, an
approximately 88,000 surface acre reservoir on the Oklahoma-Texas border. The
UOBS faculty has both a national and international reputation in the field of
aquatic (freshwater) ecology. Since the founding of UOBS in 1949, thousands of
guest researchers, students, and conference participants have visited and stayed
at the Biological Station for various lengths of time. Nearly 1100 publications,
150+ theses, and nearly 1100 undergraduate research projects have been completed
at UOBS during its history. However, one long-term problem at UOBS, relates to
the inadequate housing facilities for long-term guest researchers (e.g.
sabbatical visitors, post-docs) and accompanying family members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A 2,800 square-foot, fully-furnished, triplex guest
researcher housing facility will be constructed at UOBS near Willis, Oklahoma.
Each of the three fully-furnished apartments will consist of two-bedrooms, two
bathrooms, a fully-functioning kitchen and living/dining area. (One of the units
will be handicapped-accessible.) The triplex unit will be constructed on a
recently purchased 7.3 acre tract of land, adjacent to the main UOBS campus.
This three-apartment unit will greatly enhance the ability of UOBS to host
longer-term guest researcher teams (between 1-6 persons per apartment) or guest
researchers and accompanying family members, and will complement present housing
facilities that serve the needs of short-term guests (i.e. students, conference
participants). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UOBS is one of the largest field stations
in the south-central U.S., and its year-round faculty/staff conduct research
related to important issues in aquatic ecology ranging from exotic species
invasions to ecosystem studies of water resources. Nationally and
internationally-recognized researchers collaborate with UOBS scientists. The
benefits from constructing such a housing unit will be seen via increased guest
researcher use, allowing more researchers to access unique habitats and features
of the region surrounding UOBS, and tackle some of the key ecological and
environmental issues related to aquatic resources. With an increased researcher-
base, other programs at the station such as on-site undergraduate and graduate
training, as well as public education programs (i.e. K-12 outreach) will benefit
from enhancement of the intellectual/scholarly climate at UOBS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;