* 0224451
* Renewal of the IRI/CIMS R&D Innovation and The Competitive Performance of Large U.S. Industrial Firms Database
* SBE,NCSE
* 05/31/2001,02/29/2004
* Alden Bean, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Wolfe
* 02/29/2004
* USD 20,902.00

The existing Industrial Research Institute/Center for Innovation Management
Studies (IRI/CIMS) Annual R&D Survey, which supports research on management of
technological innovation, will continue to be performed. The survey instrument
will be augmented so that data can be collected on variables that are uniquely
relevant to firms and business units operating in dynamic and technology
intensive business sectors such as software, defense/aerospace, and
telecommunications. Coverage will be increased to seek answers to important
questions about the contribution of R&D to innovation outcomes, such as product
and process cost reductions and revenue enhancements. Finally, the breadth of
the Annual Survey sample will be expanded to include firms that may not be
members of the Industrial Research Institute (IRI), but whose R&D activities are
of significant economic interest and importance. In addition, the Management
Practices Survey (MPS), which was last conducted in 1996, will be repeated. The
MPS contributes greatly to the database by providing information about changes
in the structure of R&D organizations and laboratories that occur over time,
shifts in the business goals supported by R&D, and changes in R&D program
planning and project selection emphasis. Such information has strengthened
researchers' ability to interpret trends that have appeared in the Annual Survey
data.