* 0224410
* CISE Research Resources:   Reconfigurable Multi-Node Wireless Communication Testbed
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Tan Wong, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2005
* USD 67,200.00

EIA 0224410&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Wong, Tan F.&lt;br/&gt; Fang, Yuguang; Shea, John
M.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Florida &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
CISE RR: Reconfigurable Multi-Node Wireless Communication Testbed
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal, developing a real-time wireless
communication testbed of six reconfigurable transceiver nodes that operate in
the 900MHz or 2.4GHz ISM band, enables conducting experiments on network
protocols and communications techniques. Performing real-time experiments over
real-life wireless communication channels, the infrastructure enables three
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Communications,&lt;br/&gt;Wireless
Medium Access Control Protocol Design and Experiments,
and&lt;br/&gt;Reliability-Based Hybrid ARQ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
project concerns collaborative transmission and reception among multiple nodes
in a wireless network. Techniques of distributed space-time coding and
distributed and iterative decoding will be employed respectively to achieve
transmit and receive diversity. The second project uses the test-bed to test new
medium access control (MAC) protocols that employ a set of back-off algorithms
designed to avoid potential "future" collisions and reduce the percentage of
idle slots. These MAC protocols have the advantage of fast collision resolution
and hence give much higher throughput. The last project develops and
investigates a new hybrid automatic repeat request (ARQ) scheme that can take
advantage of reliability estimates generated by soft-input, soft-output (SISO)
decoders. This ARQ scheme transmits additional information for the unreliable
bits, and this information is used to do additional decoding. The test-bed will
be utilized to perform real-time experiments on a real-life channel to examine
the throughput and delay performance of this ARQ scheme, which can be evaluated
via simulations otherwise.&lt;br/&gt;On the educational side, the platform
provides integrated design training to undergraduate students. Conducting
simulation studies on algorithms developed on the research projects, students
will employ the test-bed to perform off-line experiments over a real
communication channel to identify possible weaknesses of the algorithms
developed based on theoretical models and then fine tune the algorithms to
produce a real-time FPGA implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;