* 0224238
* Optically Controlled Spin in Semiconductor Optical Amplifiers:  "Spin Optoelectronics"
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Alan Kost, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 08/31/2005
* USD 400,000.00

Optically Controlled Spin in Semiconductor Optical Amplifiers: "Spin
Optoelectonics"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alan Kost &amp; Axel
Schulzgen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st Century
initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on the role of
spin in new types of optoelectronic devices with applications for optical data
communications. In particular, optically induced spin states and spin relaxation
in the active layers of semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOAs) will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An optical pulse with a fluence of about 1 mJ
per cm2 can excite electron-hole pairs across the band gap of a semiconductor
and saturate absorption leading to a transmission increase of an order of
magnitude. A drawback of resonant optical nonlinearities is their rather slow
recovery. An optically excited semiconductor returns to its initial state after
recombination of the excess electron-hole pairs, in about a nanosecond. This
recovery is much too slow for many high speed applications like switching of
data at rates of 2.5 Gbits per second. Various techniques have been explored to
speed material recovery after optical excitation. Ion implantation has been used
to enhance non-radiative recombination in semiconductors and speed recovery to
an extent, at the expense of material quality. Electric fields have been applied
to sweep away excess charge. Among the most promising approaches to ultra-fast
material response is excitation with polarized light. Light with circular
polarization is used to excite electrons and holes in definite spin states.
Absorption saturation occurs and transmission is increased for light of similar
polarization. The absorption recovers rapidly, in picoseconds or less, as
dephasing events redistribute the spin. Selective spin excitation in GaAsSb
quantum wells shows particular promise. These semiconductors have sub-picosecond
spin relaxation times and they function with light that has a wavelength near
1.55 microns - an important wavelength regime for optical communications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin relaxation has not been examined in semiconductor
optical amplifiers. The plan here is to further the knowledge of spin in
semiconductors and investigate devices for ultra-fast optical switching by
studying spin in semiconductor optical amplifiers containing InGaAs and GaAsSb
quantum wells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Epi-layers will be grown at HRL laboratories
- a pioneer and world leader in the growth of novel III-V semiconductor
materials. The materials, to be grown on InP and GaSb substrates, will also
include cladding layers for light guiding and doped layers to form a p-n
junction. Dr. David Chow, a department manager in Microelectronics Laboratory at
HRL, will lead the growth effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group of Professor
Alan Kost at the University of Arizona will design and fabricate the
semiconductor optical amplifiers. The composition and thickness layers in the
active region of SOAs will be selected for optical gain near 1.55 microns. The
composition of optical cladding layers will be chosen for optimum wave guiding.
Professor Kost's group will process wafers from HRL into SOAs in a clean room at
the University of Arizona. The clean room facility at the Optical Sciences
Center at the University has all the equipment needed to make SOAs: including
photolighographic equipment, a reactive ion etcher, metal evaporators for the
deposition of electrical contacts and a rapid thermal annealer for contact
annealing. Professor Kost's group will also perform initial optical
characterization of the materials including photoluminescence and optical
transmission measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group of Professor Axel
Schulzgen will characterize optical amplifiers using their extensive femtosecond
laser facility. The semiconductors will be excited using circularly polarized
light pulses of wavelength near 1.55 microns. Spin relaxation will be monitored
and time-resolved by measuring the transmission of SOAs in a pump-probe
configuration. Spin dynamics will be examined as function of the inversion in
the gain medium by repeating measurements while varying the electrical bias to
the &lt;br/&gt;