* 0224887
* Collaborative Research: Implementation of Tabu Search for the Design of Novel Molecules using Parallel Computers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,10/31/2003
* David Miller, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/2003
* USD 50,000.00

Research:

Product design methodology is a mechanism that permits the synthesis of new
materials with specifically tailored properties. Two challenges in computational
molecular design are (1) the ability to predict the physical and chemical
properties of a given molecule and (2) the ability to solve the large
optimization problem which arises from the search for the best molecule for a
given application. Research in molecular characterization can predict many
physical and chemical properties to a reasonable accuracy for common molecules.
A missing technology is a set of parallel algorithms which can efficiently solve
the large mixed-integer optimization problems using parallel computing hardware.
This project focuses the application of tabu search, a stochastic technique for
the solution of such optimization problems, to the molecular design of novel
polymers.

Tabu search uses a neighborhood search algorithm which is efficient at searching
the entire solution space, thus enabling globally optimal solutions to be found
within a reasonable time. These algorithms are amenable to parallelization since
each member of a solution set can be updated independently. As part of this
project, the PIs plan to develop a parallel implementation suitable for use on
clusters of workstations. The work will focus on the development of improvements
to handle the types of constraint that occur when predicting the physical
properties of polymers, and the application of these improvements within a
parallel implementation for use on clusters of multiprocessor workstations.

Impact:

-Tailor-made molecules have huge potential in the chemical process industries.
-This Small Grant for exploratory research will permit two young PIs to venture
into a totally new research area for them. -This collaborative project between
an undergraduate institution, Rose-Hulman, and the University of Kansas, will
provide opportunities to undergraduates to be involved in research otherwise not
open to them.