* 0224810
* EPNES:  Modeling the Interaction between the Technical, Social, Economic and Environmental Components of Large Scale Electric Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Loren Lutzenhiser, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2007
* USD 505,000.00

The deregulation of the electric power system has been plagued by missteps and
finger pointing. It has been impossible to clearly and systematically delineate
the issues so that meaningful policy decisions can be made. Missing from most
discussions is the interplay between the economic, technical, social and
environmental factors that influence the production, transmission and
consumption of electric energy. This work will study these interactions and
develop computer models suitable for use by both policy makers and researchers.
The main effort will be focused on the development of simulation models, which
extend beyond traditional disciplinary boundaries. For example, we will model
consumer behavior, which affects efficiency and hence electricity demand, which
in turn affects the prices on generation and the operation of the transmission
grid. Such models will enable us to simulate short-term behavior such as
electricity prices and congestion in the near term. The models will also be used
to look at long-term behavior such as investment in new generation and
transmission. These models will be tested with data from the Western power grid
as the Benchmark Test System. The project will conclude with the preparation of
several instructional modules using interactive simulation of the benchmark
system. The modules will be designed for integration into syllabi for
senior/graduate level courses in sociology, economics, environmental science and
engineering, the home departments for the research team. The modular approach
will engage students from multiple disciplines in discussions and interactive
simulations.

