* 0224210
* Spin Electronics:    High Temperature Ferromagnetic Semiconductor Materials and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Bruce Wessels, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 08/31/2006
* USD 400,000.00

This grant has been co-funded by the Division of Electrical and Communications
Systems, and the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems in the Engineering
Directorate. &lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to the Spin
Electronics for the 21st century initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036.
The proposal focuses on diluted magnetic semiconductors (DMS), which are
promising materials for future electronic and opto-electronic devices that
utilize both the charge and the spin of electrons. These materials have
potential uses in spin valves, non-volatile magnetic random access memories,
quantum computation and other spin polarized transport and optical devices. Much
of the recent work has focused on the III-V DMS which have shown excellent low
temperature ferromagnetic properties. DMS substitutional III-V alloys with Curie
temperatures of 105 K have been realized Their utilization in thin film
heterostuctures, however, has been limited because of difficulties in preparing
materials with both a high Curie temperature and magnetization. Nevertheless,
recent advances in the epitaxy of ferromagnetic semiconductors indicate that
III-V materials with high Curie temperatures should be realizable. Furthermore
other semiconductor systems including the pseudo III-V compounds II-IV-V2
chalcopyrites have been recently shown to have high Curie temperatures. The
proposed work builds upon our recent demonstration of InMnAs alloys with
transition temperatures in excess of 300 K prepared by metal-organic vapor phase
epitaxy (MOVPE) as well as our discovery of high Tc II-IV-V2 compounds. MOVPE
enables the preparation of III-V DMS with high magnetization not possible by
bulk techniques. Specific systems to be investigated include: InMnAs, and II-
IV-V2 compounds ZnMnP2 and MnGeP2. While these semiconductors already show
considerable promise, the nature of the magnetic species is not well understood.
In the proposed program DMS crystals, thin films and quantum structures will be
deposited with a range of magnetic ion concentrations to optimize both the Curie
temperature and magnetization. The relationship between the atomic structure and
magnetic properties will be determined and compared to theory. The highly
accurate fully linearized augmented plane wave (FLAPW) method will be used for
these calculations. Of specific interest is the extent to which magnetic ion
clustering occurs and their role in the formation of alloys with high Curie
temperatures. Experimental techniques to be used included high resolution
transmission electron microscopy, extended x-ray fine structure analysis
(EXAFS), temperature and field dependent magnetization measurements, Hall effect
and magneto-optical measurements. Several thin film spintronic electronic and
opto-electronic heterostructures will be fabricated and their spin dependent
properties measured. The program will involve the training of both doctoral
graduate and undergraduate students in magnetic semiconductor materials and
device research. Collaborations between Sandia National Laboratories and
Northwestern. University will be further developed. International collaboration
with U. of Ulsan, South Korea will be undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;