* 0224709
* Construction of a New Accommodation Building and Teaching Room at the Rutgers Pinelands Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* John Dighton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 99,545.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation has awarded $ 99,
545 to the Rutgers University under the direction of Dr. John Dighton for the
construction of an accommodation building and classroom to its Pinelands Field
Station. Due to recent growth in use of this field station in the New Jersey
pine barrens, Rutgers University has sought to improve the facilities at the
station to be able to host short-term residential courses offered by the
university and to provide those facilities to other universities and colleges
who are also seeking to teach their own courses in the unique ecosystem. The
research station was formerly mainly a research facility. As such, interest in
the ecology and forestry of the area has attracted many researchers who wish to
use the laboratory facilities on a short-term basis or to set up long-term
monitoring programs. The lack of adequate accommodation to support visiting
researchers has been acute in recent years and has limited its use by non-local
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed new building will provide
accommodation for up to 20 people in both dormitory and individual rooms, thus
accommodating both student classes and visiting researchers. In addition, the
building will provide a classroom for educational use and meetings. An existing
building will be converted into a teaching laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to serving the Rutgers University community, the facility will be
available to other universities and teaching institutes who have expressed a
desire to teach courses in the field. In partnership with the Pinelands
Preservation Alliance and the New Jersey State Aquarium at Camden, the new
facilities will provide a venue for field experiential education for inner city
school children and, particularly, their educators. &lt;br/&gt;