* 0224817
* Dynamic Game-Theoretic Models of Electric Power Markets and their Vulnerability
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Terry Friesz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 08/31/2006
* USD 430,007.00

The issues of market power, generation adequacy, and vulnerability
in&lt;br/&gt;network-constrained electric power markets are of increasing
concern to&lt;br/&gt;market participants, policy makers, and the general public.
Although&lt;br/&gt;price formation and investment are inherently dynamic
processes, they&lt;br/&gt;are usually studied using static economic and game
theoretic models.&lt;br/&gt;This disregarding of lags, expectations, and
adjustment processes may&lt;br/&gt;yield distorted conclusions about the effects
of proposed changes to&lt;br/&gt;market structure and designs. To investigate
and overcome this&lt;br/&gt;distortion, there is a need for (a) realistic models
of dynamic&lt;br/&gt;interactions among strategically behaved electric power
market&lt;br/&gt;participants, and (b) the design of efficient
computational&lt;br/&gt;methods that can handle the high dimensionality of
realistic&lt;br/&gt;power systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
and pedagogy have four objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a) formulation of
dynamic game theoretic models of pricing and generation&lt;br/&gt;for
transmission-constrained electric power markets, for a variety
of&lt;br/&gt;competitive circumstances and market
structures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;b) development of efficient algorithms for
solving the models&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;c) demonstration and testing of models
and algorithms using realistic data&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;d) development of
educational curricula integrating game theory,
&lt;br/&gt;economics,&lt;br/&gt;and electric power
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has several broader impacts, including
contributions to &lt;br/&gt;education and public policy. We will develop
curricular offerings &lt;br/&gt;in dynamic optimization and differential games
for the modeling of &lt;br/&gt;electric power markets. This material will be
made available as a &lt;br/&gt;professional tutorial and distributed to the
educational community &lt;br/&gt;via the project website. Our models hold the
potential of &lt;br/&gt;significantly enhancing the capability of regulatory
agencies, &lt;br/&gt;market operators, and stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;