* 0224621
* Processing the Polyprotein Precursor to Euglena LHCPII
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Steven Schwartzbach, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/2004
* USD 16,267.00

96-30817 Schwartzbach Most of the proteins in chloroplasts are nuclear-encoded,
synthesized in the cytoplasm, and imported post-translationally into the
chloroplast. Precursors of chloroplast proteins contain topogenic information
for targeting to and import into chloroplasts. Precursors of Euglena light
harvesting chlorophyll a/b binding protein of photosystem 11 (pLHCP11) and of
the small subunit of ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase (pSSU) are polyproteins
that are composed of mature polypeptides covalently linked by a conserved
decapeptide. In vivo pulse chase experiments demonstrated that pLHCP11 and pSSU
are transported as integral membrane proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) to the Golgi apparatus prior to chloroplast localization rather than being
imported directly into the chloroplast. Once the polyproteins are in the
chloroplast they are processed by an endoproteolytic polyprotein processing
peptidase. PLHCP11 and pSSU each contain a signal peptide for targeting to the
ER and a stop-transfer signal C-terminal of the signal peptide. Studies using
canine microsomes and deletion constructs demonstrated that the stop-transfer
signal anchors the protein in the membrane with the N-terminus in the microsomal
lumen and the C-terminus in the cytoplasm. Previous work described the import
and processing pathway of Euglena chloroplast proteins. The objective of this
research is to understand the molecular mechanism of this novel trafficking
pathway for Euglena chloroplast proteins. This will be achieved by developing an
in vitro system that reconstitutes the Golgi apparatus to chloroplast transport
event. This system should allow for the biochemical characterization of this
step as well as for the identification of components that are essential for this
process. This includes the isolation and characterization of the polyprotein
processing peptidase(s). %%% Most of the proteins in chloroplasts are nuclear-
encoded, synthesized in the cytoplasm, and imported post-translationally int o
the chloroplast. Precursors of chloroplast proteins contain topogenic
information for targeting to and import into chloroplasts. The objective of this
research is to investigate a novel trafficking pathway for nuclear-encoded
chloroplast proteins to Euglena chloroplasts. The precursors of chloroplast
proteins are first targeted to the endoplasmic reticulum, transported to the
Golgi apparatus and are then transported to the chloroplast. Nothing is known
about the molecular mechanism of this novel trafficking pathway for precursors
of chloroplast proteins to the chloroplast. ***