* 0224826
* The Big Sky Institute:  Accessing and Understanding the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Mark Young, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 17,216.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the development of a strategic plan for the Big
Sky Institute, a newly formed interdisciplinary research and education
organization located at a site near Yellowstone National Park. Over the past
decade researchers at Montana State University and other institutions have made
great strides in understanding the diversity and dynamics of the Greater
Yellowstone Ecosystem (GYE), especially in respect to three important aspects:
processes that govern biological diversity, especially as it relates to
ecosystem management; adaptations that permit life in the diverse thermal
features of GYE; and, variations in the local climate over the last thousand-
plus years as judged by proxy records of such variability and of ecosystem
response. At present, efforts to build on this progress are limited in scope and
integration by lack of modern laboratory and educational facilities at or near
field sites in the GYE. Using the funds provided through this award, BSI will
engage in an institutional planning process that will lead to development of a
new, multi-user research and education facility. The development of BSI as a
research and education facility will increase access to the GYE for field
research and teaching in the areas of biodiversity, thermal biology, and climate
change. The improved infrastructure will allow increased public participation
in, and improve public understanding of federally-supported research activities
while forging a unique partnership between the private sector tourist industry
and a land grant university in a rural area.&lt;br/&gt;