* 0224453
* CISE Research Resources:   Programming Environments and Applications for Clusters and Grids
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* David Padua, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2004
* USD 120,000.00

EIA- 0224453&lt;br/&gt;Adve, Sarita V.&lt;br/&gt;Hwu, Wen-mei;&lt;br/&gt;Kale,
Laxmicant V.; &lt;br/&gt;Padua, David A.; &lt;br/&gt;Patel, Sanjay
J.&lt;br/&gt;University of Illinois - Urbana/Champaign
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE RR: Programming Environments and Applications for
Clusters and Grids &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal, building a cluster
platform connected by gigabit Ethernet, enables the "grid" to be used in the
following four research projects:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced Programming
Environments for Cluster and Grids,&lt;br/&gt;Parallel Applications for Clusters
and Grids,&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic Sequential Code Optimization,
and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Architectures for Multimedia and Communications
Applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The configuration permits experimentation on
diverse subsystems with varying degrees of heterogeneity, up to three levels of
parallelism, and a range of system sizes. The facility will be used in three
ways: as an experimental test-bed for systems research on clusters and grids; as
a prototype for the development of parallel and distributed applications for
clusters and grids; and as a cost-effective production compute server for
research in architecture, compilers, and machine learning. The shared facility
addresses problems critical to computational infrastructure spanning
architecture, compiler, and runtime research on systems ranging from single
nodes to grids, covering various application domains.&lt;br/&gt;