* 0224856
* FSML:  Site Improvement and Equipment Enhancement to Secure Long-Term Research Capabilities at Flathead Lake Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Richard Hauer, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 140,588.00

This award provides support for improvements in the electrical and
communications infrastructure of the Flathead Lake Biological Station (FLBS).
Established in 1899, the station located on the East Shore of Flathead Lake,
within a remarkable area of the Rocky Mountains known as the Crown of the
Continent. Station personnel and visiting staff conduct research, training and
education activities, including various summer courses that take advantage of
the station's location. The station has 4 long-term core projects: 1) floodplain
ecology and river restoration, 2) biodiversity and bioproduction along
biophysical gradients, 3) large lake limnology, and 4) environmental change
assessment and ecosystem modeling. The station maintains large, long-term
limnological databases and increasingly relies on high volume, remotely-sensed
imagery for spatial analysis of ecosystem processes. Improvements supported
through this award include: 1) underground placement of utility lines, 2)
emergency backup power and refrigeration; 3) equipment and software for data
management, network security and archival needs. The proposed improvements are
central to securing past investment, will facilitate growth of collaborative
research, and are essential for secure management, distribution, and archiving
of the massive electronic databases rapidly growing and accumulating at FLBS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;