* 0224743
* EPNES: Intelligent Power Routers for Distributed Coordination in Electric Energy Processing Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Miguel Velez-Reyes, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 09/30/2006
* USD 499,849.00

Summary&lt;br/&gt;Intelligent Power Routers for Distributed Coordination in
Electric Energy Processing Networks&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No:
0224743&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; We propose to develop a model for the next
generation power network using a distributed concept based on scalable
coordination by an Intelligent Power Router (IPR). Our goal is to show that by
distributing network intelligence and control functions using the IPR, we will
be capable of achieving improved survivability, security, reliability, and re-
configurability. Our approach builds on our knowledge from power engineering,
systems, control, distributed computing, and computer
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Each IPR has embedded intelligence into them
allowing the IPR to switch power lines, shed load and receive/broadcast local
state variable information to and from other routers. The information exchange
capability of the routers provides coordination among themselves to reconfigure
the network, even when the designated principal control center of the system has
collapsed due to a natural or man-made disaster. The IPRs may achieve their task
using direct monitoring, area-limited on-line security assessment and adaptive
controls to establish a coordinated and local set of control actions to either
apply preventive countermeasures against high risk operating conditions prior to
a potential disturbance or corrective countermeasures following a
disturbance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Our proposed approach borrows from computer
networks, where data is moved over geographically distant nodes via data
routers. In the event of a component or system failure, the IPRs will make local
decisions and coordinate with other routers to bringing the system, or part of
it, back into an operational state. Each IPR will operate on a Peer-to-Peer
system (P2P) or a mesh hierarchy making irrelevant whether its inputs come from
power producers or other IPRs, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research and education will
be integrated through undergraduate research (UR) and adapting research results
for class examples, seminars and demonstrations. The structure of UR will be
improved by using the affinity research group model [31], a model that
integrates the knowledge and skills required for research to those required for
cooperative work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;