* 0224684
* Symposium: "Physiological Ecology of Migration," New Orleans, LA, 24-30 September, 2002
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Rebecca Holberton, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2003
* USD 2,400.00

This proposal is for support of a symposium "Physiological Ecology of Migration:
How to Fly, Fast, and Feed En Route " at the Third North American Ornithological
Congress (NAOC) on 24-31 September 2002 in New Orleans, LA. The objectives for
this symposium are twofold: (a) to bring together outstanding researchers who
are actively studying migratory birds at different levels of biological
organization (molecular, cellular, organismal, populations) and (b) to include
researchers who can address the physiology of a taxonomically diverse set of
migratory birds within a broad ecological context. Such a focus is timely in
that significant recent work has addressed the metabolic physiology of flying
birds and the importance of phenotypic flexibility in organ systems for
migrating birds. However, this work has not been adequately integrated
especially across various levels of biological organization, nor has this work
been disseminated to a broader audience of ornithologists interested in the
ecology of birds during migration. The contributors at the symposium will
provide a diverse set of perspectives and approaches for studying the
physiological ecology of migration in part because they include scientists at
different stages of their careers, and from various countries represented by
both men and women.