* 0224006
* BE/MUSES:  Understanding Biocomplexity: Developing Methods of Defining Sustainable Uses for Agricultural Products
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2002,04/30/2004
* Reid Lifset, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 04/30/2004
* USD 109,851.00

0224006 Anex This MUSES project is aimed at developing the people, skills and
tools needed for understanding the system-wide sustainability of biobased
products. The transition to a sustainable raw material base will be one of the
most important challenges facing society in the 21st Century. As part of this
endeavor, substantial increases in the use of biomass-derived feedstock in the
chemical industry are expected over the next 50 years.&lt;br/&gt;A key task of
the project is organizing and hosting a two-day international workshop on
assessing the sustainability of biobased products. The team will develop
background materials for workshop participants that will include a survey of the
technologies that underlie biobased material production and a survey of the
literature on biobased material assessment techniques and sustainability
indicators. Drawing on the expertise of the interdisciplinary research team, the
literature, and the output of the consensus workshop, the team will develop a
framework for evaluating the complex environmental-social-industrial system
comprising biobased material production, use, and end-of-life
disposition.&lt;br/&gt;The team will be working throughout the project with the
Authentic Teaching Alliance (ATA) to prepare a teaching module appropriate for
secondary math and science classes. A team of two ATA Fellows and one secondary
math or science teacher will partner with our team to develop and evaluate a
learning module. This module will serve as a template for planned future module
development. A case study applying sustainability indicators to a biobased
material life cycle will also be developed and distributed as an education
resource.&lt;br/&gt;