* 0224427
* Collaborative Research:   DOT -- Distributed Optical Testbed to Facilitate the Development of Techniques for Efficient Execution of Distributed Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Alok Choudhary, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2005
* USD 186,827.00

EIA- 0224427&lt;br/&gt;Taylor, Valerie&lt;br/&gt;Choudhary, Alok;
&lt;br/&gt;Dinda, Peter A.; &lt;br/&gt;Mambretti, Joel J.&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern
University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CISE RR: (Collaborative) DOT--
Distributed Optical Testbed to Facilitate the Development of Techniques for
Efficient Execution of Distributed Applications &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative proposal with Illinois Institute of Technology (Sun, 02-24377) and
the University of Chicago (Foster, 02-24187), acquiring data nodes and compute
nodes at five sites, contributes to build a Distributed Optical Testbed (DOT).
The DOT system, a product of the paradigm shift from large-scale applications
running on large parallel systems at single sites to those running on
distributed systems, has come about by the availability of high-speed optical
networks (E.g., Starlight, TeraGrid 40 Gb/s network, the PacificRail 10 Gb/s
network). This shift necessitates techniques that allow applications to
efficiently utilize distributed systems. In contrast to parallel systems, these
systems must exploit two characteristics:&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneity of resources
(processors and networks) and &lt;br/&gt;Dynamic changes in performance of
shared resources, especially wide area networks. &lt;br/&gt;The system,
consisting of Linux clusters at six geographically different sites
interconnected via two existing research DWDM networks, I-WIRE and OMNInet,
involves the following sites: Argonne National Laboratory (ANL), Illinois
Institute of Technology (IIT), National Center for Supercomputer Applications
(NCSA), Northwester University Chicago Campus (NU-C), Northwestern University
Evanston Campus (NU-E), and the University of Chicago (UC). DOT will facilitate
the following research activities in the area of distributed
applications:&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic Load Balancing (Taylor)&lt;br/&gt;Performance
Monitoring and Prediction (Dinda, Sun, Taylor)&lt;br/&gt;Data Management
(Choudhary, Foster)&lt;br/&gt;The first activity develops techniques utilizing
network performance predictions that take into consideration the heterogeneity
of the processors and networks of distributed systems to dynamically balance the
load during execution. The second extends performance monitoring, modeling and
prediction techniques that have been focused on parallel systems and broadband
network to distributed systems with optical networks and different topologies.
The last develops techniques that manage the distributed data such that the
actual data location is transparent and the data is accessed efficiently. These
research activities are driven by three applications that have been parallelized
using MPI, such that the applications can be easily ported to
DOT:&lt;br/&gt;ENZO, an adaptive cosmological application,&lt;br/&gt;Cactus, an
open framework used to solve Einstein's equations, and&lt;br/&gt;AudioVoice, a
virtualized distributed audio application with physical simulations that have
real-time deadlines and varying computational demands.&lt;br/&gt;Each
application presents challenges, which include adaptivity, flexible framework,
and simulations with real-time deadlines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;