* 0224071
* High-Resolution Imagery and Terrain Model for Collaborative Research of Environmental Change at Barrow, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2006
* William Manley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Simon Stephenson
* 11/30/2006
* USD 257,715.00

This projects will create and release of three suites of spatial data products.
The first is high-resolution, orthorectified radar imagery (ORRI, with 1.25 m
grid cell spacing) and a co-registered, high-resolution Digital Elevation Model
(DEM; 5 m grid cell spacing; 1 m vertical accuracy). The second suite is
satellite imagery purchased through AeroMap U.S., specifically orthorectified
panchromatic (0.7 m grid cells) and multispectral (2.8 m grid cells) imagery
acquired by DigitalGlobe with the new QuickBird satellite. Third is a time-
series set of orthorectified air-photo mosaics. After processing, the DEM and
imagery would be made available to all NSF-funded researchers through the ARCSS
Data Coordination Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the vicinity of Barrow, Alaska
including the Barrow Environmental Observatory (BEO) there are more than 35
currently funded NSF research projects. These multi- and interdisciplinary
studies primarily address local to global effects of environmental sensitivity
and climate change. Many of the projects utilize quantitative spatial analysis
through remote sensing and Geographic Information Systems (GIS). Others would
utilize high-resolution spatial datasets if they were available. On a project by
project basis, research groups work piecemeal with spatial data for their own,
small, disconnected field areas. Sharing datasets is difficult due to
differences in map projection, datum, data format, extent, and distribution
channels. This new activity will provide the research community high-resolution
data and images resulting in tangible scientific benefits across numerous
disciplines, increasing the efficiency and significance of current and future
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On-going projects that would benefit are
research on ecosystem dynamics, terrestrial-atmospheric fluxes of greenhouse
gases, landscape dynamics, coastal flooding and erosion, permafrost melting,
other environmental responses to unprecedented arctic warming, and other topics.
These environmentally and societally relevant scientific problems can be
addressed in new ways and with greater success using digital topography and
imagery. By orders of magnitude, the spatial datasets would be more precise,
accurate, and useful than existing data layers. They would permit state-of-the-
art analysis for years to come, and would establish a temporal baseline for
decades of change-detection studies. This vision is shared by this proposal's
twelve collaborators from eight research institutions. With shared needs for
high quality spatial information, a modest effort now would leverage results and
promote interdisciplinary collaboration.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;