* 0224014
* BE: MUSES:  Modeling Eco-Industrial Symbiosis: Greening of Regional Industrial Materials Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Muhammad Sahimi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 04/30/2005
* USD 122,189.00

This Biocomplexity in the Environment (BE) for: Materials Use: Science,
Engineering, and Society (MUSES) study aims to develop new tools to assess and
optimize industrial networks in world city-regions. World city-regions are
enormous digesters of material, water and energy, functioning as intermediate
nodes in linear systems of material consumption and waste discharge. An ongoing
transition from linear to looped systems in industrial regions holds great
promise for reducing adverse human impacts of production and service industries
on the environment. The tool to be developed through the proposed research will
facilitate the design of alternative regional industrial networks with the
objective of achieving an eco-industrial symbiosis. The overarching field of
endeavor is industrial ecology with collaborations from industrial geographers,
regional econometricians, reverse logistics and eco-industrial park development.
The team will attempt integration of models and data sets from these fields and
will develop an operational model of waste and by-product flows in a regional
industrial network. The results will be ground-truthed through a series of
discussions with a number of representative firms in a major urban
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will function as a proof of
concept research, clarifying additional expertise needed to carry out a full-
scale modeling and analysis. USC's NSF Integrated Graduate Education Research
and Training (IGERT), "Sustainable Cities Program" (SCP) will coordinate the
efforts among the multiple disciplines. The Program already funds several
undergraduate and graduate students from a variety of fields related to
sustainable development. The proposed project presents new opportunities for the
SCP to train and educate undergraduate students and doctoral fellows in
theoretical and applied industrial ecology.