* 0224434
* Research Resources:  A High-Performance Shared-Purpose Cluster for Computer Architectural Simulation and Perceptual Interactive Ray Tracing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2005
* David Luebke, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 02/28/2005
* USD 82,802.00

EIA 02-24434&lt;br/&gt;Luebke, David P.&lt;br/&gt;Skadron, Kevin; Stan, Mircea
R.&lt;br/&gt;University of Virginia &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE RR: A High-
Performance Shared-Purpose Cluster for Computer Architectural Simulation and
Perceptual Interactive Ray Tracing &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal, building a cluster platform (with high computing and memory
requirements, and graphics and display hardware) to support research in computer
graphics and architecture, enables projects studying interactive rendering,
computer architecture, and temperature-aware computing. A 16-node rack-mounted
cluster with dual CPUs, large memory (4 GB), gigabit networking, and high-end
graphics is expected to facilitate the research. Specifically, the
infrastructure supports the following three research
projects:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perceptually Driven Interactive Ray
Tracing,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal Simulation of Computer Architecture with
Graphics Hardware, and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-Memory Architectural
Simulations.&lt;br/&gt;The computer graphics research investigates new scene
rendering algorithms motivated by models of human perception, and requiring
flexible (programmable) graphics hardware. This work investigates unconventional
rendering techniques that exploit the ability to vary sample location, density,
and frequency. Examples include frameless (replaces double buffering with
randomized update of pixels), interruptible (unifies spatial and temporal error
for a principles fidelity/performance tradeoff), and gaze-directed (varies
detail and resolution according to user's attention) rendering. Thermal modeling
is directed towards solving heat transfer equations for studying the run-time
thermal behavior of microprocessors, especially multithreaded (SMT) and single
chip (SCC) systems. The computer architecture component involves performance of
SMT and SCC systems and investigation of aggressive branch prediction techniques
using distant correlations.&lt;br/&gt;The educational aspects involve folding
relevant topics into the current graduate seminars and students in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;