* 0224363
* CISE Research Resources:  Teams of Miniature Mobile Robots
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2007
* Daniel Boley, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 10/31/2007
* USD 509,452.00

EIA-0224363&lt;br/&gt;Nikolaos Papanikolopoulos&lt;br/&gt;Daniel L. Boley;
William K. Durfeet; Maria L. Gini; Bradley J. Nelson&lt;br/&gt;University of
Minnesota-Twin Cities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE RR (Collaborative): Teams of
Miniature Mobile Robots&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, redesigning and
manufacturing a team of Scout-Ranger robots, improvises on the current scout
design through novel design schemes, software development, sensory fabrication,
and processing sensory data in real time. The research extends work based on a
previous generation of Scouts. The institution developed a heterogeneous robotic
team emphasizing the "Scout" robot, launched and controlled by a larger
platform, the "Ranger." After deployment, Scouts have a unique combination of
mobility modes including rolling and hopping, multiple sensing capabilities for
navigation (e.g., cameras, microphones), full communications for data and
instructions (controlled by cellular phones), and onboard computational
resources. Their functionality is increased by actuated wheels and miniature
grappling hooks and can serve applications such as reconnaissance, earthquake
rescue operations, homeland security space exploration, fire rescue missions,
hostage release operations, etc. Their design requires a compromise in power,
sensor types, locomotion, and size. However, rather than concentrating on size,
this work focuses primarily on communications, sensor fabrication, and sensor
placement. Solutions to research problems are sought in areas of miniature-robot
design, communication for distributed robotics (especially in low-bandwidth
situations), and resource allocation for distributed robotics.
Specifically:&lt;br/&gt;1. Designs of miniature robots: modifying original scout
design, giving special care to image-processing&lt;br/&gt;2. Software support
for Robot Teams: sharing resources leading to decision making and
planning&lt;br/&gt;3. Tradeoffs between sharing communication channels and
performance in motion detection&lt;br/&gt;4. Sensor fabrication in the micro
fabrication lab&lt;br/&gt;5. Analysis of sensory data (images) of the team of
robots; seeking optical positioning of the sensor to maximize
coverage/redundancy&lt;br/&gt;6. Analysis of traffic patterns (of humans) in a
building&lt;br/&gt;7. Detection of anomalies on those patterns, or detection of
unusual situations (i.e. smoke): using method of Principal Direction Divisive
Partitioning&lt;br/&gt;8. Innovative uses of Scouts: tele-rehabilitation,
dynamic hopping devices, etc.&lt;br/&gt;The educational plan includes the
incorporation and mentoring of women and minority students. The robots will be
used not only in Computer Vision and Robotics classes, also, in Algorithms, Data
Structures, Operating Systems, and Artificial Intelligence. Outreach activities,
proposed for K-12, along with public outreach complement the research
agendas.&lt;br/&gt;