* 0224540
* Career and Research Exploration for Students and Teachers (CREST) -- (For Track 1)
* GEO,GEO
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Darrel Schmitz, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Huntoon
* 12/31/2004
* USD 164,891.00

Career and Research Exploration for Students and Teachers
(CREST)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Career and Research Exploration for Students and
Teachers (CREST) provides a&lt;br/&gt;model for integrating research and
education by enhancing teacher content knowledge in the geosciences while
providing students with exposure to geosciences and environmental research and
related careers. During each of two summers, five teams, composed of one science
teacher and three middle school students per team, will spend two weeks working
with personnel from Mississippi Lignite Mine Company's Red Hills Mine and
Mississippi State University scientists. Students and teachers learn academic
content and research methods relative to development and utilization of a
lignite coal resource, including resource identification, pre-mining, mining,
and post-mining. Hands-on research accompanied by appropriate lectures in the
areas of ecology, geology and reclamation gives students and teachers
experiences with data collection, data analysis and data interpretation.
Students and teachers are exposed to issues of mining and the environmental
impact of the Red Hills Mine by working with scientists and participating in on-
going research projects at the mine and in the local area. Academic year follow-
up occurs through electronic communication among student-teacher teams, project
and mine personnel and scientists. CREST has the potential to introduce
geosciences and research to underrepresented groups. Participants are selected
from school districts in counties surrounding Red Hills Mine. The middle schools
identified for participant recruitment have a minority population ranging from
25% to 100%. &lt;br/&gt;