* 0224551
* Development of a field-based geochemistry course in the Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Matthew Leybourne, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 01/31/2006
* USD 168,858.00

Development of a Field-Based Geochemistry Course in the Dallas-Fort Worth
Metroplex&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a national model for a
field and laboratory based course&lt;br/&gt;in geochemistry at the undergraduate
(and graduate) levels. Geosciences majors at the University of Texas at Dallas
enrolled in Geochemistry (a required course for B.Sc.&lt;br/&gt;majors) will
spend a total of 10 days in the field working from a pontoon boat on
Lake&lt;br/&gt;Texoma, a large impoundment north of the Dallas-Fort Worth (DFW)
metroplex. During&lt;br/&gt;the field exercises students will collect data and
samples for analysis in the ICP analytical&lt;br/&gt;facility (inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometer and optical emission
spectrometer&lt;br/&gt;instruments). The purpose of the field and laboratory
work is to incorporate Problem-Based Learning (PBL) methods into geochemistry
instruction. The incorporation of the&lt;br/&gt;field work into the geochemistry
course work is intended to stimulate students interest
in&lt;br/&gt;geochemistry, provide hands-on experience with state-of-the-art
sampling and analytical&lt;br/&gt;methodologies, and mesh research with learning
to foster student understanding of real&lt;br/&gt;world problems. The study
area, Lake Texoma receives input from two major river systems, the Red River and
the Washita River. The Red River drains west Texas and Oklahoma and as a result
typically has elevated salinity (typically 1200 - 2000 mg/L total dissolved
solids, TDS, where it enters the lake and &gt; 12,000 mg/L TDS in some of the
headwater reaches), making the Red River one of the saltiest major rivers in the
world. In contrast, the Washita River drains west-central Oklahoma and is much
fresher (typically &lt; 500 mg/L TDS). Mixing between these two rivers results
in horizontal chemical gradients in addition to vertical chemical gradients that
occur during development of a summer thermocline. Large deltas are forming where
both the Red and Washita rivers enter Lake Texoma, as a result of elevated
suspended loads. This dynamic geochemical and sedimentological system is
therefore ideal for students to develop hypotheses, collect the necessary data
to test those hypotheses and then communicate the results as term papers and
oral presentations. Following the semester-length course, a graduate student and
two undergraduates will be involved in sampling the lake through the summer to
track geochemical changes as the thermocline develops. After year one of the
project, the course will be assessed by two external experts in geology and
pedagogy. Their recommendations will be incorporated to improve the course for
year two.&lt;br/&gt;