* 0224428
* CISE Research Infrastructure:  Infrastructure for Power-Aware Server Clusters
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Ulrich Kremer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 07/31/2004
* USD 71,921.00

EIA 02-24428&lt;br/&gt;Bianchini, Ricard&lt;br/&gt;Kremer,
Ulrich&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers University New Brunswick &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
CISE RR: Infrastructure for Power-Aware Server Clusters
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal, investigating the power, energy,
performance, and functionality issues and trade-offs involved in cluster
environments, aims at acquiring equipment for research on power aware clusters
of servers. The bulk of the infrastructure consists of a cluster of "blade"
servers. Since blade servers consume less power and allow finer control of power
states than traditional servers, they are considered ideal for power and energy
conservation research. The infrastructure supports two research studies
in:&lt;br/&gt;Strategies for conserving power and energy in cluster-based
Internet servers, such as high-capacity WWW, database, or file
servers&lt;br/&gt;Computation and data servers in the context of a tamper-
resistant and fault-tolerant sensor network.&lt;br/&gt;The former project
involves servers that support most WWW data/hosting centers, Internet companies,
and a large number of teaching and research institutions, but consume
significant amounts of power and energy. Conserving these resources is critical
to reduce the installation and operation costs of these clusters. Conserving
power and energy without degrading performance (or at least without degrading
excessively) constitutes the challenge. The cluster blades proposed enable
designs and experiments with techniques that can schedule the demand for
resources, permitting transitioning from active to low-power model without
relevant performance penalty. The project experiments with heterogeneous servers
comprising combination of blades and traditional, power-hungry servers. The
latter project designs the sensor network to identify, monitor, and track
objects or subjects within a physical space. This overall space is divided into
subspaces, where each subspace has its own server (or small cluster of servers),
and all servers are connected via a network. The design allows local and global
processing and evaluation of sensor data. Again, energy efficiency becomes
crucial in this context because the servers need to be able to survive power
failures for extended periods of time and still provide critical services. The
cluster of blades enables the study of energy behavior of the critical server
tasks in this environment, as well as experiment with techniques that can reduce
the energy consumption of these tasks without noticeably degrading their
performance and functionality.&lt;br/&gt;On the educational side, the blades and
the systems will be exploited developing operating systems, distributed
computing, and compiler courses. Power and energy consumption, as well as
performance, design, implementation, and evaluation guidelines will be promoted.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;