* 0224873
* EPNES:  Designing an Efficient and Secure Power System Using an Interdisciplinary Research and Education Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2009
* James Johnson, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 09/30/2009
* USD 796,753.00

The national need for improving the security of the electric power networks and
efficiently has been articulated by several government policies including
President Bush's energy policy that calls for the creation of a national energy
grid, and the elimination of regulatory provisions that limit investment in
transmission and curtail power generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This requires a
new dynamic architecture that can sustain vulnerabilities under different
perturbations to the system while remaining stable, secure and cost-effective.
The Center for Energy Systems and Controls at Howard University (CESaC) will
develop a multidisciplinary perspective, to attain an integrated sustainable
scalable and survivable power system in the context of a deregulated US market
system. A multi-layered network inculcating system technology, financial network
within the context of various market structures and environmental soundness will
employ modem control and optimization techniques. It will also invoke risk
assessment strategies in constructing, the architecture thereby generating and
delivering power efficiently at minimum cost without sacrificing environmental
and reliability standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed research and
educational activities will increase the participation of under represented
groups across disciplines as a workforce and intellectual leaders to address the
complex secured networks of the future. A system simulator will be designed and
developed to study various test beds based on the Navy challenge problem and
civilian test bed system provided by utility companies that CESaC has worked
with in the past.&lt;br/&gt;Results of the education pedagogy, including the
assessment of the learning outcomes will be disseminated via cdrom, and distance
learning information system technologies.