* 0224742
* Expansion of a Seawater Facility for Marine Organisms at the Bermuda Biological Station for Research, Inc
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Samia Sarkis, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 06/30/2005
* USD 199,860.00

This award provides partial support for the expansion and improvement of the
seawater facility at the Bermuda Biological Station for Research, Inc. (BBSR).
Funds will be used to construct a new building to house tanks with flowing
seawater, and to purchase equipment needed to expand the capacity of the
seawater system. The project will enhance the ability of resident and visiting
students and scientists to engage in research programs and educational
activities that require the use of a well-controlled, high-quality seawater
system. Among the research activities that will benefit from the expanded
facility are programs designed to: assess human impact on Bermuda's inshore
marine ecosystem; study the physiological ecology of oceanic plankton
communities; examine the response of the Sargasso Sea ecosystem to global
change; and understand the function of tropical marine ecosystems at the
organismal, cellular and molecular levels. Among the educational activities that
will benefit are the BBSR summer courses, the fall semester courses run in
collaboration with the University of Rhode Island, the spring semester program
run in collaboration with Duke University, the BBSR's Graduate Intern Program,
and the Open Ocean and Sub-Tropical Marine Research Experiences for
Undergraduates program.&lt;br/&gt;