* 0224419
* Collaborative Research Resources: An Experimental Platform for Humanoid Robotics Research
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2008
* Christopher Atkeson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 02/29/2008
* USD 1,015,000.00

This award provides funds to build a state of the art humanoid robot
experimental facility at CMU's Robotics Institute. Developing humanoid robots
pushes robotics and automation technology forward. Researchers build humanoid
robots to test and explore their theories about how humans work. Humanoid robots
are beginning to play an economically important role in the service segment of
our society. Primarily, humanoid robots inspire. For example Japan is
publicizing its humanoid robotics research to get more children interested in
science and engineering, currently a major concern in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will purchase an upper body humanoid from
Sarcos Research Corporation as well as two smaller robots and an advanced
interface device. Using the proposed equipment, the PIs will undertake a number
of projects which fall into four broad classes: core robotics and vision
research that substantially increases the capabilities and skills of robots
(Atkeson, Hebert, Rizzi, Pollard), authoring tools that will make it easier for
people who are not roboticists and perhaps even not programmers to develop new
applications on robots (Hodgins, Hudson, Kuffner), application prototyping and
assessment of humanoid robots in various application domains (Pausch, Kiesler),
and unifying applications, which involve a large number of interdisciplinary
researchers. In addition to the expected robotics researchers, the team includes
researchers from HCI and sociology to work on how these robots might be made
easy to use and how they will fit into society. Taken together, these projects
will significantly expand the ability both to control humanoid robots and to
develop applications on them. These projects will also increase fundamental
understanding of the power of the human form in a robot, and our fundamental
understanding of human motion. The PIs will encourage other researchers at CMU
and in the U.S. to use the facility, taking advantage of strengths in vision,
speech, and reasoning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the PIs are using humanoid
robots to explore computational models of how human behavior is generated. Using
a humanoid robot as a research tool forces the researchers to deal with a
complex physical apparatus and complex tasks. The knowledge required to recreate
human motions will also serve to increase our understanding of how people move
and may lead to advances in physical rehabilitation and sports medicine. In
contrast to most biomechanical research, the PIs will attempt to refine
scientific understanding of both the functional components of human motion such
as locomotion and grasping and also the subtle stylistic components that make it
appear normal, humanlike, and expressive. Combining these two components should
make the models useful for analyzing the performance of aspiring athletes as
well as diagnosing individual problems with locomotion and
manipulation.&lt;br/&gt;