* 0224206
* SPIN ELECTRONICS:   III-V/Mn Ferromagnetic Semiconductors for Device Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2006
* Bruce McCombe, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 10/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

0224206 Luo

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
Century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on
growth, characterization and device studies of III-V/Mn materials and their
heterostructures. The goal of this program is to develop ferromagnetic resonant
interband tunneling diodes (FRITD) and polarization tunable infrared light
emitting diodes. In order to develop optimized materials for these devices, and
to demonstrate proof of principle operation, device structures will be
fabricated and tested in parallel with the materials growth to provide direct
feedback to the materials effort. Preliminary studies at the University at
Buffalo (UB) of structural, transport/magneto-transport, optical and magnetic
properties of the constituent materials for these devices have revealed several
interesting problems associated with the incorporation of magnetic Mn++ ions at
high sheet densities. More importantly, it was found that the structural,
optical, transport and magnetic properties of these materials are closely
connected. These studies demonstrate the need for designing materials from the
atomic level so that electrical transport, optical and magnetic properties are
simultaneously optimized; this is one of the key tasks of this program.
Specifically, to tackle these complex problems, it is proposed to form a
multidisciplinary research team to carry out comprehensive studies of III-V-
based ferromagnetic materials/structures, fundamental properties, spin
injection/interface effects and devices. In this proposed work, the University
at Buffalo group will: 1) fabricate systematic sets of samples of GaAs/Mn,
GaSb/Mn, and InAs/Mn digital alloys, in which submonolayers of Mn are inserted
in the III-V lattice; 2) explore the magnetic, electrical transport, optical
properties and structural quality as a function of growth conditions; 3)
optimize growth conditions to produce the highest Curie temperatures; 4)
fabricate and test device structures.

The program is formulated to maximize student involvement in multidisciplinary
research by engaging engineering and physics students working together to reach
common goals. It will utilize existing infrastructure, both for collaborative
research and for student interactions, which has been established for the on-
going spintronic materials development project supported by the Defense Advanced
Research Project Agency (DARPA) focusing on other materials. A total of three
full-time graduate students will be supported in this program, a substantial
effort made possible by the synergism with the related work.

The success of this program will have immediate impact on the key problems in
the area of spintronics, namely, improving the Curie temperature and producing
materials suitable for practical devices and spin injection into semiconductor
heterostructures. Combined with the other materials currently studied in the
DARPA-supported project, the materials effort at UB represents one of the
strongest in the country. The device fabrication and characterization will lead
the way in resolving bottlenecks in materials research related to spin-injection
involving III-V materials, and the possibility of electron (rather than hole)
spin injection.

