* 0224848
* Third International Conference on Numerical Solution of Volterra and Delay Equations; Tempe, Arizona, 2003
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Alan Feldstein, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 14,000.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0224848&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jackiewicz,
Zdzislaw&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Arizona State University &lt;br/&gt;Program:
Applied Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: The Numerical Solution of Volterra and
Delay Equations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to organize
the Third International Conference on the Numerical Solution of Volterra and
Delay Equations. It will bring together leading world class experts in the
newest numerical methods for delay equations, in the most recent aspects of high
performance supercomputers, and in the most important applications (especially
biological) that lead to Volterra problems. It will, for the first time,
emphasize research and applications in the newly developing vast area of delay
and Volterra partial differential and integral equations. The subject of
Volterra equations includes functional differential equations (delay, advanced,
and neutral) as well as delay and Volterra partial differential equations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Volterra equations have have important and crucial
applications as models in diverse areas of science and engineering; e.g.
biomathematics and medical science, population dynamics, control theory,
electrodynamics, neutron transport theory, oscillation theory, and
viscoelasticity. These applications arise in a variety of critical areas such as
modeling of the spread of infectious diseases and biological agents like anthrax
and smallpox, the design of nuclear reactors and weapons, aerospace technology,
the guidance of drone weapons and intelligence vehicles, and even the design of
super computers themselves. Since the solution of Volterra and delay equations
can almost never be obtained in closed form, computational techniques must be
used. By their nature, Volterra problems create enormous demands on computing
resources (both on computer speed and memory) and therefore require the use of
extremely high performance super computers. This conference will bring together
the experts in these areas and will help to stimulate various research
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date: June 25, 2002&lt;br/&gt;