* 0224894
* 2002 Gravitational Wave Advanced Detector Workshop (GWADW)
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2003
* Barry Barish, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 04/30/2003
* USD 5,000.00

Conferences on frontier topics have played a central role in the development of
Physics for decades. The possible detection of Gravitational Wave Radiation is
one of these topics. A series of six Aspen Winter Physics conferences on
Gravitational Waves and Their Detection has been very successful in exploring
this subject and in galvanizing the community. The Aspen Winter Conference on
Gravitational Waves, called the Gravitational Wave Advanced Detector Workshop
(GWADW), usually held in January or February, will not take place in Aspen in
2002, but is to be replaced by an analogous conference to be held in Isola
d'Elba, Italy, May 19-26, 2002. The conference will return to Aspen in January
or February, 2003.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subtitle of the Elba workshop is,
"Toward a Global Detection Network". The goal is to discuss the physics coverage
that can be achieved considering that, in the near future, there will be
interferometers in the US, Europe (in Pisa and Hannover), and in Japan and these
can be operated as a combined global array. There is, as well, an array of
resonant detectors that can be included. Finally, space based detectors may be
included someday. Sensitivity is going to improve thanks to the many ongoing
Research and Development programs. This proposal requests travel support for
participants in the Elba workshop.