* 0224745
* Design of Flexible Reaction Models
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Marianthi Ierapetritou, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2007
* USD 205,126.00

Research:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project addresses the problem of
modeling simulation and optimization of realistic reaction systems involving a
large number of reaction steps and different species. The specific objectives
are the description of complex kinetic networks through reduced reaction
systems, the determination of the range of validity in terms of the initial
conditions of the reduced models and the problem of uncertainty propagation
through the reaction network. The methodology that is developed will be applied
to fossil fuels combustion but the techniques developed are applicable to a
diverse range of chemical processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen oxides (NOx)
in the atmosphere cause photochemical smog, the destruction of the ozone layer
and global warming. Atmospheric NOx increases have been attributed to the
combustion of biomass and fossil fuels, systems that are mathematically
represented by very complex kinetic reaction networks. Accurate kinetic models
could help identify the parameters responsible for the production of the
pollutant NOx in the atmosphere and be used to reduce their formation. The PI
will develop methods of kinetic model reduction to reduce the computational
complexity associated with the consideration of the detailed kinetic mechanisms
of such systems. The approach is to develop a comprehensive framework for the
analysis of uncertainty effects of complex kinetic models, quantify the range of
validity of a reduced model, and determine more flexible reduced kinetic models
with respect to kinetic parameters and initial conditions. This will be achieved
through the following steps:&lt;br/&gt;- The development of an efficient
approach to quantify the range of validity in terms of initial conditions of a
reduced kinetic model based on the ideas of uncertainty analysis&lt;br/&gt;- The
investigation of various uncertainty propagation techniques to evaluate the
effects of uncertainty in kinetic model parameters on systems
outputs&lt;br/&gt;- The integration of the uncertainty analysis procedure whtin
the framework for kinetic model reduction that will result in the determination
of reduced kinetic model with the required range of validity and pre-specified
flexibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides the
training of undergraduate and graduate students at Rutgers, the PI is involved
in SUPER (Science for Undergraduates a Program for Excellence in Research) at
Douglas College for Women. It is expected that one student affiliated with SUPER
will work on this project during each summer.&lt;br/&gt;