* 0224958
* Schistosomiasis:  Ecological Interactions Among Schistosomes Snail Hosts, Human Hosts, and Fish Predators
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2002,02/28/2009
* Kenneth McKaye, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2009
* USD 1,657,865.00

Schistosomiasis is a debilitating parasitic disease caused by trematodes of the
genus Schistosoma, which alternates between human and snail hosts The disease
now occurs in 74 countries and is ranked second to malaria as a cause of human
morbidity by a parasitic agent. The proposed research program has been designed
to determine if fish that feed on snails can be an effective biological control
agent for schistosomiasis in Lake Malawi. Specifically, the researchers propose
to (1) conduct seasonal surveys of the snail-feeding fishes and their snail prey
on a lake-wide level; (2) identify and describe the shallow water snail-eating
fishes in Lake Malawi; (3) determine habitat preferences of host snails; (4)
determine seasonal snail infection status; and (5) determine infection and re-
infection rates in human populations. These data will be used to develop models
that predict the relationship of fish/snail populations to infection rates in
the human population. By comparing these data to a historical database (i.e.,
pre-1988), researchers will be able to test the hypothesis that the reduction of
snail-eating fishes, due to overfishing, led to the increase of schistosome
infection in human populations inhabiting the lake shore of Lake Malawi.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If low population numbers of snail-eating fish can be
linked to an increase in schistosomiasis, then researchers will be able to
convince government officials to effectively manage these fish populations. The
successful management of indigenous snail-eating fish would have a major impact
on the quality of life of the human population in the region. In addition, these
studies will provide supplemental information needed to design a comprehensive
biological control program for human schistosomiasis in other parts of the
world.&lt;br/&gt;