* 0224695
* FSML: Improvements in Computer Connectivity and Auxiliary Power at the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* David Phinney, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 74,205.00

This award provides partial support for improvements in the electrical systems
and communications infrastructure at The Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences,
an independent, non-profit oceanographic institution and marine laboratory. The
improvements include installation of fiber optic cabling that will provide high-
speed digital connections between the administration building and the five
outlying buildings at the Laboratory's site on McKown Point. Currently, a
majority of the research staff does not benefit from the speed of the
laboratory's T1 connection due to the lack of fiber-optic connections between
the various outbuildings and the hub in the administration building. The
integrity of the Laboratory's power system will be protected from power outages
by the addition of a new 100kW auxiliary power generator that will augment
limited back-up power currently provided by an existing 37kW generator. This
addition will provide a reliable supply of electricity needed to maintain
instrumentation, computers and large numbers of sensitive living, refrigerated
and frozen materials stored at the Laboratory. Major activities that will
benefit from both improvements include the Provasoli-Guillard National Center
for the Culture of Marine Phytoplankton, an NSF-supported collection of marine
algae, and the J.J. MacIsaac Facility for Flow and Imaging Cytometry, which
serves users at other institutions as well as those at The Bigelow Laboratory.
The improvements in communications is also expected to facilitate educational
use of the laboratory's facilities, which has increased significantly in recent
years.