* 0224727
* GLOBEC:  Seabird Distribution and Abundance in Winter
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* William Fraser, Polar Oceans Research Group
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 02/29/2004
* USD 279,641.00

The U.S. Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics (U.S. GLOBEC) program has the goal of
understanding and ultimately predicting how populations of marine animal species
respond to natural and anthropogenic changes in climate. Research in the
Southern Ocean (SO) indicates strong coupling between climatic processes and
ecosystem dynamics via the annual formation and destruction of sea ice. The
Southern Ocean GLOBEC Program (SO GLOBEC) will investigate the dynamic
relationship between physical processes and ecosystem responses through
identification of critical parameters that affect the distribution, abundance
and population dynamics of target species. The overall goals of the SO GLOBEC
program are to elucidate shelf circulation processes and their effect on sea ice
formation and krill distribution, and to examine the factors which govern krill
survivorship and availability to higher trophic levels, including penguins,
seals and whales. The focus of the U.S. contribution to the international SO
GLOBEC program will be on winter processes. This component will focus on seabird
diet composition and foraging behavior. This will be accomplished by direct
observation of diet samples from both penguins and flying birds. Foraging
behavior will be studied using time-depth recorders and satellite transmitters.
This research will be coordinated with the component focusing the large-scale
distribution, abundance and habitat of seabirds. The result of the integrated SO
GLOBEC program will be to improve the predictability of living marine resources,
especially with respect to local and global climatic shifts.

