* 0224092
* Researcher and Student Housing at the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* David Inouye, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 180,000.00

Abstract for Proposal #0224092, "Researcher and student housing at the Rocky
Mountain Biological&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to
Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory (RMBL), under the direction&lt;br/&gt;of
Dr. Ian Billick, to build researcher and student housing at the RMBL. The RMBL
is a biological field&lt;br/&gt;station that was established in 1928 to promote
research and education in the biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;Unaffiliated with
any university, scientists from numerous institutions throughout the United
States visit&lt;br/&gt;the RMBL to conduct research and teach classes. Because
students and researchers come from around the&lt;br/&gt;world, the RMBL provides
housing in cabins onsite. Many of these cabins were constructed by miners
in&lt;br/&gt;the 1880s or biologists in the early 1930s. This grant will allow
the RMBL to provide safe, clean living&lt;br/&gt;facilities in order for
scientists to conduct their work and for students to take
classes.&lt;br/&gt;This grant will pay for the construction of three cabins, one
noncooking cabin and two cooking&lt;br/&gt;cabins. The noncooking cabin will
house six students in a two-story building. Each student will have
a&lt;br/&gt;private bedroom and there will be a shared living area. The cabin
will be of basic wood construction with&lt;br/&gt;gas heating. The two cooking
cabins will each house either a researcher family or four graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;There will be two bedrooms upstairs with a cooking and
living area downstairs.&lt;br/&gt;The RMBL has been an important center for
biological research and training. Scientists at the&lt;br/&gt;RMBL have
published approximately 1000 papers in peer reviewed journals. In addition to
basic research&lt;br/&gt;conducted at the Lab on diverse areas such as butterfly
physiology, stream ecology, and marmot behavior,&lt;br/&gt;science at the RMBL
has been used to shape the revision of the Clean Air Act and has documented
how&lt;br/&gt;climate change will affect montane ecosystems. Scientists who have
trained or worked at the Lab have&lt;br/&gt;been influential in identifying the
problem of human population growth as well as founding the
academic&lt;br/&gt;disciplines of Conservation and Restoration Biology to
provide solutions to real world problems. By&lt;br/&gt;providing funding to
renovate housing, the National Science Foundation will help ensure that
scientists at&lt;br/&gt;the RMBL can continue to provide information policy
makers need in making decisions concerning the&lt;br/&gt;environment.