* 0224683
* Workshop:  Assisting and Encouraging Student Opportunities for Post-undergraduate Study (AESOPS)
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2002,09/30/2004
* P. Aarne Vesilind, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2004
* USD 37,416.00

CMS-0224683 PI: P. Aarne Vesilind Institution: Bucknell University Title:
"Assisting and Encouraging Student Opportunities for Post-undergraduate Study
(AESOPS)"

Abstract: Engineering schools at research universities have for many years
relied on non-residents to fill the ranks of its graduate students because most
qualified American engineering graduates choose not to go to graduate school.
Even with a large influx of international students, many engineering faculty
have difficulty recruiting qualified graduate students to assist with NSF-
sponsored research. Recently, international tensions and security concerns have
created increased difficulties in recruiting non-residents to American graduate
schools. This workshop is directed toward increasing the number of qualified US
citizens and residents who chose to pursue graduate studies. Specifically the
workshop discussion will concern students who attend engineering schools which
do not have a Ph.D. program.

Excellent students graduating from non-PhD-granting engineering colleges often
do not consider graduate school because there is no "presence" of a research
program and no (or few) graduate students at their institution. These
engineering graduates are often not aware of the graduate school option, and
they are often discouraged from going on to graduate school. These students
appear to be an untapped resource of advanced-level engineering manpower.

This workshop comprises Phase I of a project to encourage and assist engineering
graduates from non-PhD-granting engineering schools to apply to and enroll in
graduate programs in research universities. The workshop participants will be
drawn from both Ph.D. granting and non-Ph.D. granting Institutions and will
include engineering researchers, administrators and teachers. The participants
will identify the sources of the problem and recommend several methods of
addressing these problems. The end product of this workshop will be a report
disseminated to engineering deans. A formal proposal to the National Science
Foundation for initiating a prototype study (Phase II) incorporating some or all
of the workshop recommendations will follow.