* 0224533
* Education Aquanauts: Exploration-Based Interdisciplinary Science Skills Enhancement
* GEO,GEO
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Randall Ryder, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Huntoon
* 12/31/2004
* USD 151,027.00

Education Aquanauts: Exploration-Based Interdisciplinary Science Skills
Enhancement&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the last decade, more than half a dozen
animal species have invaded the upper Great Lakes, some of them causing
unequivocal and perhaps cataclysmic alterations in large lake ecosystems. All
have established themselves in terms of having reproductively successful
populations, but they are recent enough in some cases to have as-yet limited
ranges. While both ecologically- and economically massive alterations in local
and global habitats are occurring, the younger K-12 and even undergraduate
population of the region is only slowly becoming aware of large water bodies
including Lake Michigan. This program provides immersion science learning for
teachers of primarily middle school students produces curriculum modules for use
in in-school hands-on learning activities. The focus of the effort is the
biological community of Green Can Reef, a local spawning reef at the heart
(e.g., zebra mussels, perch recruitment) and also the edge (e.g., goby, amphipod
decline) of invasive species influences. Specific objectives are to (1) expand
teacher awareness of exotic species occurrence and activities in local waters;
(2) engage teachers in short, intense hands-on workshops using modern-day tools
including Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROVs) and analytical instrumentation to
test specific, tractable hypotheses; (3) provide educators with resources to
access current environmental research activities and results in their own
region; and (4) develop educator-produced, scientist-assisted curriculum modules
offering experimental, hypothesis-testing, hands-on research activities for
students and public learners using locally-relevant subjects. The entire
sequence is repeated such that observations span a period of systematic change,
for example during spring bloom conditions or across thermal (de)stratification
regimes. At the conclusion of the effort, each teacher will develop a single
class-period activity that incorporates some aspect of their experience (data,
concepts, underwater video), nurtured by active research scientists experienced
in teacher enhancement programs.&lt;br/&gt;