* 0224566
* Developing "Suitcase Lessons in Oceanography" for K-6 students in concert with the FOSS-based science curriculum currently in use by a tri-county Educational Service District
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Kelly Falkner, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2006
* USD 162,269.00

Developing "Suitcase Lessons in Oceanography" in concert with the FOSS-based K-6
Science Curriculum Currently in Use in a Tri-County
Educational&lt;br/&gt;Service District&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three counties in
Oregon are currently involved in improving science education in schools by
changing the education paradigm from teaching-centered to learning-centered via
inquiry-based hands-on curricula. It is based on a Science-Teacher Partnership
Program (SEPS), in which Full Option Science Systems (FOSS) have been adopted
for each grade level from K-6, and partnerships have been established to help
teachers provide a quality science education for all students. The program is
advised by a panel composed of teachers, scientists and administrators with
experience and/or interest in hands-on science. The SEPS program has been
successful not only in enhancing the young students interest and knowledge of
science, but has also had a positive impact by increasing younger students
awareness of opportunities and of careers made possible by higher education.
However, there is no ocean science component in the curriculum. The objective of
this project is to address that deficiency. The project will generate and test
the concept of using "Suitcase Lessons in Oceanography", in concert with ongoing
curriculum, to infuse ocean science into K-6 science education in the Linn-
Benton-Lincoln Educational Service District (ESD). A complete portable module
("Suitcase Lesson") will be created which will allow any faculty member to
introduce fundamental science concepts of ocean science to K-6 students. This
approach aims at directly addressing NSES goals of science literacy for all;
real understanding of scientific processes; and development of a desire for
science learning throughout life. In addition it addresses the current need of
integrating ocean sciences in a life-long educational program aimed at promoting
a basic understanding of the oceans and their relevance to everyday
life.&lt;br/&gt;