* 0224007
* Perfusion fMRI for Cognitive Neuroscience
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* John Detre, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 754,020.00

Perfusion fMRI for Cognitive Neuroscience

Abstract

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Detre and colleagues will conduct
a three-year investigation aimed at developing perfusion functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) for use in studies of cognitive brain function. The
sensitivity of perfusion fMRI will be increased by adapting the methods to
higher magnetic field strengths. Image quality will be improved by using imaging
strategies that are not sensitive to degradation by variations in adjacent
tissue types. In addition to optimizing image acquisition parameters, image
analysis procedures will also be developed that are specifically optimized for
perfusion fMRI. These acquisition and analysis methods will be disseminated to
other scientists through publications, web-sites, and integration into currently
available software packages.

The larger goal of this project is to validate perfusion fMRI for use in
cognitive brain mapping in experiments on face recognition and risk-taking. As
is commonly known, MRI methods provide detailed pictures of brain anatomy.
However, the methods can also be used to see how brain function changes with
cognitive tasks such as learning, memory, language, and emotion. This is
possible because blood flow increases in a brain region that is being used to
perform a specific task. Most MRI methods used for mapping brain function only
detect such regional blood flow changes indirectly. Over the past decade, Dr.
Detre and others have been developing noninvasive perfusion MRI methods to
directly measure cerebral blood flow. These methods can quantify blood flow both
at rest and with cognitive tasks. Because the measurement is direct and
quantitative, the results are more stable over space and time than with indirect
and non-quantitative methods. They will be particularly useful for examining
behavioral state changes, learning, and responses to pharmacological
manipulation. Perfusion MRI can also measure changes in certain brain regions
that are difficult to visualize with other methods due to the presence of
adjacent tissues with differing effects in a magnetic field. It is anticipated
that perfusion fMRI will contribute significantly to our understanding of
cognitive brain function over the next decade.







