* 0224657
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Fabrication of Doped Single-Mode Optical Fibers for Investigation of Bragg-Grating Characteristics
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Anup Sharma, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/2005
* USD 27,750.00

0224657&lt;br/&gt;Sharma&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
US-India cooperative research entitled Fabrication of Doped Single-Mode Optical
Fibers for Investigation of Bragg-Grating Characteristics. The collaborators are
Anup Sharma of Alabama A&amp;M University (AAMU) and Har Narayan Acharya of the
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur (IITKgp). They will examine issues
related to the fabrication of specifically doped single-mode optical fibers and
followup with an investigation of the Bragg-grating characteristics that are
written in these fibers. The researchers will utilize the unique capabilities
and expertise offered by each participating institution to accomplish the
research objectives. The IITKgp specializes in optical fiber preform and single-
mode fabrication; AMMU is a leader in characterizing Bragg- gratings in optical
fibers. Fiber Bragg-gratings have numerous important applications in sensing and
communications. The research goals include developing a novel scheme for fiber
sensing of strain and temperature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This activity
will initiate a new international collaboration with a competent group of Indian
materials scientists and will promote the participation of under-represented
groups in research. A doctoral student will accompany the PI on trips to the
IITKgp where he will learn about the modified chemical vapor deposition
techniques; likewise, the Indian collaborator will gain exposure to fabrication
techniques developed at AAMU. This proposal has strong educational aspects and
there is a good chance that the investigators will produce novel results. The
Indian Department of Science and Technology (DST) jointly supports this activity
under the NSF/DST program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;