* 0224424
* CISE Research Resources:   Collaborative Research Resources:  Collaborative Data Analysis and Visualization
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Ted Wetherbee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/2006
* USD 500,000.00

EIA-0224424&lt;br/&gt;Paul R. Woodward&lt;br/&gt;David H. Du; Ernest F. Retzel;
Jon B. Weissman; Ted J. Wetherbee&lt;br/&gt;University of Minnesota-Twin
Cities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE RR: Collaborative Data Analysis and
Visualization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, creating a high-speed network
that will enable coupling a large number of PCs and Macintoshes to tackle
computationally-intensive problems during idle times, enhances the collaboration
between the University of Minnesota Laboratory for Computational Science and
Engineering (LCSE), Center for Computational Genomics and Bioinformatics (CCGB),
Academic Distributed Computing Services (ADCS), the computer science research
group, and Fon du Lac Tribal and Community College. The facility will be used as
a platform to perform off-line batch jobs related to visualization and data
mining. Augmenting network, storage, and graphics rendering capacity for a pre-
existing student lab, the project will link together approximately 100
workstations at UMN via a Gigabit Ethernet network to service an
interdisciplinary group or researchers. UMN collaborating teams, with on
exception, will move the new Digital Technology Center (DTC) into a common
location at the heart of the campus. This common location creates a special
opportunity to exploit the workstations as a powerful data analysis and
visualization engine for the genomics and scientific visualization applications
of CCGB and the LCSE. The use of workstations during the time of low student
utilization is expected to provide five-to ten-fold increases in data storage
capacity and bandwidth, data mining processing power, and image rendering power.
The collaboration with computer scientists, on distributed computing techniques
and networked storage technology, plays a vital role in realizing the benefits.
The project, involving two students from Fond du Lac Tribal College, provides
platforms for research in cluster network design, cost-effective commodity-based
storage area network design and operation, distributed computing, and
distributed visualization. A fully connected Gigabit Ethernet network will be
built by the collaborating team. This network-switching fabric will interconnect
the machines of the ADCS lab and the machine and network attached storage of the
CCGB and LCSE. A gigabit Ethernet link to UMN OC-12 Internet-2 connection will
enable large amounts of data to be brought into the combined environment (e.g.,
NSF TeraGrid). The project leverages resources and expertise to create a
combined capacity for data analysis and visualization far greater than existed
in any one of the participating labs before the collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;