* 0224225
* Spin Electronics:     Optical Studies of Spin Injection in Semiconductor/Semiconductor and Metal/Semiconductor Heterostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Bruce McCombe, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 08/31/2006
* USD 274,095.00

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
century Initiative, Program solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on the
study of spin injection phenomena in a variety of spin Light Emitting Diodes
(spin-LEDs). The proposed work has an experimental as well as a theoretical
component. All the devices that will be used in the experimental part of this
proposal have an AlGaAs(n)/GaAs/AlGAs(p) light emitting diode at their core. The
circular polarization of the diode emission is used to determine the relative
spin population of carriers confined in the GaAs layer. In ZnMnSe based spin-
LEDs the ZnMnSe contact layer is the source of spin polarized electrons. In this
well studied system we will explore the effects of resonant heating of the
electrons and holes at various components of the device using far infrared (FIR)
monochromatic light. Choice of FIR wavelength and of the externally applied
magnetic field allows the study of the effects of heating on the diode output of
a particular carrier (electron or hole) in a specific component of the device
(GaAs, AlGaAs or ZnMnSe layer) . In addition we will be using specially
designed, n-type modulation doped ZnMnSe spin LEDs to study the population
statistics of electrons confined in the GaAs quantum well of each diode and
occupying a number of Landau levels. The second type of spin-LED will use a
ferromagnetic layer as spin polarized electron source with the easy
magnetization axis perpendicular to the layer axis. Such a device is expected to
require only a few hundred Gauss to operate, as opposed to a few tesla required
by the recently developed Fe-based spin LEDs in which the easy magnetization
axis lies in the Fe layer plane. Finally we plan to explore AlGaMnAs as a
potential spin polarized hole injector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the theoretical
component of this proposal we describe investigations of several important
phenomena that take place in spin injection LEDs and affect the operation and
efficiency of these devices. We propose to investigate the capture process of
the carrier in the GaAs wells and the subsequent energy relaxation to the lowest
confinement subbands e1 and h1. The role of phonon emission and the associated
spin-flip processes will be explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A very close and
synergistic relationship between the experimental and the theoretical components
of the proposed work is expected to contribute to the success of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An educational aspect of the proposed work will
involve two undergraduate students in the program (from Physics and/or EE)
working closely with graduate students and the co-investigators. Support for the
undergraduate students will be requested from the REU program&lt;br/&gt;