* 0224322
* The Earth Science Storybook Project:  Building Content Knowledge and Teaching Confidence in Preservice Teachers
* GEO,GEO
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Barry Bickmore, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 07/31/2005
* USD 59,876.00

The Earth Science Storybook Project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Earth Science
Storybook Project is a pilot project based upon the premise that current reform
efforts in science education must have a focus on teacher education. The project
develops a process whereby university faculty can serve as positive mentors to
preservice teachers and foster sound professional development for teachers. The
project presents preservice teachers the opportunity to research and write
standards-based children's literature (storybooks) in earth science and test the
idea that use of creative skills will be a meaningful learning experience
leading to a more successful degree of professional development for teachers.
Earth scientists help the preservice teachers to create scientifically sound
products that teach concepts required by state and national standards for the
K-4 grade levels. These geoscientists work with the participants to design
simple experiments that will be included in the storybook narratives designed to
promote scientific investigation in K-4 classes. The emphasis on the design and
implementation of experiments gives the participating preservice teachers and
K-4 students a glimpse of the way science is practiced. Elementary education
majors enrolled in an introductory geology class at Brigham Young University are
mentored as they research a specific earth science topic and write a short
storybook on that topic. Potential storybook topics are taken from national and
state science education standards and are appropriate for children at the K-4
level. Participating preservice teachers are mentored throughout the process of
creating their storybooks in order to foster development of positive attitudes
toward scientific inquiry and enhanced pedagogical content knowledge in science.
The storybooks will be professionally illustrated. As the project continues past
the pilot stage, it will focus on dissemination of the storybooks into a local
school district. Assessment of the storybooks themselves will be conducted in
terms of their affective outcomes on teachers and students and their
effectiveness in fostering development of content knowledge for K-4 students at
the district level.&lt;br/&gt;