* 0224574
* Family Science:  Expanding Community Support for Inquiry-based Science Education
* EHR,DRL
* 01/16/2002,07/31/2007
* Leroy Hood, Institute for Systems Biology
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia James
* 07/31/2007
* USD 947,778.00

"Family Science: Expanding Community Support for Inquiry-based Science" is the
University of Washington's innovative five-year plan for reaching youth and
families in the Seattle school district. This program represents an enhancement
of the NSF-funded Family Science program targeting grades K-5 and expansion of
this successful program to include middle and high school students. The proposed
activities, Science Explorations, Inquiry Science Conferences and Community
Celebrations, are designed to help parents understand inquiry-based science
instruction while heightening students' confidence in their ability to
understand science processes. The hands-on activities also support and
complement Seattle's Local Systemic Change project by enlisting teachers,
parents and community members to champion science education outside of the
formal school setting. The implementation strategy includes workshops to train
Family Science Lead Teachers and Parent/Community Leaders to coordinate Family
Science programs. Subsequent partnerships between teachers and community
organizations are designed to establish regional clusters of community networks
to support programmatic activities during and beyond the funding period. It is
estimated that Family Science will result in the presentation of nearly 300
school and community-based events impacting 10,000 individuals.

