* 0224877
* Functional and Pharmacological Characterization of the Cockroach Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Ke Dong, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 07/31/2007
* USD 439,479.00

Voltage-gated sodium channels are essential for generation and propagation of
electrical impulses in the nervous system and other excitable cells. There are
at least ten voltage-gated sodium channel genes in mammals, but only one sodium
channel gene in insects. How do insects achieve sodium channel diversity
required for fulfilling different roles in different tissues and cell types? Why
are some neurotoxins, including pyrethroids (a widely used class of
insecticides) and insect-selective scorpion toxins, are more toxic to insects
than to mammals? The research proposed by Dr. Dong is aimed at answering these
questions. Dr. Dong's laboratory has isolated more than twenty naturally
occurring variants of the German cockroach sodium channel. The functional
properties of these sodium channel variants will be characterized in the Xenopus
oocyte, which is a widely used in vitro functional expression system for ion
channels. Based on the preliminary results from Dr. Dong's study, the functional
diversity of the German cockroach sodium channel appears to be achieved by
modification of the same sodium channel gene transcript via two cellular
processes called alternative splicing and RNA editing. Variation in alternative
splicing and RNA editing can result in changes in the structure and function of
a gene product. Dr. Dong will examine the role of these two cellular processes
in generating functional diversity of the German cockroach sodium channel. They
will also determine the exact amino acid residues in the German cockroach sodium
channel protein that are critical for the selective toxicity of neurotoxins to
insect and mammalian sodium channels will be identified. Successful completion
of this study may yield the first comprehensive picture of how alternative
splicing and RNA editing enables a single gene to generate functionally and
pharmacologically diverse sodium channels in insects. Elucidation of the
structural basis of functional and pharmacologically diversity will provide
valuable information for our better understanding of the structure and function
of sodium channels. One postdoctoral associate will gain training in molecular
biology, electrophysiology, and toxin pharmacology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;