* 0224624
* Impacts of the Great Lakes on Extreme Weather in the Region
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Peter Sousounis, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 05/31/2003
* USD 165,644.00

Recent improvements in operational numerical weather prediction (NWP) models,
including increased resolution and better parameterization of sub-grid scale
processes, have allowed National Weather Service (NWS) Forecasters across the
country to enjoy considerably improved mesoscale forecasts. In the Great Lakes
region, many of the mesoscale features that develop are, for one reason or
another, forced by the Great Lakes - either individually or as an aggregate. As
a result, marine forecasts over the lakes have benefited little. Forecasts over
adjacent land masses, where mesoscale phenomena are likely influenced by the
proximity of the lakes, have also not been without their challenges. The Great
Lakes influence a wide range of extreme weather throughout the year. Lake-effect
storms develop in winter when cold arctic air flows over the warm lakes.
Thunderstorms develop in summer, when the temperature contrast between the cool
lakes and the warm land generates strong lake breeze convergence zones. The ways
that the lakes influence severe weather are not well known. It is anticipated
that the effects can be significant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
is an extension of a previous NSF-funded project that has examined the impacts
of the Great Lakes on synoptic scale systems in winter. The prior NSF Project
involved performing and analyzing several series of numerical simulations where
all the Great Lakes were included (with-lake or WL), none of the lakes were
included (no-lake or NL), and select lakes were included (individual-lake or
group-lake) to examine the effects of the Great Lakes on synoptic-scale systems
in winter as well as some aspects of lake-effect snowstorms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current research will focus on lake aggregate effects
on additional winter season weather phenomena such as dominant lake-effect snow
bands. These bands can dump 20 inches of snow in as little as 3 hours. Their
development is not understood very well at all. Preliminary simulations suggest
that the lake aggregate play a role in providing moisture and reducing wind
shear. Other extreme winter weather phenomena that will be studied include
freezing rain events. It is hypothesized that the lake aggregate can provide
heat and moisture in such a way so as to produce a temperature and moisture
profile that is conducive for freezing rain. The aggregate effects on severe
weather/heavy precipitation in the summer will also be examined. It is
hypothesized that the negative surface fluxes of heat and moisture over the
lakes lead to the generation of high pressure and anticyclonic flow over the
region, and possibly enhanced surface convergence in areas to the south and west
of the Great takes region. Finally, certain marine situations (over the lakes
themselves) where high winds developed, possibly as a result of interaction
between the atmosphere and warming lake surfaces, will be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A numerical simulation approach that effectively
isolates the impacts of the lakes and which has been used successfully in past
projects will be taken. Six case studies are planned in the current proposed
study (e.g. Phase I). Each case study will involve several numerical simulations
including with-lake, no-lake, selected individual- or group-lake simulations,
and lake-surface temperature sensitivity simulations. Additional analyses will
examine the impacts of the lakes on sea-level pressure, surface winds, surface
convergence boundaries, thermal and vorticity advection patterns aloft, as well
as wind and temperature profiles - to which severe weather is extremely
sensitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information obtained from the study will be
incorporated into forecast procedures that are currently being used at regional
NWS Offices.&lt;br/&gt;