* 0224700
* Committee on Geological and Geotechnical Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Keri Moore, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2006
* USD 156,000.00

CMS-0224700&lt;br/&gt;PI:Keri Moore&lt;br/&gt;Institution:National Academy of
Sciences&lt;br/&gt;Title:"Committee on Geological and Geotechnical Engineering"
On November 6, 2001, the U.S. National Committee for Rock Mechanics was
reconstituted as the Committee on Geological and Geotechnical Engineering
(COGGE) through discussions with sponsors (particularly based on input from the
National Science Foundation), members of industry, and the national and
international research communities. This transition is intended to improve the
committee's responsiveness and to expand the scope and breadth of its
activities.&lt;br/&gt;The newly formed COGGE operates as a standing committee
under the auspices of the National Research Council's Board on Earth Sciences
and Resources and addresses scientific, technical, and public-policy issues
pertaining to the engineering applications of Earth sciences. The committee's
scope encompasses Earth processes and materials, including the mechanics of rock
and soil, and focuses on safe and responsible human development, risk
assessment, and mitigation of natural and anthropogenic hazards. The Committee's
objectives are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;1. To identify, investigate, and report on
questions relating to geological and geotechnical engineering to government,
industry, academia, and the public;&lt;br/&gt;2. To promote the acquisition and
dissemination of knowledge;&lt;br/&gt;3. To identify new technologies and
potential applications;&lt;br/&gt;4. To improve public policy on geological and
geotechnical engineering issues;&lt;br/&gt;5. To provide a forum for discussion
among academic and professional groups, government agencies, and private
industry; and&lt;br/&gt;6. To enhance national and international cooperation and
exchange of information by acting as the U.S. representative for the
International Society of Rock Mechanics and related
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;Research and engineering developments in geological and
geotechnical engineering are driven by concerns for the natural and built
environment (including radioactive and hazardous waste isolation, remediation,
and mitigation), mitigation of natural hazards such as earthquakes and
landslides, environmentally sound recovery of natural resources, and interest in
defense structures in rock. The technological, economic, social, and political
impact of these issues engage the attention of many government agencies,
business corporations, and public interest groups and posits the need for the
COGGE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expertise, judgment, and strategic perspective
of the COGGE serves to define and help initiate sponsored studies and other
activities with respect to major areas of national interest or concern in which
rock mechanics problems represent critical or limiting factors. In this regard,
the committee offers a forum for meetings with federal agency liaison
representative and other interested organizations to exchange ideas and
information on important topics that may merit inquiry through the National
Research Council.&lt;br/&gt;