* 0224795
* Improvement to Facilities at CMU Biological Station on Beaver Island
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* James Gillingham, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 07/31/2005
* USD 163,887.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; A grant has been awarded to Central
Michigan University, under the direction of Dr. James Gillingham, to improve the
facilities at Central Michigan University Biological Station (CMUBS) on Beaver
Island in Northern Lake Michigan. CMUBS has been in operation as an academic arm
of CMU since 1966 and annually offers facilities for research and education to
students and faculty from all over North America and beyond. Enrollments in
undergraduate and graduate courses offered at CMUBS have grown steadily over the
past two decades, and CMU has shown support for this growth through the periodic
upgrade of the academic facilities at CMUBS. The addition of faculty, staff and
student residence units, remodeling and upgrading existing service facilities
and the planned construction of a media center reflect this support. Since 1966
and up to a little more than a decade ago, research was conducted at CMUBS on an
intermittent basis. In spite of the attractive and easily accessible pristine
habitat on this island and the wealth of biological problems that could be
answered involving the surrounding ten-island archipelago, research activity was
historically limited to a few faculty within the Department of Biology at CMU.
In 1989, in an attempt to stimulate the development of an active and on-going
research program at CMUBS, the first building devoted totally to research was
constructed. Although this provided adequate laboratory space for several years,
by the mid 1990s this research building reached its capacity. A recent and rapid
increase in interest in undergraduate, graduate and faculty research at CMUBS
not only created a significant shortage of research space, but brought into
focus the need for basic research equipment that would allow field-gathered
aquatic and terrestrial data to be processed and analyzed on site at
CMUBS.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; This grant will be used to 1) construct an
addition to the existing research building and 2) purchase several basic, but
essential, equipment items. The research building addition will be constructed
and functionally attached to the existing facility and will effectively double
its size. A water still with storage tank and an automatic autoclave sterilizer
will replace existing but inadequate similar pieces of equipment and an ultra-
low temperature freezer and computerized weather station will provide equipment
items never before available at CMUBS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; These improvements
will not only indirectly give further support to the long-standing quality
teaching program at CMUBS, but will significantly augment its research program
in such a way as to allow such new avenues of research to be pursued such as
microbial ecology, molecular ecology and geographical biodiversity. These
improved facilities will allow CMUBS to more effectively attract both faculty
and graduate student researchers from other universities thus providing them
with opportunities to study at a field station strategically located in northern
Lake Michigan and would provide CMU faculty and students (undergraduate and
graduate) a unique opportunity to gain experience from well-know
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;