* 0224203
* Synthesis, Characterization and Application of AlGaMnN
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Cammy Abernathy, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* James W. Mink
* 08/31/2005
* USD 240,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on
synthesis of n-type dilute magnetic semiconductors based on GaMnN and AlMnN, and
on using the resultant materials to fabricate tunneling magnetoresistance (TMR)
and spin FET devices. Materials growth and basic understanding of the
structural, chemical and electrical properties governing the magnetism will be
addressed first. A host of characterization tools will be employed to
characterize and provide guidance for the optimization of the materials growth.
Quantitative measurements of the magnetization as a function of temperature will
be made using a SQUID magnetometer. The degree of magnetic order and the
magnetic transition temperature will be ascertained from temperature dependence
of the magnetization and susceptibility together with the application of Arrott
plots. The roles of the nitrogen/metal ratio, growth rate and growth temperature
on material properties will be investigated. In order to determine the
composition and microstructure, samples will be characterized using powder and
high resolution XRD, TEM and AES. Once the dependence of magnetic properties on
growth conditions has been established, experiments will be performed to
determine the role of the Mn both physically and electrically. Bonding
information will be obtained from EXAFS and XPS. This information will be
correlated with Hall measurement, photoluminescence and photoluminescence
excitation spectroscopy measurements to determine the position of the Mn
level(s) in the bandgap. In general, samples with the same Mn concentration but
different magnetic properties will be compared in order to discern any
differences chemically, structurally or electrically which can explain the
variance in magnetic behavior. One of the important objectives of this program
is to look at the role of co-dopant concentration and carrier concentration on
the magnetic and electrical behavior of the material. By varying the Si
concentration in GaMnN and AlMnN with a fixed Mn concentration, it may be
possible to vary the electron concentration independent of the Mn. This would
not only allow independent tailoring of the electrical properties and the
magnetic properties for device applications, but would also allow investigation
of the role of the metal insulator transition in the ferromagnetic ordering.
Through the comparison of GaMnN and AlMnN, it will also be possible to test
theoretical predictions regarding the relationship between lattice constituents
and Curie temperature. Further, because of the DX centers formed by the Si,
AlMnN:Si may prove useful as a light activated magnetic material. By
illuminating AlMnN:Si with below bandgap light, it may be possible to alter the
magnetic properties. Device applications to be pursued in this program include
light activated TMR devices using GaMnN spin sources and AlMnN:Si barriers, and
spinFETS using conventional AlGaN/GaN HEMTs in which n-GaMnN layers are used as
the source and drain regions.

