* 0224306
* CISE Research Resources:  Matching Advanced Visualization and Intelligent Data Mining to High-Performance Experimental Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2006
* Thomas DeFanti, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 10/31/2006
* USD 883,750.00

EIA 02-24306&lt;br/&gt;DeFanti, Thomas A.&lt;br/&gt;Grossman, Robert L.; Leigh,
Jason; Nelson, Peter C.; Yu, Oliver&lt;br/&gt;University of Illinois Chicago
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE RR: Matching Advanced Visualization and Intelligent
Data Mining to High-Performance Experimental Networks &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, developing techniques for advanced grid computing with focus on
visualization and data-mining applications, aims at setting up a high-
performance, high-bandwidth Grid matched with Visualization and Data Mining
Research. The Grid is made up of Lambdas (clusters of PCs) that are connected by
high-bandwidths connections to other clusters. Software and toolkits to enable
high-performance applications will be built with the goal of attaining a high-
speed optical metropolitan-area network to be used in the data mining and
visualization applications. The project expands grid technology to
infrastructure, protocols, network memory and distributed control, and
applications in constraint logic programming. Since optical networking
technology is rapidly migrating from ultra-expensive long-haul carrier
implementations to affordable regional- and metro-area community networks, this
project explores inherent flexibilities in these new technologies to support
large-scale data, visualization, and collaboration-intensive applications with
very advanced real-time demands. Thus, application-aware software and middleware
will be created to help interconnect tomorrow's terascale-class machines with
distributed petabyte data stores, remote sensors, instrumentation and
visualization over gigabit/sec to terabit/sec networks. LambdaNodes, defined as
PC clusters with storage and visualization coupled to like clusters by numerous
wavelengths (called lambdas), will be used connected by lambda networks to
create a prototype metropolitan-scale LambdaGrid. With the goal of optimally
matching data mining and visualization to high-performance optical networks with
e-Science and homeland security model applications as expected drivers
(achieving a 10x or greater end-to-end improvement over today), the equipment
and support enables the following:&lt;br/&gt;1. Matching data-mining and
visualization capabilities on clusters to emerging wavelength-rich
networks,&lt;br/&gt;2. Distributing parallel computation and rendering for high-
resolution volume visualization,&lt;br/&gt;3. Providing applications signaling
and control of both electronically and optically switched lambdas,&lt;br/&gt;4.
Measuring and monitoring multi-gigabit circuits over multiple
wavelengths,&lt;br/&gt;5. Providing users with networks that have known and
knowable bandwidth and latency,&lt;br/&gt;6. Investigating high-
availability/uninterrupted cluster computing to support time-critical
collaborations,&lt;br/&gt;7. Addressing real-time applications in security
domain, and, eventually, security of the data as well,&lt;br/&gt;8. Integrating
metropolitan-scale LambdaGrids with the emerging Global Grid and the National
TeraGrid, and&lt;br/&gt;9. Incorporating distributed data mining and
visualization into undergraduate African-American-centered coursework and
research through the Virtual Harlem Project.&lt;br/&gt;