* 0224829
* EPNES: Integrating Electrical, Economic, and Environmental Factors into Flexible Power System Engineering
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* M. Pai, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 12/31/2005
* USD 599,955.00

This grant is investigating alternatives for a new framework for flexible power
system analysis and design. The framework will be based on the need for power
engineers that must be concerned with complex decision-making involving economic
and environmental trade-offs in addition to added complications introduced by
incorporation of new energy sources and increased reliability demands. This
framework will be built from formal methods for flexible power systems. Power
electronics provide the versatility necessary to physically implement flexible
systems. This research will address use of localized power electronics control
techniques for generation and load, resulting in a large, complicated switching
network. Such networks have not been adequately studied. Therefore, analytical
tools, including reduced-order and parallel methods, for large-scale switched
systems will be developed. An economic analysis will be given in context of
flexible power systems. These studies will help system planners make informed
decisions about the trade-offs between electrical, environmental, and economic
issues. However, making such difficult decisions is often done only
qualitatively. This project will result in more scientific decision-making
techniques for these complicated issues. Students will be better educated as a
result of this project by new coursework in large system analysis and team
energy projects.