* 0224431
* Instrumentation for Empirical Studies in the Modeling of Visual Appearance
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* David Kriegman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2006
* USD 115,000.00

EIA 0224431 Belhumeur, Peter N. Kriegman, David J. Columbia University

Title: CISE RR: Instrumentation for Empirical Studies in the Modeling of Visual
Appearance

This project, supporting experimental validation of computer vision algorithms
for shape modeling and analysis, aims at building two independent systems to
support computer vision. Methods for shape reconstruction and reflectance
recovery, termed Helmholtz reciprocity stereopsis and light field reconstruction
that exploit previously neglected physical principles, are able to recover
surface shape regardless of the object's BRDF. The two special purpose imaging
systems will be built at Columbia University and the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). The Columbia rig, composed of sixteen imaging modules
that can be arranged in different configurations, directly supports research in
Helmholtz reciprocity stereopsis. The UIUC rig, consisting of two arms that move
their endpoints over the surface of a sphere, directly supports the light field
reconstruction method. The two new pieces of hardware will contribute to the
following four projects: Helmholtz Stereopsis, Light Field Reconstruction,
Image-Based Modeling and Rendering, and Texture and Reflectance Estimation from
Small Datasets. The first project exploits the symmetries in an object's surface
reflectance. The Helmholtz stereopsis method can reconstruct surfaces with
complex reflectance, e.g., highly non-Lambertian. The Helmholtz rig will be used
to gather datasets of objects in a manner such that they can be processed using
the Helmholtz stereopsis shape recovery method. The second uses images gathered
from a double covering of a surface's incident light field to reconstruct both
the surface shape and an effective bi-directional reflectance distribution on a
point-by-point basis. The illumination/viewpoint rig will be used to gather data
in a manner such that it can be processed with the light field reconstruction
method. The third utilizes the datasets gathered by both rigs for image-based
and modeling projects to render photorealistic images of objects under novel
viewpoint and arbitrary illuminations. Datasets of objects, with their 3-D shape
reconstructed, are collected and their reflectance is modeled. These models of
shape and reflectance are then used to synthesize novel images of the objects
and composite them into still pictures and video footage. The objects will be
catalogued by their visual appearance. The last project uses the datasets
gathered by the light field rendering rig for developing low-dimensional models
of texture and reflectance. These models are then used to estimate texture and
reflectance properties from a small number of images. Thus, images
characterizing reflectance properties of a wide variety of materials will be
created and distributed satisfying the following goals to Develop, refine,
analyze, and empirically validate the method of Helmholtz stereopsis, Develop,
refine, and analyze the light field reconstruction method, Apply the
reconstruction methods to image-based rendering, and Develop and refine data-
driven low-dimensional non-parametric models for surface reflection and textures
that vary with viewpoint and lighting.