* 0224163
* SPIN ELECTRONICS: Spin Manipulation in Semiconductor Nanostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Stephen Goodnick, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 09/30/2007
* USD 461,737.00

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
Century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on the
application of semiconductor nanostructures in the emerging field of spin-based
electronics. The program objectives are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To explore
demonstrations of the spintronic applications of nanostructures, including
nanoscale implementations of the spin filter, the spin valve, and the spin
transistor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To undertake experimental investigations of
spin-polarized transport in semiconductor nanostructures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
To perform theoretical studies of the spin-dependent electronic structure of
semiconductor nanostructures, and of the mechanisms of spin
decoherence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key outcome of this research is expected
to be the development of a crucial understanding of the manner in which the
unique properties of semiconductor nanostructures may be exploited in future
spintronic devices. An important aspect of this program is its coordinated
structure. The principal investigators have proven track records in the
experimental and theoretical study of semiconductor nanostructures, and their
collaboration is expected to result in a highly multidisciplinary interaction.
The research program itself explores the implementation of complicated
spintronic devices, such as the spin valve or the spin transistor, by
integrating nanoscale implementations of the most basic of spin devices, the
spin filter. Theoretical modeling explores the spin-resolved subband structure
in these devices, the mechanisms for spin decoherence, and the transport
properties of the structures being investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to its scientific importance, this program also contributes to the
creation of a superior environment for graduate and undergraduate education at
Arizona State University. Its pedagogic impact is further enhanced by the
collaborations it promotes with researchers at national laboratories in the US
(Sandia) and Japan (National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and
Technology, AIST). Graduate and undergraduate students involved in this project
benefit greatly from the opportunities provided by these collaborations. A
significant component of these collaborations, for example, is the opportunities
they provide for student internship during this program. At the same time,
undergraduate involvement in this program is encouraged by coordinating the
research with the two-semester senior-design projects, which form one of the
graduation requirements of the undergraduate program in the Electrical
Engineering Department. As we have done in the past, we continue to make efforts
to involve both underrepresented minorities and women in this program. A
valuable opportunity for wider outreach is provided by the Women in Science and
Engineering (WISE) program, which we have a record of involvement in and which
actively encourages female high-school students to enter engineering programs.
Dissemination of the results of this program is promoted through publications in
the top peer-review journals, student and faculty participation in conferences,
and the posting of related material on a central web resource that is being
developed under an existing NSF-sponsored project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;