* 0225698
* Role of Disorder in Strongly Correlated Low-Dimensional Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2007
* Kun Yang, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2007
* USD 240,000.00

This award supports research and education that aims to elucidate the interplay
between electron-electron interaction and disorder in low dimensional electronic
systems. This remains a major and difficult problem in modern condensed matter
physics. This award supports studies of: edge states of fractional quantum Hall
liquids, especially in the presence of edge reconstruction; bulk fractional
quantum Hall liquids in the presence of disorder, focusing on the effects of
disorder and interaction on their transport properties and critical behavior
near the quantum phase transitions between different quantum Hall phases;
quasiparticle transport properties in two-dimensional non-s-wave superconductors
in the absence of time-reversal symmetry, with the cuprates as the prototype;
and magnetic and superconducting properties of quantum dots and nano-size
metallic grains. The PI will combine numerical and analytical methods in these
investigations. Specific methods include mapping to an effective field theory,
exact diagonalization, and quantum Monte Carlo simulation. Numerical studies
will elucidate the topological properties, such as Chern numbers, of many-
electron wave functions and quasiparticle wave functions in the PI's
investigations of bulk fractional quantum Hall liquids and quasiparticle
transport properties in superconductors. Calculations will focus on physical
quantities that can be directly measured experimentally, and compare our results
with experiments whenever possible. The broader impacts of this award are
primarily educational; the work involves training the next generation of
condensed matter theorists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental
research and education that seeks to advance our understanding of strongly
interacting electrons confined to one or two dimensions and disrupted by
imperfections. The PI will study the combined effect of strong correlations and
disorder in a variety of materials and systems including quantum Hall systems
and nanoscale ferromagnets and superconducting grains. This basic research helps
improve understanding of fundamental and novel electronic states and phenomena
that occur in materials and contributes to the intellectual underpinnings of
potential future electronic device technologies. This award also supports
training the next generation of condensed matter theorists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;