* 0225058
* The Ecomorphology of Mammalian Frugivores:  A Test of Congruence Between Cranial Morphology and Feeding Behavior
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Elizabeth Dumont, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 109,402.00

Ecomorphology is the study of how an organism's anatomy is associated with its
ecology. Behavior, or how animals use their anatomy, is an important bridge
between animals and their environments. Specifically, comparing animals
abilities to perform certain tasks can provide information about the ecological
roles those animals play. Modern ecomorphology studies combine analyses of
anatomy, performance and relationships among animals to understand the factors
underlying the diversity of organisms in the world today. Scientists studying
birds and fish have found a strong association between the anatomy of the skull
and feeding behavior. This study investigates whether this same strong
association is typical of mammals. By investigating this relationship, this
study will test fundamental associations between skull form and skull function
and shed light on the basis of ecological diversity within one group of modern
mammals. The subjects of this study are two distantly related groups of fruit
bats - New World fruit bats and Old World fruit bats. These groups were selected
for this study because they each contain an array of species that divide the
fruit resources available to them in similar ways. The anatomical and behavioral
diversity within these two groups make them an ideal test case for studying the
interplay between skull morphology, behavioral flexibility and feeding
performance. The goal of this study is to explore the relationships among
cranial morphology, feeding performance, and diet, and evaluate the roles that
these factors play in the ecological diversity of fruit feeding mammals. This
study will: 1) provide an assessment of flexibility in feeding behavior within
and between species, 2) identify peaks in feeding performance within species, 3)
test fundamental associations between skull morphology and dietary habits; 4)
evaluate the role of body size in feeding performance, and 5) test the
hypothesis that skull morphology and feeding behavior are tightly linked and
reflect variation in diet more than evolutionary history. Each of these five
areas will be explored through testing explicit hypotheses using specific
statistical and systematic techniques. The importance of this study lies in
testing the proposition that skull morphology and feeding behavior are tightly
linked in mammals. Although mammals are generally well studied, the relationship
between variation in feeding performance and ecological diversity has not been
investigated. This study will assess the correlation of morphology, behavior,
and performance in two ecologically similar but distantly related linages - a
design that provides a natural test of the strength of association among these
factors.