* 0225447
* Integrated Sensing:  A Simulation-Based Test Bed for Networked Sensors in Surface Transportation Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Mostafa Ammar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 08/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

Urban transportation systems face important challenges concerning safety, delays
due to congestion, pollution from vehicle emissions, and vulnerability to
natural and man-made disasters. Sophisticated, integrated sensor/actuator
systems offer the potential to make significant inroads in alleviating these
problems. Vehicle-to-vehicle communication via ad hoc wireless networks present
new opportunities for innovative applications with reduced public infrastructure
investments. This project will explore the realization of simulation-based test
beds for rapid evaluation and integration of sensor and actuator systems in
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS), and use this test bed to explore
architectural alternatives for data networks supporting ITS applications. An
integrated distributed simulation approach will be utilized, focusing on
interoperable simulations of transportation infrastructures, wired and wireless
communication networks, and distributed computing applications. The project will
incorporate data from a pool of instrumented vehicles operating in the Atlanta
metropolitan area providing second-by-second sensor data concerning the
vehicle's location, velocity, and acceleration, among others; data from road
sensors in the Atlanta area will also be used for model and scenario development
and validation of simulations. Test bed research will focus on developing a
modular, federated simulation/emulation approach using a software backplane to
interface simulations and data.