* 0225451
* Integrated Sensing:  Active Stereoscopic Visual Search Driven by Natural Scene Statistics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Joydeep Ghosh, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 08/31/2005
* USD 249,999.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"ACTIVE STEREOSCOPIC VISUAL SEARCH DRIVEN BY
NATURAL SCENE STATISTICS"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alan C. Bovik, Lawrence K.
Cormack, J. Ghosh&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary thrust of this proposal is
to develop methods based on the natural statistics of stereoscopic images that
will enable the design and implementation of the next generation of foveated,
fixating machine vision systems that are capable of efficient and intelligent
visual search, by exploiting and applying knowledge about human fixation and
search mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt; We summarize the intention of our proposal via the
following key goals:&lt;br/&gt;Goal 1: To develop a quantitative description of
human active stereo vision as a function of natural scene statistics in a
variety of three-dimensional visual search and learning tasks. Our emphasis will
be on developing statistical models of stereo primitives that attract low-level
visual attention based on a unique and in-depth statistical analysis. We feel
that statistical models based on natural scene statistics have a very good
chance of succeeding where deterministic models have failed.&lt;br/&gt;Goal 2:
To train a state-of-the-art foveated, fixating active computer vision system
(named FOVEA) to search and to learn to search 4-D (space-time) scenes. To do
this, back-end artificial neural networks trained on telepresent human search
patterns will be used. The statistical models and extracted statistical
stereoprimitives discovered as part of the research in Goal 1 will be used as a
priori knowledge to improve the configuration and learning of the networks. We
envision that these experiments will result in smart active machine vision
protocols for exploring, searching, and interacting with 4-D environments, while
giving new insights into visual cognitive processes.&lt;br/&gt;