* 0225057
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Significance of Sunken Court Architecture to the Development of Sociopolitical Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Charles Stanish, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 11,482.00

Under the direction of Dr. Charles Stanish, Amanda Cohen will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation during the Summer and Fall of 2002. She will direct
excavations at a sample of three Formative Period (1200 B.C. - A.D. 300) sites
in the Pukara Valley of the northwestern Lake Titicaca Basin, Peru. This
research will assess the role of public or ceremonial architecture in the
evolution of complex societies in the Titicaca Basin of southern Peru. A process
of steady settlement nucleation and growth took place during the region's
Formative Period, culminating in the emergence of the Pukara Polity (200 BC - AD
300), the earliest known urban-scale society in the southern Andean region.
Prior to the rise of Pukara in the Late Formative Period, the Pukara Valley was
populated by a series of small villages. It was within this context of
interacting autonomous villages that public architecture emerged in the Early
and Middle Formative Periods (1200 B.C.-200 B.C.). These social evolutionary
processes were paralleled by the development and elaboration of a distinctive
tradition of public architecture, sunken courts with associated surface
structures, and an associated corporate ceramic and sculptural style. An earlier
survey by the applicant has located at least a dozen sites in the Pukara Valley
containing low mounds with central rectangular depressions, almost certainly
indicating the presence of sunken courts. To test the relation between the
sunken court architectural form and increasing sociopolitical complexity, three
of these sites representing the Early and Middle phases of the Formative Period
will be sampled. The resulting data will trace architectural and behavioral
changes through time at sites with sunken courts. Two models that purport to
explain the social significance of early ceremonial architecture will be
evaluated. The first suggests that as societies become increasingly stratified
ceremonial structures become increasingly specialized. In this scenario, early
examples of public architecture are normally associated with a wide range of
activities, ritual and domestic. As sociopolitical complexity increases,
however, the range of activities associated with public architecture becomes
restricted to ritual or ceremonial activities. An alternate model is that public
architectural features are highly specialized early in their history, and become
less specialized over time as community permanence and cohesion become
increasingly institutionalized in the practices of everyday life. In this view,
the social integrative function of public ritual facilities is most important in
the early stages of sedentary life. The proposed research will evaluate these
two models through a diachronic analysis of Pukara Valley sunken courts, their
architectural form, and associated artifact assemblages.

The study has implications for comparative social science study. Additionally,
the survey, combined with paleoecological and paleoclimate data, may be of some
use to development programs in the future. This project will provide data of
interest to many archaeologists and shed new light on the development of complex
societies

