* 0225721
* CAREER: Adaptive Signal Processing for Coded Time-Varying   Wireless Multiple-Access Communications Channels
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Xiaodong Wang, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2004
* USD 182,259.00



There is at present a worldwide effort to develop next-generation wireless
communication systems. It is envisioned that many of the future wireless systems
will incorporate considerable signal processing intelligence in order to provide
advanced services such as multimedia transmission. In general, wireless channels
can be very hostile media through which to communicate, due to substantial
physical impediments, primarily radio-frequency interference and the time-
varying nature of the channel. The need to provide universal wireless access at
high data rates (which is the aim of many emerging wireless applications)
presents a major technical challenge, and meeting this challenge necessitates
the development of advanced signal processing techniques for multiple-access
communications in non-stationary interference-rich environments.

This research involves the development of adaptive signal processing algorithms
and architectures for application in future wireless communications systems
featuring high user mobility, high data rate and high quality of service. The
primary emphases of this research are on advanced receiver signal processing
techniques, and on advanced transmitter signal processing techniques for
wireless systems. The first of these focuses on developing adaptive signal
reception techniques for jointly combating various impairments in time-varying
wireless channels, such as radio-frequency interference (narrowband
interference, multiple-access interference, impulsive ambient noise), multipath
fading, channel dispersion, etc. A particular approach that will be examined in
depth is the exploitation of the redundancy introduced by channel coding at the
receiver for interference mitigation and channel tracking. The second addresses
adaptive signal transmission techniques in time-varying wireless channels for
improving network capacity. Specifically, adaptive antenna array transmission
techniques and adaptive frequency hopping techniques are being studied, with the
focus on rapid adaptivity to dynamic channel environments. This research is
expected to culminate in the formulation of novel signal processing techniques
and system design concepts applicable to future wireless communication systems.
It is also anticipated that this research will influence many current and next
generation communication systems planners and designers, to bring the promise of
many new research techniques into the arena of wireless communications.

