* 0225481
* Integrated Sensing:  Collaborative Research:  Dynamic Objective-Oriented Mobile Heterogeneous Sensor Networks for Coordinated Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Tamer Basar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 09/30/2005
* USD 80,000.00

Objective-Oriented Mobile Heterogeneous Sensor Networks for Coordinated Control

This proposal focuses on a comprehensive study of large, mobile ad hoc
reconfigurable networks for coordinated control, using coordinated autonomous
flight as a guiding example problem. State estimation provides a link between
control and communications which admits heterogeneous sensors, that is the
combining of dissimilar or different accuracy data using concepts which underpin
data fusion. Management of complexity and preservation of design principles are
keys to the development of workable, tunable, mission-oriented systems with many
components.

The intellectual merit of this collaborative research proposal hinges on the
drawing together of cognate and disparate elements from coordinated control,
dynamic state estimation, ad hoc network management, resource assignment, and
fault tolerance. Its aim is to provide a formalism in which the methods of
sensor networking may be integrated as part of a systematic design process
focused on achieving a specific control objective. This provides a framework for
the development of methodologies for embedding a sensor network in a context of
control performance.

The broader impact of this research is that it ties together tools and
techniques from distinct areas using concepts of information quality. The team
is multi-disciplinary across a gamut of Systems Engineering and the problem area
impacts a range of fundamental problems in the individual areas of
specialization. This linkage across communications, control, networking and
estimation is a perceived bottleneck of current design techniques.