* 0225711
* Imaging Mechanisms of Action in Motor Learning
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Peter Fox, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Continuing grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 01/31/2005
* USD 493,877.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Xiong will develop imaging and
modeling strategies to study mechanisms underlying adaptive changes of the human
brain. The focus of this proposal is to explore the mechanisms underlying motor
learning. Learning-induced neural plasticity and functional reorganization are
well-established and well-documented, but not well-understood. Current
neuroimaging studies investigate neural mechanisms underlying learning by
exploring the changes in regional neural activity and inter-regional activity of
task-performance. Little effort has been given to studying the more fundamental
changes of neural connections and synaptic weighting. On the technical front,
human functional imaging research sorely needs more rigorous approaches, as can
be provided by mathematical modeling. A modeling framework - Structural Equation
Modeling - is now accepted as appropriate for human imaging data. Structural
equation modeling however, is currently performed with anatomical constraints
based on neuroanatomical studies in non-human species. The performance of
structural equation modeling might be greatly enhanced if anatomical constraints
are individually optimized using the same subject's task-independent anatomical
connectivity data. To date, this strategy has not been reported by any
laboratory. The present proposal seeks to develop system-level modeling
strategies for neuroimaging and to apply these novel strategies to mechanisms of
action of motor learning. The overall goal of this proposal will be accomplished
through the following four goals. First, developing and optimizing imaging
strategies for detecting anatomical connectivity for each individual subject.
Second, developing a structural equation modeling strategy by incorporating
individual anatomical constraints to enhance those models' performance. Third,
investigating changes in regional neural activity and inter-regional activity of
task-performance induced by motor learning using the enhanced modeling strategy.
Fourth, investigating synaptic plasticity by applying the enhanced modeling and
demonstrating that synaptic plasticity is an underlying mechanism of action of
motor learning. When completed, this research project will increase the
understanding of mechanisms of adaptive learning and has the potential of
defining a new strategy by which functional imaging can be applied to study
mechanisms of action and disease pathophysiology.