* 0225925
* PREMISE:  Design and Engineering of Green Compsites From Bio-Fibers and Bacterial Bio-Plastics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Amar Mohanty, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jian Cao
* 04/30/2004
* USD 98,530.00

There is a growing urgency to develop novel biobased products and innovative
technologies that can reduce the US dependence on fossil fuel. This PREMISE
project seeks to replace existing petroleum-based glass fiber-nylon composites
with sustainable, eco-friendly, 'green' composites produced from a combination
of engineered natural/bio-fibers and a new, emerging bacterial-based bio-plastic
(polyhydroxyalkanoate, PHA) for automotive applications. This 'green' composite
material has the attributes of recyclability and 'triggered' biodegradability
i.e. (stable during intended life but biodegradable only under composting
conditions) to qualify it as a sustainable material. The objective is to
strengthen the connection between "DESIGN" and "MANUFACTURING" of this novel
'green' composite so that they can have a positive impact upon industrial
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address research issues
related to the development of ideas and creation of tools for sustainable
product development in the manufacturing enterprise. In order to achieve
'sustainability', all the components such as environment, economics, life cycle
analysis, energy and education are included in this project. Product realization
for industrial application of biocomposites requires complete Life Cycle
Assessment, from production of bio-fibers and bio-plastics, to design and
engineering of green biocomposites to their ultimate disposal or recycling.
Energy calculations for the entire manufacturing system will be calculated from
fiber/plastic production to their processing and manufacturing based upon the
existing scientific literature and preliminary experimental data collected from
the pilot-scale experiments. A strong collaborative partnership with
representative industrial participants, METABOLIX (manufacturer of bioplastic),
FLAXCRAFT (natural fiber company) and FORD (automotive OEM) insures relevancy
and a high potential for industrial implementation in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;