* 0225268
* Protecting the Electrical Power Supply at the Whitney Laboratory
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Peter A. V. Anderson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 96,839.00

ABSTRACT

A grant has been awarded to the Whitney Laboratory, University of Florida,
under the direction of Dr. Anderson, to protect the electrical power supply of
the Whitney Laboratory. Because of its location in on the north east coast of
Florida, a region traversed by tropical weather systems, the Laboratory is
extremely vulnerable to disruptions of its power supply. Long term interruptions
of the power supply can result in the loss of valuable and sometimes
irreplaceable stocks of cells, antibodies and other supplies, and would put
animals in the Laboratory's aquarium at risk because of a lack of flowing sea
water and aeration. Furthermore, when power to the air conditioning system is
lost, the Laboratory's sensitive cell and molecular biological equipment is be
extremely vulnerable to damage from the high humidity and salt air that
accumulates in the Laboratory. The Laboratory is also very vulnerable to short
term outages and power surges caused by the many lightening strikes that typify
weather pattern in the region. These can and have damaged equipment and cause
unnecessary interruption to on-going research. While small items of equipment
(i.e. computers) can be protected by commercial surge suppressors, large items
such as ultracold freezers cannot be protected in this manner and are frequently
damaged by power surges, putting frozen stocks and supplies at risk of thawing
and subsequent loss. The Laboratory currently uses a 25 year old generator to
provide emergency power. However, this unit, which was installed when the
Laboratory was established and minimally equipped, supplies less than 50% of its
rated power. Consequently, it is insufficient for the current needs of the
Laboratory, to the point at which much of the critical equipment, including
freezers, cannot be served by this unit. Furthermore, during prolonged operation
it overheats and must be turned off to cool down every few hours. To correct
this deficiency, the Laboratory will use the funds provided by this grant to
purchase and install a replacement generator that will meet the current and
projected needs of the Laboratory. To protect against power surges from
lightening strikes, central surge suppressors will be installed in the
Laboratory's electrical system. The Whitney Laboratory is recognized as one of
the leading marine biomedical institutions in the country that has and continues
to make significant contributions to our understanding of basic biological
mechanisms, many of which directly affect mankind. To support this research, the
Laboratory possess a diverse array of very sensitive instrumentation such as a
DNA sequencer, numerous microscopes, including a laser scanning confocal
microscope, a capillary electrophoresis systems, ultracentrifuges and
electrophysiological equipment. In addition to its research mission, the
Laboratory has developed a variety of training programs for college students,
including a very active REU program, and a very active and well received program
of outreach education to all age groups in the surrounding community. The funds
provided by this grant will ensure that these activities are not jeopardized by
short and long term power interruptions that are a common feature of the coastal
environment that is so critical to the Laboratory's mission and success.