* 0225007
* SPIN ELECTRONICS:  Spintronics with Novel Half-Metals:  Computational Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Ching Yao Fong, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 09/30/2006
* USD 240,000.00

0225007 Fong

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on the
computational design of novel quantum structures in the forms of
heterojunctions, quantum wells, and quantum dots composed of half-metallic
compounds in zinc-blende structure with both magnetically and nonmagnetically
doped semiconductors as new materials for spintronics. The unique features
possessed by these half-metals compounds are: (A) the half metallic properties
of each compound are preserved for a range of each lattice constant, (B) large
magnetic moments (= 1 uB), (C) high Curie temperature (= 400oK), and (D) less
intrinsic scattering (greater coherence) than for dilute magnetically doped
semiconductors due to the fact that the half metals are stoichiometric
compounds. They inspire a singular opportunity for making novel quantum
structures. The outcome of this proposal will include (1) the technological
information of quantum structures for spintronic applications, (2) specific
scientific knowledge about the effects of interfaces, surfaces on the magnetic
and electronic properties of the proposed quantum structures, and (3) the
selections of elements serving as antisurfactants to grow half-metallic quantum
dots. Specifically relevant to (1), The PIs will provide: (a) the compositions
of quantum structures involving chromium and manganese compounds with magnetic
and nonmagnetic doped semiconductors and exhibiting half-metallic behaviors as
new spintronic materials, (b) the magnetic and electronic properties of the
promising quantum structures, (c) the possibility of making spin polarized
Schottky barriers, and (d) the conditions for ballistic spin transport in
heterojunctions, and quantum wells. For (2), the information will lead them to
understand: (i) Whether spin polarized Schottky barriers are being formed in
heterojunctions and quantum wells made of half metal compounds with various
doped semiconductors, and do the interfaces affect the corresponding half-
metallic character and magnetic moment? (ii) What are the effects of the
Schottky barrier formed by the metallic spin channel of a heterojunction on its
semiconducting spin channel? (iii) Do subbands formed in a quantum well exhibit
the stepwise feature in the conductance? (iv) How do the magnetic properties of
a quantum dot made of a half-metal compound depend on the sizes of the dots, and
on cation- versus anion-terminated surface? Finally, the results relevant to (3)
will provide guidelines for facilitating the growth of quantum dots composed of
half-metals with the zinc-blende structure.

