* 0225441
* Troposphere-Stratosphere Coupling Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2007
* Dale Durran, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/2007
* USD 437,776.00

The project will investigate the extent and impact of tropospheric-stratospheric
exchange associated with convective storms. The transfer of momentum, energy,
and trace constituents between the troposphere and stratosphere profoundly
influences the dynamical and chemical climatology and variability of the
stratosphere and upper troposphere. Dynamical interaction between the two
regions can moreover influence weather in the Northern winter. Drs. Holton and
Durran (Univ. of Washington, Seattle) will use a cloud-resolving numerical model
to analyze gravity wave generation and propagation, resulting from
orographically generated convection. The project will also advance the 3-D
modeling of tropical and extratropical storms to better understand the transport
of trace chemicals from the boundary layer to the upper troposphere, and across
the tropopause. The PIs expect to be able to distinguish between transport
resulting from transient lifting of the tropopause and that resulting from
irreversible transfer across the tropopause. Improved modeling of the mechanisms
and distribution of troposphere-stratosphere coupling should lead to more
accurate parameterizations of momentum and chemical transports in global weather
and climate models, and advance the understanding of the stratospheric general
circulation, ozone chemistry, and tropospheric weather and climate.