* 0225697
* SGER:  Novel All Solid-State SiC Fuel Cell for High Power Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* John Wolan, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* James Momoh
* 06/30/2003
* USD 60,000.00

Our objective is simple and straightforward - use novel porous SiC materials to
develop an all- solid state fuel cell that it'll more than double the output
power of Si based fuel cells while completely eliminating the problem of CO
poisoning of expensive Pt electrodes! Currently available proton exchange
membrane fuel cells (PEMFC5) suffer from three major limitations connected to
cell design and materials used. First, most PEFC designs require elaborate
manifold design and hydrodynamic control schemes which include humidification
modules and rotating components such as pumps and compressors. The second major
limitation comes from the Pt anode electro catalysts, which are extremely CO
intolerant down to the 5 to 10 ppm level. Thirdly, poor thermal dissipation from
the exothermic process limits membrane lifetimes and power density output. Our
objective is to make use of rapid advances in novel SiC nanoporous materials to
completely eliminate the need for platinum and low-temperature polymer
membranes. Preliminary results from catalytic reactor studies show that SiC has
a high degree of catalytic activity and. due to its wide band gap, high output
fuel cells operating at higher thermal budget efficiencies will be possible. The
objective of this work is to demonstrate such a fuel cell that will
revolutionize the portable power storage industry. Advantages/advances over
conventional PE FC s are summarized below:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Completely
passive operation designed run on dry, low pressure, solid-source hydrogen and
atmospheric pressure air without the need for humidification modules.
Elimination of compressed gaseous hydrogen fuel and negative public perception
(e.g.. hydrogen bomb, Hindenburg, etc.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Elimination of
hydrodynamic auxiliaries such as pumps, compressors, fans or blowers resulting
in completely quiet operation. Increased power, efficiency and reliability by
eliminating the parasitic power required to run auxiliaries and absence of
moving mechanical parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Elimination of the costly Pt
electrode and CO poisoning problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Solid-state
microfabrication, thin-film deposition, and micromachining
approaches&lt;br/&gt;provide a manufacturable modular, self-contained
unit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Greatly improved fuel cell stack size and weight,
fuel storage and delivery, packaging,&lt;br/&gt;robustness and thermal
management due to microfabrication and material properties
of&lt;br/&gt;SIC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Significantly improved thermal budget
efficiencies due to the high thermal&lt;br/&gt;conductivity of SiC, which is
higher than that of copper at room-temperature, 430 verses 540 W/mK
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid development of this technology is
critical. Therefore a seed grant to get these novel ideas from the concept stage
to the demonstration stage is needed. Traditional proposals to expand this
research at the University of South Florida are planned. However the graduate
students who are already working on this project were being funded on a grant
that has just ended. Therefore immediate funding is required to cover this
research if progress is to continue.&lt;br/&gt;