* 0225186
* PGE/RES:  Enhancing Women's Experiences with Teamwork in Technical Writing and Computing Environments
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Joanna Wolfe, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2007
* USD 127,605.00

The University of Louisville will examine the experiences of over 400 students
working on team projects in scientific and technical writing and computer
science classes over three semesters. The results of this study should provide
technical writing and computer science instructors and researchers with new
insights into the different communication styles and values of male and female
students, new information about differences in the epistemological styles of men
and women and how these affect teamwork experiences, empirical data on the
effectiveness of a variety of workshop interventions for improving teamwork
experiences, and extensively-tested materials suitable for inclusion in a
textbook or CD-ROM on teamwork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teamwork and collaboration
are often proposed as ways to augment the experiences of female students in SMET
disciplines. However, in practice, women frequently have negative experiences
with team projects that leave them feeling even more alienated than before. Men
and women often conflict over their preferences for different types of
communication and problem-solving styles, and these conflicts often result in
women's silence and frustration. Such silence is harmful not only because women
lose out on opportunities to contribute to the project, but also because their
silence is often perceived by others as insecurity over their technical
competence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first research phase, six to ten teams
working on technically-oriented writing projects will be observed in detail.
Data collection will consist of field notes, video recordings, and written
documents. In addition, students will complete questionnaires assessing their
attitudes towards teamwork and their favored epistemological styles (i.e.,
attitudes toward knowledge and authority). Relationships have been found between
gender, the ability to manage conflict, and epistemological styles. Team
interactions will be transcribed and analyzed for quantity of interaction,
interruptions, roles played by different individuals, reactions to different
types of conversational interchanges, and different approaches to problem-
solving. These analyses will be compared against the questionnaire data to
assess how communication, problem-solving, and knowledge styles can affect men
and women's experiences in teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next phase of the
project will draw upon these taped interactions to produce materials that will
be used in workshops designed to enhance the team experience. Four different
workshops will be compared for effectiveness: (1) analyzing tapes of team
interactions; (2) analyzing transcripts of team interactions; (3) analyzing
tapes of team interactions followed by role-playing activities; (4) listening to
a lecture. It is hypothesized that analyzing the annotated transcripts of team
interactions will be the most effective workshop intervention and the lecture
will be the least effective.&lt;br/&gt;