* 0225184
* PGE/DEM - Seeing Gender: Tools for Change
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Diane McGrath, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2006
* USD 927,231.00

Kansas State University is developing an interactive CD-ROM/DVD set for use with
pre-service and in-service high school teachers, teacher education faculty and
college faculty in SMET fields. The set will: (1) introduce the user to the
research base on gender and gender socialization, (2) sensitize these educators
to the inadvertent gender bias that operates in SMET classrooms and programs,
(3) provide classroom strategies and interventions designed to reduce bias, and
(4) present school-wide or department-wide efforts to increase the presence of
women in SMET classes and programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Components of the CD-
ROM/DVD include: (1) classroom segments or dramatizations of bias, research, or
interventions; (2) interviews with female high school and college students about
their experiences in SMET classrooms; (3) interviews with high school teachers
and college faculty members about the process by which they became sensitized to
gender issues and began working towards change; (4) interviews with researchers
familiar with the research on gender bias conducted in both psychology and
education; (5) abstracts of relevant journal articles; and (6) essays that
invite further reflection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CD-ROM/DVD will be field-
tested with the target population and disseminated through existing professional
organizations. In addition, guidelines will be prepared for introduction of the
CD-ROM/DVD in classroom settings for pre-service teachers as well as in
professional development seminars for in-service teachers and college
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is innovative in its use of an
interactive CD-ROM/DVD to provide instruction, in its integration of
presentations of gender bias in education with a solid research base, and in its
use of student and teacher/college faculty members' voices to explore their own
experiences in SMET classrooms and the processes by which change is implemented.
Because it can be used both individually and as part of a classroom or seminar,
the CD-ROM/DVD has the capacity to reach thousands of pre-service and in-service
teachers, teacher educators, and college faculty who work in SMET disciplines.
This potential for reaching a broad audience makes this project a cost-effective
and efficient method of strengthening the social infrastructure in SMET
education in ways that ultimately increase the number of women working in SMET
fields.&lt;br/&gt;