* 0225774
* SGER: Assisted Cognition: First Steps Towards Computer Aids for People with Alzheimer's Disease
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Henry Kautz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mary P. Harper
* 08/31/2003
* USD 99,513.00

This small grant for exploratory research will support development of novel
computer systems that will enhance the quality of life of people suffering from
Alzheimer's Disease and similar cognitive disorders. Assisted Cognition systems
use ubiquitous computing and artificial intelligence technology to replace some
of the memory and problem-solving abilities that have been lost by an
Alzheimer's patient. Assisted Cognition systems: sense aspects of an
individual's location and environment, both outdoors and at home, relying on a
wide range of sensors such as Global Positioning Systems (GPS), active badges,
motion detectors, and other ubiquitous computing infrastructure; learn to
interpret patterns of everyday behavior, and recognize signs of distress,
disorientation, or confusion, using techniques from state estimation, plan
recognition, and machine learning; offer help to patients through various kinds
of interventions including speech and natural language processing; and alert
human care-givers in case of danger.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two concrete examples
of the Assisted Cognition systems that will be developed are an activity compass
that helps reduce spatial disorientation both inside and outside the home, and
an adaptive prompter that helps patients carry out multi-step everyday tasks.
This project will explore an emerging area that could be of great humanitarian,
commercial, social, and scientific importance in the coming decades.&lt;br/&gt;