* 0225656
* Computational Learning and Discovery in Biological Sequence, Structure and Function Mapping
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* Jaime Carbonell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2008
* USD 5,900,766.00

EIA-0225656&lt;br/&gt;Reddy, Raj&lt;br/&gt;Carnegie Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Computational Learning and Discovery in
Biological Sequence, Structure and Function
Mapping&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer scientists, together with biological
chemists will collaborate using statistical and computational tools and methods
that the computer scientists have been developing for dealing with human
language to better understand the function of proteins. Proteins are major
players in the functioning of human and all other living cells. &lt;br/&gt;As in
languages, where sequences of letters determine patterns of words and sentences,
sequences of amino acids in proteins determine protein structure, dynamics and
function. Such sequences and their constituents can be thought of as syllables
or words that have particular properties. Given these sequences, scientists want
to be able to predict their geometrical structure and dynamics, and hence their
function. A deeper understanding of the relationship between these is required
so that the information hidden in the DNA sequences of genes can be used to
develop drugs to fight disease. In particular, there is great societal demand to
understand and treat degenerative diseases, many of which are based on defective
triggers for protein shape and interactions. Work toward these goals requires
deep knowledge both in computer science and in biological chemistry, and must
therefore be collaborative in nature. Carnegie Mellon computer scientists will
therefore be partnering with colleagues with expertise in Biological Chemistry
at the University of Pittsburgh, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), Boston University and the National Research Council of Canada. Industry
collaborators include Mathworks, Inc., and medical bioinformatics company,
Medstory, Inc. &lt;br/&gt;Using tools like statistical language modeling,
machine learning methods and high-level language processing for understanding
how proteins work inside cells is a relatively new field called computational
biolinguistics. At this point, the researchers have been able to detect protein
fragment signatures from pathogens by application of statistical language
modeling technologies to genome sequences, promising novel strategies in
identifying and targeting such pathogens. &lt;br/&gt;.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;