* 0225180
* Operation of the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (CHESS)
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2010
* Sol Gruner, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Guebre Tessema
* 03/31/2010
* USD 39,487,933.00

This project will continue to operate, develop, and improve the Cornell High
Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) over the five-year period 1 April 2003 through
31 March 2008. CHESS is a unique national synchrotron radiation user facility
that operates parasitically on the Cornell Electron Storage Ring (CESR),
producing high energy X-rays from the 5 - 8 GeV electrons and positrons in the
ring. Since 1998, CHESS has hosted 2516 visits from investigators from all over
the world to conduct research in a wide range of science and engineering
disciplines in academia, industry, and government. For example, CHESS has been
used for investigations of the atomic structure, properties, and time-resolved
behavior of electronic, structural, polymeric, and biological materials, protein
and virus crystallography, environmental science, radiography of solids and
fluids, and microelemental analyses. CHESS is an incubator of new synchrotron
science, people, methods, and instrumentation. To date, 449 students have
received Ph.D. degrees using data taken at CHESS. In consequence, CHESS is a
national resource for new beamline scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X-rays are
produced as byproducts from the acceleration of electrons to very high energies.
This occurs in the Cornell Electron Storage Ring (CESR), producing X-rays that
are utilized by the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS). This
radiation can be used to determine the properties and time-resolved behavior of
a wide range of electronic, structural, polymeric, and biological materials. In
addition, the X-rays can be used to determine the structures of proteins and
viruses, for environmental science, and to obtain radiographs of solids and
fluids. Many of these pieces of information can be obtained in no other way. For
example, time-resolved X-ray images of pressurized fuel sprays have been
obtained that may lead to significant improvements in engine performance. This
project will continue to operate, develop, and improve CHESS over the five-year
period 1 April 2003 through 31 March 2008. CHESS is a unique national
synchrotron radiation user facility, which has hosted visits from investigators
from all over the world to conduct research in a wide range of science and
engineering disciplines in academia, industry, and government. CHESS is an
important incubator of new synchrotron science, people, methods, and
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;