* 0225738
* NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences--"Stochastic Partial Differential Equations and Their Applications"
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Jinqiao Duan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 12/31/2003
* USD 31,470.00

There is a growing recognition of a role for the inclusion of stochastic terms
in the modeling of complex systems. The addition of such terms has led to
interesting new mathematical problems at the interface of probability and
partial differential equations. In order to quantify uncertainty and estimate
predictability of these systems, we need better understanding of stochastic
partial differential equations. Thus, the investigation of stochastic partial
differential equations has attracted a lot of attention recently, from both
theoretical and applied communities. It is now the very time to have a sharply
focused conference in this field. The Principal Lecturer for this conference is
Professor Jerzy Zabczyk, Institute of Mathematics, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Poland. Jerzy Zabczyk's research on stochastic partial differential equations
places him at the forefront of this exciting area. He is the co-author of the
research monographs ``Stochastic Equations in Infinite Dimensions" (1992) and
``Ergodicity in Infinite Dimensions" (1996). He is uniquely qualified to provide
an overview of the major recent developments in the subject and point to
research directions in the future.

Scientific and engineering systems are often subject to random influence.
Stochastic partial differential equations are appropriate models for many
randomly influenced systems. This conference is to stimulate new research on
stochastic partial differential equations and their applications in engineering,
science and finance, by bringing together both established researchers and
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. The lecture notes will be published
and will be accessible to a wide audience of professionals interested in the
subject.

