* 0225239
* Renovation of Research and Education Spaces at the Telonicher Marine Laboratory, Humboldt State University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Dennis Thoney, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 71,334.00

This award supports renovation of classroom and office space at the Fred
Telonicher Marine Laboratory. Located in Trinidad, CA, the laboratory provides
access to a variety of nearby marine and terrestrial habitats, including an
extensive rocky intertidal zone, sand beaches, protected and exposed subtidal
areas, lagoons and estuaries, mudflats, eelgrass beds, and submarine canyons.
The Laboratory's main building includes two large classrooms, 14 offices for
faculty and graduate students, research labs and additional space used to
support education and research activities. A filtered seawater system supplies
classrooms, a large wet laboratory with numerous holding tanks, and a small
public aquarium. The Laboratory offers a diverse set of marine-oriented research
and educational programs, including college level courses, graduate research,
K-12 programming, and self-guided tours for the general public. The Laboratory's
close proximity to a variety of habitats and the ability to maintain a wide
variety of organisms at the laboratory permit "hands on" laboratory and field
experiences for students. Fifteen faculty members regularly use the marine
facilities for research and teaching. The amount and quality of existing
laboratory space, offices and classrooms has made it difficult for the
Laboratory to accommodate visiting scientists, additional faculty and more
students. Using the support provided by this award, the institution will
renovate three large rooms to create additional research space and to improve
the quality and utility of space currently used for teaching and faculty
offices. The renovated classrooms will provide a far superior space for
conducting course lectures and laboratories. Separate rooms will allow the
Laboratory to offer two courses concurrently, making more space available for
new classes. The lecture and laboratory courses to be offered will include:
biological oceanography, chemical oceanography, geological oceanography,
zooplankton ecology, and estuarine ecology. In addition all three rooms will
meet ADA requirements for wheelchair access as a result of the
renovations.&lt;br/&gt;