* 0225963
* U.S.-Hungary Materials Research:  Liquid Crystalline Mesophases of Bent Core Molecules
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Peter Palffy-Muhoray, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 29,840.00

This US-Hungarian research project headed by Peter Palffy-Muhoray of Kent State
University and Agnes Burka of the Hungarian Institute for Solid State Physics
and Optics Budapest examines a new class of liquid crystals consisting of bent-
shaped molecules. These ester type bent core liquid crystals range from low
molecular weight materials to elastomers. The collaborative research plan
involves synthesis, characterization, and modeling of such bent-core, or banana-
shaped, molecules. Junior researchers from Kent State University are part of the
distinguished US-Hungarian team.

To determine the mesophases and physical properties of bent-core liquid
crystals, the research partners will employ three experimental techniques:
1)Mechanical studies of thin films including linear electro-mechanical and
rheological measurements of banana liquid crystal systems, where the overall
chirality is set by surface interactions. 2)Electrical measurements which
include determination of the polarization and dielectric spectroscopy. 3)Optical
observations consisting of polarizing and confocal microscopy as well as
electro-optic measurements and laser spectroscopy. The goal is to resolve a
number of fundamental questions concerning the correlation between material
parameters and pattern forming instabilities. For example, the researchers hope
to explain observed achiral symmetry-breaking mechanisms and to understand how
the structures form helical filaments in an isotropic melt. If successful, their
results may help identify novel synthetic materials with optical and
pyroelectric properties that have practical applications in information
technology and biotechnology.

This research project in experimental condensed matter physics fulfills the
program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the
United States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share
research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.