* 0225962
* Non-Equilibrium Effects in High Pressure, High Intensity Arcs
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2006
* Joachim Heberlein, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 11/30/2006
* USD 399,000.00

It has been discovered that a cold gas flow parallel to the anode surface can
lead to a stable attachment with an enlarged non-equilibrium region between the
luminous arc plasma and the anode surface. The current flow to the anode appears
to be distributed over a relatively large area, thus drastically reducing the
anode heat flux. In this study, this type of arc attachment, in which a
constrictor-stabilized arc attaches to an anode perpendicular to the arc axis
with a cold gas flow parallel to the anode surface, is investigated. The
enlarged non-equilibrium region between the anode and the arc column is
characterized with a newly developed data analysis technique using Thomson
scattering of laser radiation to determine the electron temperature and density
distributions. Measurements with a Langmuir probe imbedded in the anode provide
values for the same quantities at the anode surface allowing determination of
the current density distribution, and heat-flux probe measurements give the
heat-flux distribution at the anode surface. A parallel modeling effort using a
three-dimensional finite-volume code for a non-equilibrium plasma provides
insight into the physical processes in this non-equilibrium region including a
mapping of the electric field strength. Both kinetic and composition non-
equilibrium are considered, and a self-consistent treatment for diffusion is
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High intensity
arcs have attracted considerable interest for materials processing because they
can provide high fluxes of electrons, ions, or other radicals. However, because
the arc plasma is usually close to equilibrium, these fluxes are usually coupled
with high heat fluxes, limiting their usefulness for processing applications.
Furthermore, electric arcs frequently operate in an unstable manner, and the
high heat fluxes lead to erosion of the electrodes, limiting the life of arcing
devices. This study addresses the problems of the high heat fluxes associated
with the benefits of high electron densities in electric arcs. Two aspects of
this investigation are expected to lead to results of practical importance. One
is the generation of larger non-equilibrium plasma volumes that can be used for
surface treatment or bulk chemical processing. The second is the existence of a
wide-area diffuse attachment for high-intensity arcs with apparently low heat-
flux densities and, consequentl&lt;br/&gt;