* 0225952
* CAREER: Merging Dynamics and Mechanics for Integrated       Machine-Tool, Tooling and Process Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2001,03/31/2004
* William Endres, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2004
* USD 126,139.00

DMI-9734147 Endres The research focus of this CAREER project is integrated
analysis of the machine tool, tooling, and machining process in support of a
systems-approach to the development, planning and diagnosis of machining
systems. This requires a comprehensive analysis tool that merges detailed
cutting mechanics and analytical machining dynamics, which represents a shift in
paradigm from looking at the two as virtually separate problems. A 3-D
mechanistic edge ploughing model will be formulated such that it adheres to
slip-line theory. The ploughing model will be complemented by a model of the
cut-chip deformation energy that is present when using curved cutting edges seen
in industrially relevant processes. The result is the replacement of process-
specific physical calibration experiments with predicted process-specific
calibration pseudo-based solely on tube-end turning physical test data. It will
then be merged with an analytical solution for chatter level, derived first for
a linear process and then extended to account for process nonlinearity.
Educational activities will include the redevelopment of a mechanical design
course into a project-based experience including design, analysis and hands-on
manufacture of components and simple systems, as well as the development of a
graduate course on dynamics and mechanics of machining as a repository for the
latest research in machining dynamics and fundamental process mechanics. The
development of analytical dynamics solutions for performance and risk assessment
increases the pool of analysis tools and allows industrial users to reduce
calibration testing. The resulting advances in the science base will make
possible economic implementation of emerging machining practices (high-speed,
single-pass and hard machining).