* 0225417
* Integrated Sensing:  ScalableSensorSim - A Simulation Environment for Large-Scale Sensor Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Douglas Blough, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 09/30/2006
* USD 261,876.00

In this project, we will extend and advance the state--of--the--art in the field
of sensor network research in two important ways. First, we will design,
implement, and distribute a simulation environment designed specifically for
sensor networks of hundreds of thousands of network elements. The basic
simulator will be designed from the beginning with scalability in mind, and will
use distributed simulation methods to increase the available memory and CPU
power that and be utilized to conduct the simulation experiments.

Secondly, we will design and demonstrate a set of protocols designed
specifically for data dissemination in a very large--scale sensor network
environment. These protocols will be power and bandwidth aware, allowing a
maximization of data throughput while at the same time extending the overall
life of the network by limiting energy costs at individual network elements. The
protocols will be designed to support a hierarchical view of the network, and
will support primitives for data aggregation methods and selective attention of
high--priority measurements.

Our simulation environment will be freely available to all researchers working
on large--scale wireless networks, and will foster increased attention to
network performance as the network scales to tens or hundreds of thousands of
elements. Our power and bandwidth aware protocols will encourage deployment of
inexpensive environmental sensing devices that interact in a cooperative manner
to insure sensor data is reliably delivered to the end--user on a timely basis.