* 0225871
* PREMISE/Collaborative Research:  Integrating Manufacturing and Ecological Process Models For Ecosystem Impact Valuation: A Problem-Based Learning Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Jane Ammons, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 08/31/2004
* USD 49,999.00

The goal of this Product Realization and Environmental Manufacturing Innovative
Systems (PREMISE) Exploratory Research project is to establish a multi-
disciplinary team that brings together several manufacturing engineering
disciplines with system ecologists and city planning to understand how ecosystem
and social valuations can be integrated into enterprise decision-making. The
creation of tools that support this goal will enable systematic approaches to
enterprise design to appropriately balance industrial activity and human
development with ecosystem health, and the analysis of process modifications at
spatial scales that span the local watershed to the global environment. The
specific objective is to engage in a "scientific atelier" - a problem-based
learning course that has participants, faculty and students, from Georgia Tech
and the University of Vermont. The specific case studies will take existing
ecosystem models, Patuxent Landscape and the Gwynns Falls Landscape Models,
which contain both urban and rural land use and pressures for human system
development, and combine them with at least two different types of manufacturing
activities. The probable success of integrating models of ecosystems with
manufacturing systems is built on the fact that both use "unit models" -
convenient decompositions of the systems under study into re-useable components,
and solve the resulting transient mass and energy balances. The key challenges
are bridging conceptual and terminological gaps between the modeling
communities, determining the appropriate scaling and abstractions of the models
such that data that is transferred matches the information that is available,
and understanding how manufacturing decisions can and should be influenced by
ecosystem capital and service valuations. Ensuring environmental quality is
emerging as a key societal goal for industrialized nations.&lt;br/&gt;This
project will enable research on understanding how we can value, and account for,
the ecosystem services upon which we build our wealth as we design and operate
diverse manufacturing systems.