* 0225439
* Integrated Sensing:    Collaborative Research:   Development of Multifunctional Wireless Sensory Microsystems with Integrated Nanoelectromechanical Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Stephane Evoy, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 12/31/2004
* USD 75,000.00

Recent advances in nanometer scale science and technology offer novel approaches
for the development of ultra-miniature low-power sensor nodes for distributed
wireless sensor networks in applications such as environmental monitoring, civil
infrastructure monitoring, condition-based maintenance, security and
surveillance. The reduced dimensions and masses of nanoelectromechanical systems
(NEMS) are of great interest for highly-sensitive force- and mass-sensing. We
propose a novel technology based on assembly of nanostructured nanomechanical
sensors rather than their direct machining from the substrate material.
Nanomechanical sensing structures will be produced using "bottom-up" synthesis,
then surface assembled and integrated with foundry-fabricated monolithic
circuits through electrofluidic assembly, allowing on-chip integration of
nanomechanical sensors with transduction, readout, processing, and
communications circuitry. This approach also offers flexibility and scalability,
enabling the assembly of a larger range of functional structures. Leveraging our
core competencies in NEMS device development and analog/RF/microwave IC design,
we will develop a micropower nanosensor-based microsystem containing nanosensor
assembly/integration sites, sensor-specific transduction, and read-out
electronics.

These research activities are complemented with related education/outreach
goals. These include the groundwork for Summer Microelectronics Workshops that
will provide cleanroom research experiences to local high-school teachers. This
pilot program offers the promise for substantial impact in K-12 science and
mathematics education. The combination of these pedagogical and research
activities will enable a complete academic program that bridges the gap between
"bottom-up" nanotechnology and microsystems. More specifically, the proposed
integration of electrofluidic assembly of nanosensors with prefabricated
functional circuits represents realistic possibilities for the development of
Integrative Nanosystems that can "sense, think, or communicate".