* 0225424
* SGER:  A New Method for Landmine Detection and Minefield Mapping
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2004
* Gary Brown, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2004
* USD 64,324.00

0225424&lt;br/&gt;Brown&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is being submitted
under the Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER)&lt;br/&gt;program and it
focuses on answering critical feasibility questions pertaining to a
new&lt;br/&gt;technique for the detection and location of buried landmines and
unexploded ordnance. The&lt;br/&gt;subject technique comprises a standoff,
ground based, pulsed radar that launches&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic energy into
the Norton surface wave mode of propagation. The Norton&lt;br/&gt;surface wave
travels along the air-ground surface at the speed of light in a vacuum
and&lt;br/&gt;exponentially decays into the ground due to the losses in the
ground. By selecting the&lt;br/&gt;frequency properly, sufficient energy will be
scattered by the landmine back along the&lt;br/&gt;same propagation path and
then received by the radar. This energy is usually insufficient&lt;br/&gt;to be
above the system noise level so return pulse averaging is carried out using
coherent&lt;br/&gt;techniques. If N return pulses are averaged coherently the
signal-to-noise power ratio&lt;br/&gt;will increase by a factor of N rendering
the signal scattered from the landmine&lt;br/&gt;detectable. Location of the
mine is achieved by using the pulse width to accomplish&lt;br/&gt;resolution in
the range coordinate and the radar antenna to achieve resolution in
the&lt;br/&gt;azimuth angle. In order to achieve area coverage and the best
possible angular resolution&lt;br/&gt;close to the antenna, it is proposed to
simultaneously employ both beam steering and near&lt;br/&gt;field focusing
techniques. The critical study, to establish feasibility, is
the&lt;br/&gt;determination of the highest operating frequency for which the
Norton surface wave can&lt;br/&gt;propagate on the surface and penetrate
sufficiently deep to detect antipersonnel and&lt;br/&gt;antitank mines. It is
also proposed to develop the appropriate radar range equation for&lt;br/&gt;the
Norton surface wave, investigate techniques for maximizing the coupling of the
radar&lt;br/&gt;antenna to the Norton surface wave, determine the variation of
soil conductivity and the&lt;br/&gt;radar cross section values for typical
nonferrous landmines, and investigate the maximum&lt;br/&gt;range and angle
resolution or the acceptable frequencies of operation. Having
answered&lt;br/&gt;these questions, it should be possible to establish the
viability of such a radar subject&lt;br/&gt;only to the need to compute the
effects of surface roughness and buried debris on the mine&lt;br/&gt;scattered
signal strength, i.e., the low signal-to-clutter ratio problem.&lt;br/&gt;