* 0225758
* NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conference, Free boundary problems in partial differential equations and applications, May 18-22, 2003
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Pao Liu Chow, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 04/30/2004
* USD 32,000.00

The Mathematics Department of Wayne State University is hosting a National
Science Foundation--Conference Board of Mathematical Sciences (NSF-CBMS)
Regional Research Conference during the period of May 18 to May 22, 2003. The
conference topic is ``Free boundary problems in partial differential equations
and applications.'' This five-day-long conference is intended to stimulate
further interest in this important mathematical research area. The aim of this
conference is to highlight the new methods, directions and most recent
developments in variational and nonvariational free boundary theory. It will
focus on the existence and regularity of solutions of free boundary problems and
applications to problems arising in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor David Jerison from MIT will present
ten lectures in this focused area along with additional invited speakers
including Luis Caffarelli (UT, Austin), Avner Friedman (Ohio State University),
Carlos Kenig (University of Chicago) and Fanghua Lin (Courant Institute of
Mathematical Sciences), each of whom will give one hour lecture. These
additional lectures are meant to complement the ten lectures given by the
principal speaker and motivate more active discussions among the participants.
The format of the conference will be intensive lectures by the featured speaker
and four invited speakers along with semi-structured discussion sessions
following the invited talks. To meet the requirement of CBMS meetings, we will
not schedule any contributed talks by the participants. Anticipated participants
shall include not only well established researchers, but also graduate students,
postdoctoral and young researchers. In particular, the conference will encourage
the participation of women, persons with disabilities and people
from&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups.