* 0225025
* SGER:    Performance Enhanced Organic FETs by Built in Strain in Organic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* P.Paul Ruden, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2004
* USD 75,809.00

This project explores a unique materials science approach to understand and
improve transport processes in organic semiconductor materials suitable for the
fabrication of electronic or opto-electronic devices. The specific objective of
the project is to explore and demonstrate an approach to substantially increase
carrier mobility under ambient conditions in organic semiconductors by
designing, fabricating, and analyzing structures with built-in strain. The
proposed research is motivated by recent experimental results with pentacene.
Despite recent progress in organic semiconductor materials research, electronic
devices fabricated with pentacene have a primary impediment-a relatively low
charge carrier mobility which appears to be limited by intermolecular charge
carrier transfer. With decreasing intermolecular distances, as happens under
compressive stress, and demonstrated utilizing high pressure, charge carrier
mobility in organic materials increases. The research proposed here addresses
this critical limitation of low mobility by exploring built-in strain
enhancement under ambient pressure conditions. The approach is to deposit
pentacene on bent, thinned-down Si/SiO2 substrate wafers. When the substrate is
allowed to relax, compressive strain is built into the active pentacene layer.
Field effect transistors will then be fabricated on this material and tested for
enhanced mobility. The proposed research will explore the feasibility of such an
approach through a coordinated effort involving experiment and modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research issues in a
topical area of electronic/photonic materi-als science having technological
relevance. An important feature of the project is high risk/high payoff
potential with strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research and
educa-tion.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;