* 0225110
* Patterns and Processes: Dynamics of the Erebus Bay Weddell Seal Population
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Donald Siniff, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 07/31/2008
* USD 670,925.00

The Erebus Bay Weddell seal population study in eastern McMurdo Sound,
Antarctica was initiated in 1968 and represents one of the longest intensive
field investigations of a long-lived mammal in existence. Over the thirty-four
year period of this study a total of 15,636 animals have been tagged with
144,927 re-sighting records logged in the current database. As such, this study
is an extremely valuable resource for understanding population dynamics of not
only Weddell seals, but also other species of both terrestrial and marine
mammals with similar life-history characteristics. With the retirement of the
original investigator, Dr. Donald Siniff, this proposal represents an effort to
transition the long-term studies to a new team of investigators. Dr. Robert
Garrott and Dr. Jay Rotella propose building upon the foundation with two lines
of investigation that combine use of the long-term database with new field
initiatives. The continuity of the demographic data will be maintained by
annually marking all pups born, replace lost or broken tags, and perform
multiple mark-recapture censuses of the Erebus Bay seal colonies. The new data
will be combined with the existing database and a progressively complex series
of analyses will be performed using recently developed mark-recapture methods to
decompose, evaluate, and integrate the demographic characteristics of the Erebus
Bay Weddell seal population. These analyses will allow the testing of specific
hypotheses about population regulation as well as temporal and spatial patterns
of variation in vital rates among colonies within the population that have been
posed by previous investigators, but have not been adequately evaluated due to
data and analytical limitations. The primary new field initiative will involve
an intensive study of mass dynamics of both pups and adult females as a
surrogate measure for assessing annual variation in marine resources and their
potential role in limiting and/or regulating the population. In conjunction with
the collection of data on body mass dynamics the investigators will use
satellite imagery to develop an extended time series of sea ice extent in
McMurdo Sound. Regional extent of sea ice affects both regional primary
productivity and availability of haul out areas for Weddell seals. Increased
primary productivity may increase marine resources which would be expected to
have a positive affect on Weddell seal foraging efficiency, leading to increased
body mass. These data combined with the large proportion of known-aged seals in
the current study population (&gt;60%) will allow the investigators to develop a
powerful database to test specific hypotheses about ecological processes
affecting Weddell seals. Knowledge of the mechanisms that limit and/or regulate
Weddell seal populations and the specific bio-physical linkages between climate,
oceans, ice, and Antarctic food webs can provide important contributions to
understanding of pinniped population dynamics, as well as contribute more
generally to theoretical understanding of population, community, and ecosystem
patterns and processes. Such knowledge can be readily applied elsewhere to
enhance the ability of natural resource managers to effectively maintain
assemblages of other large-mammal species and the ecological processes that they
facilitate. Continuation of this long-term study may also contribute to
understanding the potential impacts of human activities such as global climate
warming and the commercial exploitation of Antarctic marine resources. And
finally, the study can contribute significantly to the development and testing
of new research and analytical methodologies that will almost certainly have
many other applications.