* 0225523
* Integrated Sensing:   Acquisition, Compression and Interpolation of Panoramic Stereo Images of a Scene for Remote Walkthroughs
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Yoshihisa Shinagawa, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 07/31/2005
* USD 250,000.00

This proposal is aimed at producing novel images of a scene from arbitrary new
viewpoints using a sparse set of compressed panoramic snapshots or sample images
of the scene. The samples are taken from a relatively small number of
strategically placed cameras. A major application and evaluation testbed of the
proposed work is to enable walkthroughs of a 3D scene by generating the images
of the scene along a trajectory dynamically chosen by a remote user. The focus
of the proposed work is on the acquisition of panoramic stereo images which
serve as scene samples, and their interpolation (or extrapolation) for producing
a new stereo pair of images of the scene from an arbitrary new viewpoint. The
user follows a dynamically chosen arbitrary trajectory and wishes to
continuously teleview the scene from along the trajectory points. It is assumed
that relative locations of the objects in the scene for which walkthroughs are
to be generated are known; the object locations are sparse; and that the
strategic placement of the cameras does not change significantly to warrant
camera replacement. Development and implementation of a stereo panoramic camera
is proposed. Limited work is proposed on joint image compression. The topology
of the camera network also allows the determination of which cameras are to be
used to generate the walkthrough image at any given point along the user drawn
trajectory. Applications of the proposed work include video surveillance,
virtual museums and video conferencing.