* 0225826
* Adaptive Bayesian Receivers in Fading Channels: A Sequential Monte Carlo Filtering Design Paradigm
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2002,11/30/2004
* Xiaodong Wang, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Venugopal V. Veeravalli
* 11/30/2004
* USD 291,100.00

Abstract The coming generation of tetherless communication technology promises a
giant leap forward in information accessibility. Advanced features of the so-
called fourth-generation wireless systems and beyond, such as data rates
compatible with multimedia applications, will enable many emerging applications
not possible with current wireless systems. However, it is not at all clear how
wireless receivers should be optimally designed to meet the technical challenges
introduced by the wider bandwidths and higher data rates inherent in the future
wireless systems. It is generally believed that the real niche for future
wireless receivers lies in the development of adaptive systems to perform
sophisticated signal processing functions. But, at this time there is a lack of
concrete principles that can be used to design these futuristic receivers. It is
important at this stage to acquire the insights and theoretical tools that may
help spark revolutionary breakthroughs in this field.

Investigation of design methodologies of adaptive Bayesian receivers in single-
user and multiuser fading channels is proposed. The approach is to formulate the
problems of signal reception in unknown time-varying channels as multivariate
Bayesian inference problems. Sequential Monte Carlo filtering methods, the
relatively simple but extremely powerful numerical techniques recently developed
in the field of statistics, will be employed to develop adaptive systems for
computing the Bayesian estimates of the channels and data. An array of receiver
design problems found in wireless communications, such as mitigation of various
types of radio-frequency interference (including multiple-access interference,
narrowband interference, impulsive noise), tracking of fading channels,
resolving multipath channel dispersion, space-time processing by multiple
antennas, exploiting coded signal structures, etc., will be treated under the
unified framework of sequential Monte Carlo Bayesian estimation. The theoretical
effort in this project is expected to culminate in the formulation of novel
receiver design concepts applicable for future wireless systems.



