* 0225918
* PREMISE:   Machining Performance Evaluation in Near-Dry Machining of Aluminum Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Ibrahim Jawahir, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Production Realization and Environment Manufacturing Innovative Systems
(PREMISE) project is aimed at establishing the major effects of spray cooling
under a wide range of cutting conditions, tool geometry and three major aluminum
work materials (356, 380 and 390) in most commonly known automotive machining
operations covering turning, milling, and drilling. The effects of influencing
parameters such as the fluid (and mist) flow rate, air pressure, direction of
spray (and the nozzle position), type and composition of fluid, etc., are to be
studied and compared for machining performance measures such as tool-wear/tool-
life, cutting forces, chip-forms/chip breakability, surface roughness, etc. A
sensitivity analysis will be made in order to identify the major influencing
parameters and relevant empirical relationships will be derived for practical
applications. At the end, a full range of validation is proposed. The project
will be conducted in four overlapping phases in twelve months.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings of this project will validate and establish
the feasibility of using spray cooling to replace conventional flood cooling in
specific applications, thus avoiding the disadvantages such as extremely harmful
environmental pollution, negative influence on personnel health, increased
production costs and poor energy efficiency, etc., prevalent in flood cooling.
The machining performance will not be compromised in spray cooling applications.
The identification of the primary influencing parameters in spray cooling is
important for machining process planning. The experimental data generated and
the relevant empirical relationships established from this project will also
serve as the basis for developing analytical models for use in the optimization
of machining processes.