* 0225688
* PREMISE:   Predictive Modeling of Environmental Impact and Tool Performance in Near Dry Turning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Steven Liang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 02/28/2006
* USD 99,976.00

This project is supported by the Product Realization and Environmental
Manufacturing Innovative Systems (PREMISE) Program to develop the analytical
understanding and predictive modeling capability or the quantitative planning of
near dry lubrication parameters in turning operations. The targets are set on
the control of air quality and tool wear in achieving environmental and
productivity missions. This project utilizes machining science, fluid mechanics,
heat transfer theories, and liquid atomization principles to develop a set of
predictive models that estimate the aerosol concentration and the tool wear rate
as functions of near dry lubrication parameters and cutting conditions. To this
end, the temperature and stress distributions under mixed or boundary
lubrication will be developed; the generation of cutting fluid aerosol through
evaporation, splash, and dissipation mechanisms will be examined; and the
volumetric wear rate of cutting tool due to adhesion, abrasion, and diffusion
will be quantitatively evaluated. Experimental calibration in non-machining
tests and full-range validation in machining tests will follow the theoretical
development.

The results of the project will provide a scientific infrastructure needed for
the evaluation, quantification, and optimization of near dry machining
performances. The broader impacts of the project include the extendibility of
the resulting scientific understanding to support process optimization, activity
based costing, and life cycle analysis of a wide range of part integrity issues,
various waste concerns, and in different machining configurations. The project
will also aims to integrate research into educational programs, to encourage the
involvement of underrepresented student groups, and to involve the collaboration
of several industry sectors, including fluid dispensing system vendors, tool
manufacturers, machine makers, and technology end users. The successful
completion of this study will open up opportunities for future full-scale, team-
based research programs to follow.