* 0225497
* Integrated Sensing:  Communication Protocols and Testbed Development for Ad-Hoc Sensor Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Ian Akyildiz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 07/31/2005
* USD 200,000.00

022597 Sivakumar

The convergence of micro electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) technology, wireless
communications and digital electronics have enabled the development of low cost,
low power, multi-functional sensor nodes that are small in size and communicate
un-tethered in short distances. They can perform tasks, which traditional stand
along sensors are hard to match. Although sensor networks have some similarities
with another class of wireless networks called ad-hoc networks, they have
several distinguishing characteristics that necessitate dedicated communication
protocols.

The PIs overall objective in the proposed project is to develop a system
architecture, which includes new protocol entities and interfaces. Their focus
will be on the integration of the proposed algorithms into an efficient overall
system. While they propose to develop new algorithms and protocols for the
transport and network layers, specifically, their deliverables will include: (a)
a new transport protocol called SNTP (Sensor-Nets Transport Protocol) that is
designed specifically for a sensor network environment, and (b) a power aware
and scalable routing protocol that allow an end-user to control the sensors and
reconfigure the interconnection of the sensor network.

The PIs will evaluate their proposed protocols in a ns2 network simulator based
simulation environment, and make available for public use any protocol
simulation software. Since the ns2 simulator currently does not extensively
support the simulation of sensor network environments, they will also develop
such support and make it available for public use.

