* 0225170
* SSTI 6th Annual Conference -- EPSCoR Sponsorship Request in Dearborn, Michigan, October 2002
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Mark Skinner, State Science & Technology Institute
* Standard Grant
* Karen L. Sandberg
* 04/30/2003
* USD 24,975.00

States and communities increasingly are recognizing that universities' roles in
research, innovation, faculty entrepreneurship, and workforce preparedness
provide the critical foundation for successful tech-based economic development.
Paradoxically, the fiscal crises confronting all but four states is forcing
difficult decisions regarding funding for higher education and tech-based
economic development. The State Science and Technology Institute (SSTI) sixth
annual conference in Dearborn, MI will serve as a forum for nurturing stronger
alliances between university and economic development officials during
challenging financial times.

The university track will allow participants to examine and strengthen higher
education's contributions toward forging local, state, and regional economic
vitality. The goals of this track are to (1) increase among technology-based
economic development professionals recognition of and support for the important
roles universities play in building technology-based economies; (2) attract more
university leadership and research administrators to participate in the
gathering, allowing the opportunity to foster stronger working relationships
with their state, local and regional economic development partners; (3) provide
a forum for universities to discuss shared challenges and issues in and examples
of effective tools and techniques for increasing commercialization of university
technology, building the research enterprise, encouraging faculty
entrepreneurship, and preparing tomorrow's workers and leaders; and (5) promote
interstate and intrastate cooperation toward common goals for research and
economic development. ***

