* 0225023
* PGE/DEM  Computer Science Computing and Mentoring Partnership (CS CAMP)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Richard Tapia, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 07/31/2006
* USD 809,163.00

Rice University, in collaboration with the Houston Independent School District,
proposes the Computer Science Computing and Mentoring Partnership (CS-CAMP), a
demonstration project to enhance the interest and persistence of female students
in pre-college computer science. The proposed CS-CAMP is an ambitious yet
realistic plan to develop a model that can be used across the nation to make
systemic school change while providing enriched learning experiences for
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though women are making
strides in some areas of science, their participation in computer science is
actually declining. Even in high schools, the vast majority of girls opt out of
advanced high school computing courses. Through its 2-year program, CS-CAMP will
provide high school girls opportunities to learn computing in a female-centric
environment outside school and increase enrollment of girls in advanced computer
science classes in their high schools. This should give girls in these high
schools enough high-quality exposure to computing so that they can make informed
decisions about whether to pursue computer science as a college major and a life
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program Goals are to:&lt;br/&gt;-Prepare high
school girls so that they will succeed with confidence and enthusiasm in
computer science courses;&lt;br/&gt;-Increase girls' admission and retention in
pre-college computer science courses; and&lt;br/&gt;-Improve the climate for
girls and instructional experiences in high school computer science
classes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program will target eight high schools
in the Houston area who will make a strong, long-term commitment to improve
their schools' computer science program with the goal that girls comprise 50% of
the schools' most advanced computer science classes, and if they are not
currently teaching an advanced computing class, to begin to do so. The selected
schools will form an implementation team consisting of a counselor,
administrator, and computer science teacher to meet bimonthly at Rice with the
other schools' teams and CS-CAMP to develop and implement an action plan for
their schools. CS-CAMP will seed the effort by engaging 16 girls from each of
the eight schools in a two-year program consisting of 2-week summer computer
camp and monthly follow-up sessions. Computer camp focuses on community
building, computing-career awareness, mentoring, introductory computing courses,
and lots of fun.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will provide professional
development on gender equity in technology to the schools' principals,
counselors, and computer science teachers. The participating computer science
teachers will also facilitate at the girls' computer camp under the tutelage of
master teachers. This will afford the targeted teachers (1) solid knowledge of
computer science content and curriculum; (2) skill in a variety of approaches to
instruction; and (3) the opportunity to plan and reflect on instruction together
with other teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CS-Camp will create a multi-level
(middle school through university faculty/industry worker) community that
provides academic support and personal and professional mentoring to girls in
the targeted eight schools in the hopes that those eight will become some of the
country's premier schools in participation of girls in computer science and
provide a model for the nation in this regard.&lt;br/&gt;