* 0225369
* PGE/PLN -- Coupling Assessment with Organizational Change Strategies: A Fresh Approach to Promoting Gender &amp; Racial Diversity in Undergrad. Physical &amp; Comp. Science &amp; E
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Linda Basch, National Council for Research on Women
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2003
* USD 31,793.00

The National Council for Research on Women (NCRW) proposes a 12-month planning
project to design a multi-site three-year project aimed at improving the
recruitment and retention of undergraduate women students in selected physical
and computer science departments, and engineering disciplines. The larger
project will focus on women students of color, who are severely under-
represented in these fields. The fields that will be encompassed in this project
are all areas in which there are increasing opportunities, given the ways
technology is transforming whole sectors of the world economy and increasing
demands for scientific and technological expertise to extend knowledge and
capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NCRW will draw on its 95 member centers, and
specific SMET departments representative of a wide range of racial and ethnic
diversity, where a base of institutional support for such an approach is
present. Its aim will be to develop fresh approaches to assessing environments
and implementing strategies for change in specific SMET institutions and/or
departments through partnerships with women's research centers, and its
methodology will focus on the development of assessment protocols and change
strategies by the project's partners on each campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
innovative emphases are: intersections of race, gender; assessment tools and
institutional change across a wide range of undergraduatel environments; and
partnerships for change across campuses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
build on the findings and recommendations of the recent NCRW report Balancing
the Equation: Where are Women and Girls in Science, Engineering and Technology?,
roundtables and convenings sponsored by NCRW, and on the work of its centers
engaged in work on issues related to women and girls in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;