* 0225413
* INTEGRATED SENSING: Distributed Architecture for a Voluble Intelligent Environment
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Randal Nelson, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 08/31/2006
* USD 250,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to implement
a&lt;br/&gt;conversational intelligent environment&lt;br/&gt;containing a
distributed array of active cameras and other sensors,&lt;br/&gt;and
communicating with users via natural dialogue, augmented where
useful&lt;br/&gt;with imagery and pointing devices.&lt;br/&gt;This artificial
spatial intelligence, termed a&lt;br/&gt;Voluble Intelligent Environment or VIE,
will actively obtain information about,&lt;br/&gt;and provide assistance within
a real physical domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project requires grounding
natural language understanding in&lt;br/&gt;machine perception.&lt;br/&gt;A
major difficulty is that outputs supplied by&lt;br/&gt;current perceptual
algorithms are too low-level&lt;br/&gt;to serve as primitives for traditional
understanding and reasoning systems.&lt;br/&gt;To address this, the PIs will
integrate the results of machine vision&lt;br/&gt;and other perceptual functions
into mid-level representations termed&lt;br/&gt;"perscripts", which represent
items of perceptual information of the sort that&lt;br/&gt;would typically be
described by a phrase or simple sentence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also
requires advances in&lt;br/&gt;distributed systems technology to permit
the&lt;br/&gt;various perceptual, computational, and communication components
to&lt;br/&gt;be efficiently and flexibly configured.&lt;br/&gt;The integration
framework will be based on&lt;br/&gt;a prototype distributed resource interface,
InterWeave,&lt;br/&gt;developed at the University of
Rochester.&lt;br/&gt;Interweave provides an efficient
implementation&lt;br/&gt;of a network-wide global name/address space that
directly supports&lt;br/&gt;the proposed approach to grounding language in
perception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will be validated in&lt;br/&gt;a
``Household Assistant'' application that provides occupants of
a&lt;br/&gt;``smart house'' with information useful in activities
of&lt;br/&gt;daily living (such as ``where did I leave my glasses?''
or&lt;br/&gt;``did I take my meds?'').&lt;br/&gt;This application is being
developed in conjunction with the University&lt;br/&gt;of Rochester Center for
Future Health.&lt;br/&gt;It addresses needs of&lt;br/&gt;the elderly and the
disabled, and has the potential to have a significant&lt;br/&gt;economic impact
as part of an overall system that unloads caregivers for&lt;br/&gt;this
population.&lt;br/&gt;