* 0225492
* Integrated Sensing:   Towards Sensate Media and Electronic Skins - Testbeds For Very High Density Distributed Sensor Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Joseph Paradiso, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 09/30/2005
* USD 200,000.00

A pair of testbeds will be built to study the behavior of very dense sensor
networks. The first involves constructing small sensor nodes in the form of a
pushpin, having a pair of insulated-jacket conductive pins that provide power to
the nodes when they are pushed into a large piece of laminated conductive
wallboard. The nodes couple to their immediate neighbors via local communication
once inserted, and form an ad-hoc network across the wallboard. The wallboard
substrate will accommodate relatively large numbers (e.g., over 100) of these
pushpins, and they can be trivially reconfigured, essentially as one would move
tacks about on a bulletin board, allowing different network densities and
geometries to be easily investigated. Likewise, the pushpins themselves have a
configurable, layered structure, allowing the processor, communications system,
and sensor suite to be easily swapped. Our second testbed will push these ideas
towards the concept of a multisensory electronic "skin" - a sheet of material
with circa 100 or more processor/sensor nodes, now spaced significantly closer
than a centimeter to one another. The processors will talk to their neighbors to
reject background while isolating and parameterizing sensor stimuli and routing
the results peer-peer to external connections at the network's perimeter. In
order to scale gracefully, most data reduction (feature clustering, detection,
parameterization, etc.) must be done by the network itself, using regional
communication. Accordingly, these testbeds are useful for exploring and
developing new kinds of self-organizing and physics-inspired algorithms to
reduce and process the data locally on the network