* 0225975
* SGER: Distribution of Photoheterotrophic Bacteria in the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2002,10/31/2003
* Michael Sieracki, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/31/2003
* USD 25,680.00

A new type of bacteria in the ocean was discovered this past year using in?situ
infrared fluorescence measurements. These cells, termed aerobic, anoxygenic
photoheterotrophs, or AAPs, are capable of using sunlight and/or carbon sources
for energy. They can fix C02, but do not produce oxygen as traditional
photosynthesizers do. They were shown to live in coastal ocean waters and in the
Northeastern Pacific Ocean. The ecological role and importance of AAPs is not
known. In current carbon models they are confounded with heterotrophic bacteria,
yet may play a very different role. This project, a small grant for exploratory
research, will analyze samples collected from 3 recent research cruises in the
NW Atlantic for counts of AAP cells across seasons and across a trophic gradient
from productive, coastal Maine, Gulf of Maine, and Georges Bank waters to
offshore oligotrophic waters of the Sargasso Sea. This project will provide some
of the first quantitative estimates of AAPs in different marine ecosystems and
over different seasons, and will give the first indication of the potential
ecological importance of this newly discovered microbial form. The findings from
this study should have broad significance in understanding ocean ecology and
biogeochemical cycling in the oceans.