* 0225346
* Integrated Sensing:  Integrated Smart-Sensor Networks for Monitoring Aqueous Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Craig Grimes, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 08/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

0225346&lt;br/&gt;Grimes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks support for
the design and development of networked sensors capable of operating in aqueous
environments. Development of an aqueous network sensor technology is a
challenging prospect, requiring careful design and systematic integration of the
sensor platforms incorporated into the network nodes for operation in liquids,
packaging of the sensors for an aqueous environment, and burst-spread acoustic
communication schemes (pulse modulation of a steady state carrier) able to
compensate for reflections due to the water-ground and water-air interface. The
PI will design and integrate sensor technologies capable of aqueous operation
with acoustic based communication technologies and data processing protocols to
achieve a network sensor technology able to autonomously, continuously, and in-
real time monitor streams, lakes, ocean bays, liquid streams in processing
plants, etc. He proposes to integrate arrays of magnetoelastic sensors into the
nodes for measurement of liquid chemical composition, liquid density and
viscosity, pH and temperature. Beyond helping to ensure water quality, the
aqueous networked sensors would be a tremendous tool for biologists seeking to
monitor the temperature, flow characteristics, and chemical environment of lakes
and, ultimately when the technology is fully developed, oceans. Without question
a viable networked sensor technology for aqueous environments would find great
application for environmental monitoring, industrial process control, homeland
security and scientific
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;