* 0225111
* FSML:  SDSU Field Station Programs' Model:  Building a Wireless Web-based Community to Integrate Research, Education, and Technology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Kathy Williams, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2006
* USD 187,500.00

A National Science Foundation grant has been awarded to San Diego State
University Field Station Programs (FSP), under the direction of Ms. Sedra
Shapiro, Drs. Claudia Luke and Kathy Williams to develop a wireless web-based
community to integrate research, education and technology. Funding will be used
to create a wireless telecommunications network and install an array of sensing
devices at the Santa Margarita Ecological Reserve (SMER) sixty miles north of
San Diego. Our mission is to support research, education, and university
teaching through the collecting, sharing and understanding of environmental
data. The Field Station reserves serve as foci for interdisciplinary work and
relationship building among scientists, students, regional managers, community
groups, and decision-makers. SMER will serve as a model system for environmental
observation that collects and shares data from various scientific disciplines
using novel data collection methods. With improved understanding, scientists and
FSP staff will be able to better inform policy makers, natural resource
managers, and the general public on how to address these, and other critical
questions. New technologies allow us a whole new way of conducting environmental
science with wireless sensor technology linked into a high-speed Internet
backbone providing scientists with a new resource to monitor, probe, explore,
and understand our ecoregion. Completely new things can be measured; completely
new insights are inevitable. Development of a wireless communication network and
automated sensor arrays within a remote field station will feed into major
collaborations with other NSF-funded environmental data acquisition and
distribution projects, such as ROADNet (Real-time Observatories, Applications,
and Data management Network), under the direction of Scripps Institute of
Oceanography's (SIO) PI, John Orcutt; and HPWREN (High Performance Wireless
Research and Education Network), under the direction of the San Diego
SuperComputer Center's PI, Hans-Werner Braun and SIO's Frank Vernon. Existing
partnerships and collaborations along with the SDSU FSP personnel ensure success
of this novel project.

Currently, a fledgling network of Internet-accessible telecommunication
facilities at SMER has attracted widespread interest from environmental and
technology researchers, educators, and natural resource managers. Data collected
by the FSP is non-proprietary and will be made freely accessible through the
Internet. While the current system generated interest and collaborations, and
provided basic biotic and abiotic information, new funds will be used to meet
rising demands for a reserve-wide network. To achieve project goals,
instrumentation to expand the SMER wireless network region or "communications
bubble " allowing researchers to collect and share real-time data from novel
sensor technologies on 65% of the 1760 ha SMER reserve. Additionally we will
deploy a series of sensor arrays that collect hydrographic and meteorological
data at strategic locations within the reserve. Collecting and sharing these
data sets through real-time wireless streaming of data is important in that
these types of data are frequently used by a wide community of researchers, can
be important for education and outreach, and are significant environmental
factors for real-time monitoring of water and air in our national quest for
improved security and homeland defense. This project will benefit researchers,
educators, students, and habitat managers, who may integrate their data with
non-proprietary real-time and archived ecological data from SMER or elsewhere.
This activity bridges the gap between environmental and technological research
by establishing an extensive in situ sensor and telecommunication network. SMER
will be a model site and living laboratory for ecological observation with
emerging technologies benefiting environmental research being proto-typed at
SMER. A novel aspect of this project, in addition to new data collection
capabilities, is the broad interest by collaborators in assessing potential uses
of wireless technology by the scientific community as a whole. The broader
impact of this project will increase access to ecological data and support novel
learning strategies for expanding educational uses. With an increasingly diverse
undergraduate student population nation-wide, we must aggressively meet the
challenge of increasing diversity of the Science, Math, Engineering, and
Technology (SMET) workforce by improving preparation of ALL students. SDSU
graduates one of the most diverse student bodies in higher education. These data
sets will also be used in K-12 and community education.