* 0225228
* PGE/RES:  Why Does It Work? A Study of Successful Gender Equity in Industrial Engineering at the University of Oklahoma
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* M. Jayne Fleener, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2006
* USD 899,562.00

The University of Oklahoma (OU) will study the factors that impact the retention
of female undergraduate majors in its Industrial Engineering program. The
program is especially successful: as of Fall 2001, 58% of the undergraduate
majors in Industrial Engineering are women. This proportion is strikingly higher
than both the nationwide proportion in industrial engineering and the proportion
in other STEM degree programs at OU. Furthermore, the proportion has more than
doubled in the space of five years, having steadily increased from 27% in 1996.
OU did not set out specifically to accomplish this rate of retention of female
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will investigate combinations of
factors that affect students' choices. For example, one factor is the proportion
of female faculty. Industrial Engineering at OU has a high proportion of women
faculty (4 of 10 faculty, 40%), which is one of the factors identified by
Seymour and Hewitt (1997) as having an impact on retention of women majors. This
phenomenon alone is unlikely to account for the present high retention, as
evidenced by nationwide trends in other disciplines (e.g., chemical engineering
and computer science). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary source of data will be
600 interviews with students. Students will be sophomore to senior, as well as
alumni. During the first year, the team will interview only Industrial
Engineering majors at OU. In the second and third years, they will interview
students at OU majoring in Aerospace &amp; Mechanical Engineering, Chemical
Engineering, Computer Science, Mathematics, and Physics, in addition. Finally,
during the third year, they will include additional interviews of Industrial
Engineering majors at Arizona State University, the University of Nebraska at
Lincoln, and the University of Pittsburgh. To assure triangulation, other
sources of data will include student transcript records, the Pittsburgh
Engineering Attitudes Toward Engineering Survey(copyright), and interviews with
faculty, program directors, advisors, and graduate students, all of whom affect
student experiences in college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fifteen-person research
team consists of two anthropologists, two educational researchers, two faculty
in industrial engineering at OU (one with expertise in engineering education
research), one faculty liaison for each of the other participating departments
at OU (one with expertise in undergraduate mathematics education research), one
faculty liaison with each of the participating institutions, and an experienced
project director.&lt;br/&gt;