* 0225028
* Regulation of Somitogenesis by Calcium Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Michael Ferrari, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 03/31/2004
* USD 199,775.00

0091174&lt;br/&gt;Ferrari&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the
general hypothesis that calcium (Ca 2+ ) transients within the presomitic
mesoderm (PSM) and forming somites are necessary for somitogenesis (SMG). The
specific aims are to 1) determine if somite formation is directed by Ca 2+
transients and, 2) examine the relationship between somitogenic gene expression
and Ca 2+ transients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The morphogenetic movements which
produce somites have been described, but the cellular control mechanisms have
remained elusive. However, recent observations indicate that several genes are
expressed with spatiotemporal patterns corresponding to somite formation. For
example, the bHLH transcription factor c-hairy-1, a pair-rule segmentation gene,
is transcribed such that the time for a single oscillation equals the time to
form one somite. These patterns have generated much excitement, as they are
consistent with theoretical models based on a clock and wave somite formation
mechanism. However, the biochemical or molecular nature of this segmentation
clock remains unknown. This proposal will test the hypothesis that Ca 2+
transients may form part of the clock mechanism and/or serve to entrain cell
populations via intercellular Ca 2+ waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ca 2+ signaling
appears to play an important role in SMG. In both zebrafish and Xenopus, a high
degree of Ca 2+ transient activity exists in the PSM and forming somites, and
when this activity is blocked SMG is disrupted. Since somites are produced with
high regularity, significant correlations between this process and Ca 2+ signals
are possible. This regular patterning allows even subtle defects to be detected
after experimental manipulation of Ca 2+ signaling.&lt;br/&gt;A large array of
fluorescent compounds exist for observing and modulating both intra- and
intercellular Ca 2+ signals. These fluoroprobes are used in conjunction with
high-resolution fluorescence microscopy of living Xenopus embryos and explants.
Of particular utility are a number of caged compounds, which can be
photoactivated with temporal and spatial specificity to control Ca 2+ dynamics.
Using these compounds, experiments are planned to determine if transients are
part of an epigenetic signaling pathway responsible for somite patterning. For
example, transients will be inhibited in specific regions of the PSM by
photoreleasing BAPTA, a high affinty Ca 2+ chelator. These regions will then be
examined for the ability to form somites and produce the correct pattern of
somitogenic gene expression. The proposed work may further our understanding of
how epigenetic signals can control and modify morphogenetic events.&lt;br/&gt;