* 0225855
* PREMISE:  Emerging Materials and Future Global Resource Scarcity: Identifying Technologies with Impact
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Charles Fine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 09/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

The goal of this Product Realization and Environmental Manufacturing Innovative
Systems (PREMISE) Exploratory Research project is to allow policy-makers to
better allocate research funds by providing an understanding of both the
environmental value and market potential of an emergent technology. Realizing
the energy and resource benefits of emerging materials, depends upon market
success for those materials. This success is driven by the bundle of
characteristics provided by the incumbent and emergent technology. Although
classic value theory can identify the preferred alternative, it provides no
guidance in describing the actual path of adoption. Solely retrospective
analyses are also inappropriate for describing markets confronted with
significant structural changes (e.g., revolutionary materials). A methodology
that addresses the issues that drive a material's potential for
commercialization is needed and will be developed by this project, including: 1)
the cost and performance characteristics necessary to lead to substitution; 2)
the potential for a material I process to achieve those characteristics; 3) the
manner in which material markets evolve in the face of increasing demand; and 4)
the net lifetime impact on resource use provided by an emerging
technology.&lt;br/&gt; The planning activity will assemble an interdisciplinary
team to identify the issues which drive adoption and the methodologies
appropriate to their study. The planning effort will yield a research plan for
assessing such issues and identifying preliminary case studies to guide the
second phase of work. Another objective of this planning project is the
integration of resource use considerations and industrial ecology concepts into
engineering education. The project will focus on the development of
interdisciplinary, case-based courses. The integrated framework that will emerge
from this work will allow decision makers to identify those materials
technologies most likely to make an impact on environmental burden as well as to
understand under what conditions those substitutions will occur.