* 0225670
* ITR Collaborative Research: GEON: A Research Project to Create Cyberinfrastructure for the Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2002,04/30/2007
* Christopher Andronicos, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 04/30/2007
* USD 906,517.00

0225670&lt;br/&gt;Keller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GEOscience Network (GEON)
project seeks to bring leading-edge information management research to bear on
creating a cyberinfrastructure for the solid earth geosciences to interlink
multidisciplinary geoscience data sets in 4D space. The need to manage the
growing amounts of diverse Earth science data has been recognized through a
series of NSF-sponsored community meetings on Geoinformatics. The GEON
collaboration between IT researchers, who represent key technology areas
relevant to GEON, and Earth science researchers, who represent a broad cross
section of Earth science sub-disciplines, will provide the foundation for a
national Geoinformatics program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a pressing need
in the Earth sciences for a national information infrastructure that enables the
community to share databases and tools to enable interdisciplinary analysis of
networked data sets in studying a wide range of phenomena including the
interplay between tectonics and the evolution of sedimentary basins; the role of
mountain building in the evolution of climate and life; broader predictive
understanding and modeling capabilities of geologic hazards, such as earthquakes
and volcanoes; the 4D reconstruction of the Earth through time; and, managing
the natural resources of our planet. Each of these problems requires
interdisciplinary research to discover relationships among Earth science
disciplines, and depends on the community's ability to construct an integrated
geoscience information system. The goal of GEON is to develop the necessary IT
foundations and create such a system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many past and on-
going projects in the geosciences have produced valuable sub-disciplinary and
disciplinary databases. Numerous national centers and organizations such as
IRIS, UNAVCO, the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis (NCEAS),
the Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC), as well as government agencies
such as the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), are contributing research and data to
the community. Building on this base, the imperative now is to take a step
beyond research resulting in disciplinary databases, towards a new paradigm for
interdisciplinary information integration and tool sharing via the creation of
the GEON cyberinfrastructure. The research products and services arising from
GEON will be available to the entire scientific community and will transform the
way in which geoscience research is conducted, opening unprecedented avenues for
research and collaboration and providing the foundation for creating geoscience
collaboratories.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;