* 0226031
* SGER-Lu-Hf and Re-Os Systematics of the Earliest Crust in Antarctica: The Napier Complex of Enderby Land
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Samuel Mukasa, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 05/31/2004
* USD 97,229.00

This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs, allows a US investigator
to participate in integrated geochemical and isotopic investigations of an
unusual suite of ancient rocks from East Antarctica. This project entails a Lu-
Hf and Re-Os isotopic study of the Archean Napier Complex on the East Antarctic
Shield using rock samples collected by two Japanese expeditions to the remote
regions of Mt. Riiser-Larsen and Tonagh Island in 1996-97 and 1998. These
samples are being made available for a collaborative investigation with Japanese
scientists. It is imperative that the work in the US and Japan move ahead
simultaneously. The Japanese team is focusing on rock and mineral major oxide
compositions, Nd, Sr and Pb isotopic compositions, as well as SHRIMP zircon U-Pb
dating on aliquots of these samples. The component of the work supported by this
award focuses specifically on Archean crustal and mantle evolution for which the
Napier Complex has, potentially, some of the best-preserved rocks on Earth. This
project will use the Lu-Hf and Re-Os approach because of increasing recognition
that the Sm-Nd system can be perturbed severely by younger metamorphic and
metasomatic events. Furthermore, presently the number of data for initial Os
isotopic compositions of Archean mafic-ultramafic magmas worldwide is very
small, largely because of post-crystallization alteration events and the
analytical challenges that have only recently been overcome. In collaboration
with Dr. Rick Carlson at the Carnegie Institution, we will attempt to exploit
the freshness of Napier Complex ultramafic and mafic rocks and generate Re-Os
data on several samples. In addition to providing a means of dating rocks that
lack zircon, this approach will yield data critical to the understanding of Os
isotopic evolution of the mantle with its implications for the timing and nature
of crustal recycling, accretion of a late chondritic veneer and possibly core-
mantle exchange through time.