* 0226102
* Collaborative Research: Health Education Assets Library
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Joy Summers-Ables, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Pelaez
* 08/31/2005
* USD 252,838.00

This collections track project is expanding the prototype of the Health
Education Assets Library (HEAL), created in 2000 with funding by the NSF's
National Science Digital Library (NSDL) program. The mission of HEAL is to
become the premier digital library of health science education resources
supporting all levels of teaching, including K-12, undergraduate, professional
health science education as well as patient and consumer education. The
foundation upon which the HEAL digital library is built includes a metadata
schema for health science educational materials, a test collection of
multimedia, and a suite of applications for searching, and contributing
educational resources. In addition, partnerships with two health science
institutions have been forged: the National Library of Medicine and the
Association of American Medical colleges, both of which strongly support HEAL's
mission. These partnerships have facilitated the formation of a rapidly growing
network of institutions that have expressed interest in collaborating with HEAL-
either by donating teaching resources to the HEAL collection or by allowing
bridges to their collections. Also, HEAL is conducting a national study to
identify the obstacles that would need to be removed in order to foster a
climate of free exchange of educational tools. The outcomes of this study are
instrumental in articulating a collection development strategy and strongly
suggest the adoption of a peer-review process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HEAL is
dramatically increasing the number of teaching resources that can be accessed
through HEAL, while at the same time adhering to strict quality assurance
principles. Specifically, the project is providing: 1) access to tens of
thousands of resources through incorporation of existing collections as well as
building bridges to specialized libraries of health sciences materials; 2)
customized interfaces for specific health science education constituencies
(teachers, students and life-long learners); 3) a process assuring the high
quality of the materials (including peer review) and compliance with Federal
regulations; 4) tight integration within the NSDL by adopting Core Integration
(CI) services, such as metadata harvesting, and by collaborating with other life
science collections; and 5) a plan for continuing growth and sustenance of HEAL.
With HEAL expanded to a full-fledged library, health science teachers and
learners can access learning-teaching materials through one powerful search
utility and at the same time judge their quality and usability.&lt;br/&gt;