* 0226455
* Research Starter Grant
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Carlos Crocker, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2003
* USD 50,000.00

The stress related to prolonged aquatic submergence is the focus of this
research proposal. This work attempts to quantify levels of circulating
catecholamines in chronically submerged freshwater turtles and will provide
useful background information for future studies on diving in turtles.
Freshwater turtles typically employ one of two well-documented physiological
homeostatic mechanisms for surviving submergence in water for long periods.
First, 'thin-skinned' turtles (softshells; Apalone spinifera, musk turtles;
Sternotherus odoratus, and painted turtles, Chrysemys picta) that overwinter in
streams, ponds, or shallow lakes, rely on extrapulmonary mechanisms of gas
exchange to provide sufficient oxygen for metabolism and carbon dioxide
excretion. In essence, these turtles can remain aerobic throughout the winter by
exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide via extrapulmonary gas exchange sites that
include the buccal cavity, the cloacal bursae, and the thin skin near the
proximal aspect of the limbs. When metabolic demand for oxygen is low, (e.g.
during winter submergence when water temperatures are near freezing) oxygen
demand can be met by these comparatively 'low capacity' gas exchange sites.
Another strategy for operating cellular machinery during long-term aquatic
submergence is to burrow into the anoxic substrate (mud) and produce ATP
anaerobically. This second strategy presumably minimizes access to turtles by
predators and ectoparasites, but usually results in severe metabolic and ionic
disturbances. Nevertheless, turtles that dive underwater for long periods, and
employ either strategy, experience apnea. Thus they do not breathe using their
lungs, and the success of either strategy depends upon the interactions among
abiotic factors (i.e. water temperature, dissolved oxygen and carbon dioxide
levels, and perhaps water pH) and biotic factors related mostly to anatomical
correlates (i.e. thickness of skin, presence of cloacal bursae, cardiovascular
and respiratory adjustments). Apnea, with or without hypoxia or anoxia is a
stressful experience and catecholamines are released into the blood stream as a
result. Release of stress hormones in response to 'stressful' situations can be
adaptive, but chronic production and secretion of stress hormones (epinephrine
and cortisol) usually leads to immunosuppression, morbidity and ultimately,
mortality. This research will track the changes in stress hormone concentrations
during normoxic and hypoxic/anoxic exposure. These data on stress hormone levels
will be interpreted in the context of additional data concerning the effects of
long-term submergence on cardiovascular function (including systemic, pulmonary,
gastrointestinal, and renal blood flows) in freshwater turtles, which will be
gathered in these studies as well. This project will produce qualitative and
quantitative data that will be instrumental in helping biologists understand
aspects of cardiorespiratory physiology in diving reptiles, particularly
turtles.