* 0226121
* Superrigidity, Actions on Manifolds and CAT(0) Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* David Fisher, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2006
* USD 106,494.00

The proposed research studies the interaction between
dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems and geometry. Work of Furstenberg, Mostow and
Margulis&lt;br/&gt;shows that understanding certain dynamical systems is
an&lt;br/&gt;important tool in the study geometric properties of symmetric
and&lt;br/&gt;locally symmetric spaces. . One important property of
symmetric&lt;br/&gt;spaces is that they have non-positive curvature.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigator plans to extend this work in several inter-
related&lt;br/&gt;directions. The study of symmetric spaces will be generalized
to&lt;br/&gt;include more general spaces of non-positive curvature as well
as&lt;br/&gt;more general maps between symmetric spaces. This raises
the&lt;br/&gt;possibility of purely dynamical applications. The group
of&lt;br/&gt;diffeomorphisms of a compact manifold acts on the space
of&lt;br/&gt;square-integrable Riemannian metrics, which is naturally
an&lt;br/&gt;infinite-dimensional space of non-positive curvature.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigator will attempt to exploit these relationships to
prove&lt;br/&gt;long-standing conjectures of
Zimmer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamical systems is an important and relatively
young field of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics that investigates the evolution of physical
or&lt;br/&gt;mathematical systems over time (e.g. fluid flow). New ideas
from&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems theory such as chaos and fractals have had
a&lt;br/&gt;profound impact on our perception of the world. One of
the&lt;br/&gt;deepest and most influential mathematical applications
of&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems has been the study of geometric properties
of&lt;br/&gt;spaces with "many symmetries". The proposed research will
extend&lt;br/&gt;our understanding of this deep connection between geometry
and&lt;br/&gt;dynamics.