* 0226785
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Modeling Somerset Monongahela Village Organization Within a Chronological Framework Developed Through AMS Dating of Curated Organic Remains
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Christopher Carr, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 9,885.00

With National Science Foundation support, Mr. Bernard K. Means will determine
the ages of a dozen American Indian village sites located in the rugged
Allegheny Mountains region of southwestern Pennsylvania. The American Indian
farmers who built and lived in these villages vanished long before the first
Europeans settled this area. How these people maintained vital and vibrant
farming communities in this sometime hostile terrain, and for how many
centuries, remain mysteries. Direct knowledge of their ring-shaped village
communities-which consisted of a ring of houses built around a central open
plaza-is limited to what can be determined through archeological research. Most
of these villages were excavated by federally-funded work relief projects during
the Great Depression. Mr. Means has examined records and artifacts from these
1930s excavations in museum collections. He found that these Depression-era
archeologists used relatively modern techniques that compare favorably to those
used today. Dr. Carr and Mr. Means will use their combined expertise in modern
archeological techniques and scientific tools to build on the legacy of these
earlier village excavations. Site maps for these ring-shaped villages will be
examined using new anthropological models and computer-assisted spatial analysis
to address a number of questions: 1. Did villagers arrange their houses to
enhance cooperation and minimize conflicts? 2. Did families work independently
while farming or did some families regularly combine their efforts? 3. Did
families gather into clan-like groups that each owned part of a village? 4. Was
each village separated into two larger social divisions that perhaps competed in
games, performed group ceremonies, and buried each other's dead? 5. Were later
villages more efficiently planned, reflecting lessons learned by earlier
generations of villagers? These questions cannot be answered without knowing the
ages of the village sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science
Foundation funding, each village site will be dated using accelerator mass
spectrometry (AMS) applied to the burned remains of past meals discovered still
clinging to pottery-vessel fragments found by Mr. Means in museum collections.
This research is important for several reasons. It will help archaeologists
working in the Northeastern U.S. to understand the changing relationships
between village lifeways and farming. There is a tenuous understanding
throughout the region regarding the timing of the first appearance of farming
villages and what material and social changes resulted. This research will also
demonstrate that new concepts and methods can be applied to stored museum
collections to answer questions undreamt of by their original excavators. This
will generate a greater understanding of the past and highlight the importance
of maintaining collections for future study.&lt;br/&gt;