* 0226848
* Support of the 3rd Annual International Conference on High Resolution Sector Field ICPMS (Atlanta, Georgia; October, 2002)
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* A. Mohamad Ghazi, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 09/30/2003
* USD 20,010.00

0226848&lt;br/&gt;Ghazi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the 3rd
annual International Conference/Workshop on High Resolution Sector Field ICPMS
to be held at the Department of Geology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA
on October 2-5, 2002. This international conference is a continuation of the
previous two successful meetings that were held in Norfolk, Virginia, (2000),
and in Vienna, Austria (2001). There are now more than 300 single collector and
nearly 100 multicollector high resolution ICP mass spectrometers around the
world. We request funding to organize this meeting to bring together all the
scientists around the world who work in the field of high resolution ICP mass
spectrometry and accessory instrumentation (e.g., laser ablation, HPLC, CE,
Microdrill techniques). This conference is intended to be a forum for the
exchange of ideas and the presentation of work completed or in progress, for
comment and discussion among international research groups working in the same
field, as well as with research colleagues from the manufacturers to discuss
future goals and improvements with the instrumentation. The conference will
feature newest development in the field of high resolution plasma mass
spectrometry, and we encourage participation of users from all kinds of
applications. We specially encourage the participation of graduate students and
post-docs. We will summarize the outcomes from this conference in the form of a
report documenting directions and priorities in ICPMS and HR-ICPMS based-
research. We anticipate that this report will comment on the development of
useful and appropriate instrument-based topics which can be included in
undergraduate and graduate geosciences curricula.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;