* 0226397
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Prehistoric Resource Depression and Intensification on Kodiak Island, Alaska
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Julie Stein, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2003
* USD 11,950.00

National Science Foundation support will allow Robert Kopperl, an anthropology
graduate student at the University of Washington, to finish his dissertation
research: testing the proposition that prehistoric hunter-gatherers had an
impact on their prey populations which in turn affected their diets and
ultimately their social organization. The geographic focus is on Kodiak Island,
Alaska, where the native Alaskan Alutiiq hunted sea mammals and fished for over
7000 years before Russian colonization. For almost a century, anthropologists
have proposed that intensive salmon harvesting played a large role in the
development of socially complex cultures on the north Pacific coast, but no
cause for this intensification has been determined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation research tests the hypotheses that harvest pressure on local prey
populations caused a dietary shift from larger-bodied sea mammals to a greater
focus on smaller-bodied marine fish and salmon, and that this shift preceded,
and therefore may have caused, the development of social complexity on Kodiak
Island. Testing these hypotheses will involve a combination of analytical
techniques, including the examination of animal bones recovered from several
archaeological sites spanning over 6000 years for evidence of prey choices and
butchery and carcass transportation patterns by the occupants of the sites.
Additionally, paleoclimatic data for the region during this period will be
examined as another agent that could have affected prey populations. Finally,
changes in hunting and fishing tool technology will be explored for the role it
may have played in changing prey preference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support for
these hypotheses can be seen in declines in the proportion of sea mammal bone to
fish bone over time in archaeological assemblages, as well as changes in age
structures of the individual animals that the bones represent, depending on the
behavioral habits of each species. Changes in the parts of carcasses deposited
at each site will be informative of the distance foragers traveled from the site
to hunt and fish. Finally, how long ago these changes occurred will be
correlated with the known dates of the first evidence of cultural complexity on
Kodiak Island, approximately 1500-2000 years ago. The oldest of the
archaeological sites examined is very poorly dated; therefore charcoal and bone
samples recovered from the site will be submitted for radiocarbon dating.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research combines zooarchaeological, paleoclimatic,
and artifactual data for the first analysis of its kind with this time-depth,
examining prehistoric subsistence changes on Kodiak Island from shortly after
initial colonization over 7000 years ago until Russian contact. Testing the
proposition that human or climatic impacts on prey populations had a causal role
in the development of cultural complexity will offer a theoretically grounded
starting point to further investigate the development of prehistoric social
complexity on the coast. Additionally, this research has implications for future
management of certain animal populations by examining their interactions with
humans in the past. &lt;br/&gt;