* 0226779
* Doctoral Dissertation:  Sources of Power among Mapuche (Araucanian) Chiefdoms in South-Central Chile (A. D. 1500-1900)
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2002,04/30/2005
* Tom Dillehay, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2005
* USD 11,990.00

Under the direction of Dr. Tom D. Dillehay, Mr. Ricardo Fernandez will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. He will survey and conduct limited
excavations in the Palguin River Valley, a small locale in south-central Chile.
The purpose of this investigation is to locate and recover the archaeological
signatures for the emergence and development of prehistoric power and authority
among the Mapuche people during the period from A.D. 1500 to
1900.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mapuche, or Araucanians, are virtually unique in
the New World for their long and successful resistance to foreign invasion. From
the early 1500s to the 1880s, the Mapuche not only managed to resist the advance
of Inka, Spanish, and Chilean armies, but actually expanded their own influence
over large areas of Argentina. Moreover, this period witnessed the development
of an independent, culturally thriving Mapuche political entity. Concomitantly,
this period was characterized by powerful, wealthy chiefs rising to and
consolidating their power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent investigations suggest
that in pre-industrial societies, chiefly political power could be obtained from
military, economic, and/or ideological sources. The Palguin valley, an area of
approximately 30 km, offers an excellent opportunity for investigating the
archaeological signatures of chiefly power and authority. Ethnohistorical
documents and preliminary archaeological investigations suggest that in this
small locale, some local Mapuche chiefs achieved their powerful positions as war
leaders, others as ritual administrators, and others as promoters and
beneficiaries of intense commerce and trade. Not yet known are the timing and
circumstances of these individuals' rise to power. To investigate these issues,
an archaeological survey of the valley will be executed, combined with a surface
collection of artifacts and limited excavations of selected sites. It is
expected that this will result in the location and dating of mounds, associated
ceremonial fields, and elite burials, bearing the marks of ideological sources
of power. Likewise, it will result in the identification and dating of forts,
look-outs, and perhaps mortuary evidence of military sources. Furthermore, it
will document the statistically significant differential distribution of exotic
and other prestige materials in both domestic and burial contexts, suggesting
the use of economic sources of power. In addition, the temporal and contextual
evidence for the use of these sources of power will be revealed. This will
demand comparing and contrasting archaeological evidence to ethnohistorical and
ethnographic data, as well as precise radiocarbon and thermoluminiscence dating.
Eventually, this will suggest when chiefs began to obtain power and authority,
how this process developed, what the sources of power were, and under what
circumstances were they selected, combined, or
abandoned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides illuminating the emergence and
development of chiefly power and authority at the local level, this study may
reveal the broader circumstances under which Mapuche political authority and
power developed in similar areas throughout south-central Chile. At a more
general level, this research will allow anthropologists and ethnohistorians to
gain a better understanding of similar processes that may have been at work in
prehistoric and early historic intermediate-level societies elsewhere in the
Americas.&lt;br/&gt;