* 0226961
* US-France Cooperative Research (INRIA):  Control of Interactive Structures with Dynamic Shells
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Irena Lasiecka, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 09/30/2007
* USD 18,000.00

0226961&lt;br/&gt;Lasiecka&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for US-
France collaboration in applied mathematics involves research teams at the
University of Virginia and the Institut National pour la Recherche en
Informatique et en Automatique (INRIA) in Rocquencourt and Sophia Antipolis,
France. Led by Irena Lasiecka in the US and Michel Bernadou in France, the
researchers propose to study problems in the general area of control theory
models described by partial differential equations. The topics are related to
stabilization and optimal control of dynamical shell models where control
actions and sensing are implemented via smart materials technology. These
include piezoceramic or peizoelectric elements, magnetostrictive devices and
rheological fluids. The theoretical analysis, with a focus on inverse type of
estimates, will culminate with numerical algorithms and convergence analysis.
Two approaches to control modeling will be pursued. The first, piezoelectric
shell modeling, will be investigated by the French team. This is complemented by
US expertise in an approach based on piezoelectric patches attached to a curved
wall. These complementary approaches will lead to two different control
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of parallel
proposals to the NSF and INRIA. NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses
for annual visits to France by the US investigator and graduate student. INRIA
will support visits by French researchers to the United States. The project will
advance understanding of control models and their applications to smart
materials technology and materials engineering.&lt;br/&gt;