* 0226241
* A Digital IdeaKeeper For K-12: NSDL Scaffolded Portal Services for Information Analysis and Synthesis
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Christopher Quintana, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Barbara N. Anderegg
* 09/30/2006
* USD 473,798.00

While national organizations such as the AAAS and the NRC can call for K-12
students to carry out science inquiry activities, students must be provided with
supports for such challenging intellectual activity. Digital libraries, such as
the National Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Education Digital
Library (NSDL) can be a vital part of science inquiry by giving students access
to range of scientific information and resources: websites, data sets, images,
etc. In reality, NSDL-compliant digital libraries, in particular, must go beyond
simply services that support students in finding information and also provide
scaffolded services to support students in analyzing and synthesizing the
information they find in their searches with respect to the driving questions
they are investigating in their science inquiry projects. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the needs to (1) design and build the
IdeaKeeper, a specialized scaffolded NSDL portal and services for K-12 science
learners and (2) deploy versions of IdeaKeeper in Detroit middle school
classrooms to assess the impact of such supportive digital library services on
learning. IdeaKeeper incorporates scaffolds, or software features to support
students in analyzing library resources and synthesizing the information into
arguments addressing their driving questions. By incorporating IdeaKeeper into
science curriculum units, IdeaKeeper is classroom-tested to assess the
effectiveness of the analysis/synthesis scaffolds and to articulate new
scaffolds and capabilities extending current learner-centered digital library
projects. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Thus the impact of the IdeaKeeper project
includes: &lt;br/&gt;- the specialized IdeaKeeper portal and associated services
as components for the NSDL for other learners to use and other researchers to
extend with new functionalities and scaffolds. &lt;br/&gt;- the demonstration of
how an NSDL-compliant set of services can indeed support K-12 science learning.
The impact of the IdeaKeeper scaffolds and functionality is assessed and
articulated in terms of how well they support students in doing information
analysis/synthesis and how much students learn about information
analysis/synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;- the IdeaKeeper project acts as a guidepost to
what new services are still needed to more effectively support science inquiry
and science learning in K-12. &lt;br/&gt;