* 0226726
* UMEB: Travel to Animal Behavior Society Annual Meetings
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Emilia Martins, Animal Behavior Society
* Standard Grant
* Sally E. O'Connor
* 06/30/2006
* USD 60,000.00

A variety of programs have been developed with the intent of increasing the
number of undergraduates from underrepresented groups entering graduate schools
and later pursuing research careers in science. While minority participation has
increased in some fields of science, other fields have seen little change. No
one knows all the factors contributing to the low participation of groups
underrepresented in the field of animal behavior, but issues include a lack of
knowledge of career opportunities and the image of the field. For example,
bright students from traditionally underrepresented groups are often steered
towards careers in health sciences if they show an early interest in biology.
They may have never seen in textbooks, or heard of through the electronic media,
anyone pursuing a career in animal behavior that actually looks like them.

The objective of this project is to increase the number of undergraduate
students from historically underrepresented groups pursuing graduate degrees in
the field of animal behavior. This goal will be pursued through encouraging
their active participation and networking with majority and minority
undergraduates, graduate students and professionals in the field at the Animal
Behavior Society's annual meeting.

Under this four-year grant, about 15 undergraduate students per year will
receive Diversity Travel Awards. They will be selected on the basis of
statements indicating financial need, potential to increase diversity at the ABS
meeting, how animal behavior fits into their future career plans, and what they
hope to gain by attending the ABS meetings. Travel awards will be given only to
students who agree to stay for the entire meeting, and priority will be given to
students who will present their own research.

A two-tiered mentoring program will be developed. Students receiving travel
awards will be paired with faculty members or graduate students who will help to
orient the undergraduates to the meeting and maintain correspondence with them
afterwards. In addition, all undergraduates attending the annual meeting will be
given the opportunity to select mentors at an opening dinner for students and
mentors, and roundtable discussions on such topics as preparing for graduate
school will be organized for all undergraduates attending the annual meeting.

The ABS will advertise the opportunity by a poster at the annual meeting, by
advertising in the meeting programs of organizations of minority scientists, by
sending printed invitations to institutions and programs with large enrollments
of minority undergraduates, by sending e-mail to all members, and through its
Web site. The meeting registration form will have a line on which potential
mentors can indicate their interest.

This grant is awarded under the National Science Foundation's program of
Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology, which is designed to enable
academic institutions and their partners, as well as professional societies, to
enhance access to careers in environmental biology (broadly defined) for
undergraduate students, particularly those from underrepresented groups.