* 0226185
* BioSciEd Net (BEN) Collaborative: Cycle 2
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Yolanda George, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 09/30/2005
* USD 900,007.00

The Biosci Ed Net (BEN) Collaborative is continuing development of a portal site
and six (6) digital library collections. The BEN Collaborative is composed of 12
professional societies and coalitions for biology education with an interest in
transforming the teaching and learning of undergraduate biology. The BEN portal
provides users with seamless access to accurate and reliable undergraduate
biology resources In this phase of the project activities
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Enhancing the BEN portal site to increase
security, the content and services offered to users, and to support the
anticipated increase in contributors/users, collections Partners, and
resources..&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Modifications to or development of the
concurrent collections six (6) BEN Partners. These Partners include American
Physiological Society (APS), Ecological Society of America (ESA), American
Society for Microbiology (ASM), American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology (ASBMB), the Human Anatomy and Physiology Society (HAPS), and Science's
Signal Transduction Knowledge Environment (STKE). These developments and
modifications are being done in a manner that is consistent with BEN and NSDL
specifications. In addition, some Partners are developing digital library
features that will be adopted by other BEN Partners and useful for other NSDL
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Increasing the number of learning objects in
collections and in the BEN catalog, either through acquisition of existing
collections or submissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With prior support of the NSDL
program members of the BEN Collaborative have:&lt;br/&gt;a) Developed one
portal, two web sites, and two digital collections, including: (1) the prototype
of the BEN portal, http://www.biosciednet.org/portal/; (2) the BEN documentation
site, http://www.ben.e-guana.net/ ; (3) the BEN announcement site,
http://www.biosciednet.org; (4) the ESA digital collection,
http://www.ecoed.net/index.php; and (5) the APS digital
collection,&lt;br/&gt;http://www.apsarchives.org/main/index.asp. In addition,
the existing ASM digital collection,&lt;br/&gt;www.MicrobeLibrary.org, was
modified for resource harvesting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;b) Six hundred and eighty
(680) resources have already been harvested or cataloged from APS, ASM, ESA,
NABT, STKE, and SOT. In Cycle 2, we expect to harvest at least another 2,500
resources from another 8 collections or sites. These 8 collections or sites
include Access Excellence, ASBMB, HAPS, Heal Education Asset Library (HEAL) at
UCLA, Evolution and the Nature of Science Institute at Indiana University,
International Association of Medical Science Educators (IAMSE), the National
Biological Information Infrastructure (NBII), and the Human Genome Project
Information Web site at Oakridge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collectively about 10,000
monthly visitors used the digital collections or web resources of BEN Partners.
By 2004, we expect 20,000 monthly visitors to use the BEN digital
collections.&lt;br/&gt;