* 0226320
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Tree-Rings, Climate, and History in Central Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2004
* David Stahle, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 09/30/2004
* USD 8,000.00

This research will use new tree-ring chronologies from Mexico in conjunction
with historical records to reconstruct the history of extreme drought/wetness
events and examine their impact on the environment and society in central Mexico
for the last 300 to 500 years. Initial analyses of recently developed tree-ring
chronologies from central Mexico indicate that tree growth there is strongly
influenced by extreme climatic events such as drought. Several periods of
abnormally poor growth apparent in the tree-ring record are coincident with
drought-induced crop failures, famine, and attendant social disruption in
central Mexico. The primary objective of this project will be to develop the
first robust tree-ring reconstructions of precipitation in central Mexico, and
use this data to validate and quantify historical records of extreme climate and
related socio-environmental impacts. A variety of primary and secondary
historical records will be consulted, including records from the Archivo General
de la Nacion in Mexico City. Another objective of this project will be to
reconstruct the timing of monsoon onset in central-southern Mexico and examine
the consequences of abnormally early or late monsoon seasons. The timing and
seasonal distribution of rainfall is an important factor in crop production in
central Mexico, and several of our new tree-ring chronologies are well
correlated with the onset date of the North American Monsoon System. The
precipitation reconstructions will be developed using transfer functions between
individual and regionally averaged tree-ring chronologies from central Mexico
and precipitation data at both local and regional scales. The reconstruction of
monsoon onset date will utilize the complete network of tree-ring chronologies
in Mexico to derive the best relationship between the tree-ring record and onset
date. Monsoon onset date will be determined using threshold analysis of daily
precipitation data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central Mexico is one of the most
populous regions on earth. Reconstructions of past climate using tree-rings and
other environmental data indicate that northern Mexico and the southwestern
United States have experienced extreme climate fluctuations over the past 500 to
1000 years. There is an extensive body of historical documentation regarding the
impact of climate on agriculture and society in central Mexico. But long,
climate-sensitive tree-ring records have previously not been available for this
region. The tree-ring reconstructions of precipitation and monsoon onset will
represent new environmental records for the study of past climate and its impact
on ecosystems and society in Mexico. The results of this research will be
disseminated through conference presentations and journals, and by contribution
to the International Tree-Ring Data Bank at the National Geophysical Data
Center. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;