* 0226421
* Simulation-Based Learning Systems for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics:  Issues in Design and Assessment; Washington DC
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Henry Kelly, Federation of American Scientists
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 09/30/2003
* USD 75,000.00

0226421&lt;br/&gt;Kelly&lt;br/&gt;Federation of American
Scientists&lt;br/&gt;"Simulation-Based Learning Systems for Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics: Issues in Design and
Assessment"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a one-year effort to examine
current uses of simulation-based education and training and identify a research
framework for designing and evaluating advanced simulation capabilities in
future learning systems. The project involves: 1) A literature review of the
current use of simulation-based education and training. 2) A survey of the major
simulation-based training systems now available in military, commercial,
colleges and universities. 3) Interviews with educators and experts who are
implementing simulation-based training systems to determine the number of users,
cost of development, assessments of effectiveness, new technologies under active
development, recommendations for future research. 3) A preliminary report
reflecting the state-of-.the-art in simulation-based education and training
systems, expectations for future systems, and detailed recommendations for
future research. 4) A draft research plan for understanding how to use
simulation-based learning systems, building demonstrations, and evaluating the
effectiveness of existing and experimental systems. 5) A focused workshop to
review and discuss the draft research plans, with the goal of reaching consensus
on research priorities. Workshop participants will include individuals who are
experts in learning science and information technologies. The Workshop projected
date in Washington, DC, is January or February 2003. 6) A final report
reflecting the state of the art in simulation based learning, expectations for
future systems, and detailed recommendations for future research. The final
report will be published twelve months following receipt of funding. This
project is relevant to EIA's new initiative in Technology-Enhanced
Learning.&lt;br/&gt;