* 0226565
* Conference: Sixth International Symposium On Cytochome P450 Biodiversity, to be held  in Los Angeles, California, August 20-25, 2002
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Mary Schuler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 07/31/2003
* USD 5,000.00

The cytochrome P450 monooxygenase superfamily of heme-containing enzymes
contains a wide range of monooxygenase activities that make them critically
important to virtually all life forms. In recent years, they have been shown to
be important in human growth and development because they are involved in
steroid biosynthesis and also in many pharmacological areas because they are
critical for the activation and/or detoxification of drugs in human and
vertebrate models. In a rapidly and ever-expanding area, they have been shown to
be important in insect and plant growth and development because of their
involvement in biosynthetic pathways for insect and plant hormones and in
agricultural areas because they mediate the metabolism of herbicides,
insecticides, fungicides and environmental pollutants.

Realizing the growing importance of this area of plant and insect P450 research,
the organizing committee for the International Symposium Series on P450
Biodiversity branched from the more classical area of vertebrate P450 research
represented in the Symposium Series on Microsomes and Drug Oxidations to create
an independent and focused series devoted to microorganisms, plants and insects.
For the Sixth International Symposium on P450 Biodiversity: Functional
Biochemistry & Molecular Biology of P450 Cytochromes in Microorganisms, Plants
and Insects, the organizers have endeavored to continue the examples set in the
five previous meetings in this series by providing platforms for the
presentation of approaches for expression analysis of model P450s as well as
functional analysis of the numerous P450s existing in these non-vertebrate
systems. The goal is to provide a forum for discussing leading research in the
field through a single lecture series of 48 presentations interspersed with
scheduled poster presentations and ample time for informal discussions. With
this goal in mind, funds are requested to help support travel expenses for
competitively identified advanced predoctoral and postdoctoral students.

The International Advisory Board and Scientific Organizing Committee for this
Series contains representatives from seven different countries including eleven
from the United States. The meeting will be held August 20-25, 2002 at the
Conference Center on the UCLA campus and hosted by Armand J. Fulco, Professor of
Biochemistry at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). Dr. Fulco's
research has focused on characterization of bacterial cytochrome P450s through a
variety of world-wide collaborations. It is expected that attendance at this
meeting will be approximately 200 with participation from the United States,
Europe and the Pacific Rim in approximately equal proportions.