* 0226279
* Collaborative Research:  A Digital Library Collection for Visually Exploring United States Demographic and Social Change
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2007
* Andrew Beveridge, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 03/31/2007
* USD 389,072.00

This collaborative project between CUNY and UCLA is a collection of web-based
materials that will enable depiction and exploration of growth and social change
in the United States since its beginnings. It is accessible to students from
elementary through postgraduate school, library users, the media, and all others
interested in relating a variety of demographic and other data to one another.
It is being implemented so a high level of technical sophistication is not
required of users to visualize the results in the form of maps and charts, to
download the data for further analysis, and to relate the data to specific
issues in the social sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically the following
elements will be part of the project:&lt;br/&gt;1) Census data and maps at the
county level from 1790 through 2000, which depict the sweeping
change.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;2) Census data and maps at the tract level,
beginning with the largest cities in 1910 and expanding until 1990, when they
become available for the entire country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Data from the
street and road layer of the Census, which are part of the national
&lt;br/&gt;map of the United States and used to define Census tracts and other
Census geography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) Available images and text that can be
geographically located and related to the underlying demography. The images
recorded by the award winning photojournalist Camilo Vergara, who has documented
areas of the large cities for the past 30 years, illustrate the demographic
material. The demographics, in turn, provide contextual information for his
photos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5) A system for visually displaying and
manipulating the maps, data, images, and texts. This effort draws on several
other projects, including, the National Historic Geographic Information System
(NHGIS), Visualizing and Exploring United States Urban and Rural Social Change,
1790-2000 --Interactive Multimedia and Web Based Tools (both funded by NSF), and
the Great American History Machine, as well digitization efforts in New York,
Los Angeles, Philadelphia, Indianapolis, Chicago and
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In short, the digital library serves as a
demographic, geographic and social grid for the United States. The grid also can
accommodate the addition of other materials on land use, transportation, health
care, and the like. Examples are provided, especially for the major metropolitan
areas of New York and Los Angeles. All materials are developed in standard
formats and integrated with a dynamic mapping system and an interactive
multimedia viewer to provide a user-friendly interface. Materials are freely
available for interactive use, downloading, sharing and enhancement on publicly
accessible servers at UCLA and CUNY. Also, they are being made available to
other digital repositories. The NHGIS at the Minnesota Population Center is
distributing the materials, which ultimately will be archived along with the
NHGIS materials at the Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social
Research.&lt;br/&gt;