* 0226059
* Evaluation of Mesoscale Convective System Rainfall Predictability in the Upper Midwest Considering System Morphology
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2006
* Moti Segal, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 10/31/2006
* USD 285,746.00

Prediction of warm season convective rainfall remains a challenge, particularly
for systems occurring in the absence of orographic or strong larger-scale
forcing. Under a prior award, the Principal Investigator focused on improving
numerical model Quantitative Precipitation Forecast (QPF) guidance for summer
convection. The present research provides a continuation of this research, with
a goal of improved use of mixed-physics ensemble guidance, while examining also
physical processes associated with mesoscale convective system (MCS) morphology
and evolution in the Upper Midwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal
Investigator will explore MCS evolution and morphology, with primary emphasis on
differences between systems with trailing stratiform regions and those with
leading stratiform regions, by analyzing the outputs of fine grid spacing
versions of the NCEP Eta and WRF (Weather Research and Forecasting) models. The
use of different models and convection-related physical parameterizations will
allow the following two goals to be pursued. First, careful analysis of observed
MCSs and comparison with the different mixed model/mixed physics ensemble
members will improve understanding of physical processes important in system
evolution. Also detailed spatial and temporal investigations of the realism of
the simulated MCSs will be pursued. Second, it is suggested that mixed
model/mixed physics ensembles will be one of the most direct means of improving
warm season mesoscale QPF. This approach will assist in improving QPF,
particularly because the emphasis on different MCS morphology will reveal
strengths and weaknesses within model parameterizations of physical processes
important in the development and evolution of the different MCS modes. This
analysis will additionally help improve understanding of the origins of
diversity in model forecasts, which should assist in design of optimal mixed-
physics ensembles. The researchers also will run selective cloud-resolving scale
simulations for each case to which physical processes and QPF will be compared
with the runs using parameterized convection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal
Investigator will implement new strategies for verification of high resolution
models that will improve understanding about verification/evaluation of rainfall
on refined spatial and temporal scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Completion of the
proposed research will improve understanding of the development and evolution of
convective systems in the Midwest. In addition, the research will facilitate
future advances in mesoscale meteorology by establishing the most beneficial
uses of refined resolution ensemble guidance for warm season convective system
forecasting.&lt;br/&gt;