* 0226221
* Dissemination of the Inroads (SIGCSE Bulletin) Special Issue on "Women and Computing"
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Denise Gurer, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Burton
* 07/31/2003
* USD 35,880.00

&lt;br/&gt;EIA 0226221&lt;br/&gt;Impagliazzo, John&lt;br/&gt;Hofstra
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides partial support
for preparation and targeted dissemination of a special issue of the ACM SIGCSE
Bulletin--a special issue on "Women and Computing". Women are significantly
underrepresented in computing and this funding supports dissemination of the
special issue to K-12 teachers attending the National Educational Computing
Conference (NECC) at which K-12 teachers represent a large segment of the
attendees. This particular audience is believed to be very important in helping
to inform students at a relatively early age of the opportunities in this field.
Further, it is expected that the availability of this special issue to this
particular group may have the potential in the long term to begin to help
alleviate the problem of underrepresentation of women in this field. Volunteers
at the conference disseminate the free issues to the K-12 teachers from the ACM
exhibit booth. The Editor-in-Chief of the SIGCE newsletter and the two ACM-W Co-
chairs oversee the dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other copies of the
special issue are being distributed to university department chairs, to
attendees at the Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing, to ACM Special
Interest Group (SIG) Chairs, and to a number of ACM sponsored conferences. These
latter dissemination efforts are being carried out with support from the ACM
Executive Committee and a number of other ACM groups, including the ACM Council,
ACM-W, and the SIG Project Fund.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;