* 0226410
* SGER:    Identification of General Probability Models for a Taxonomy of Manufacturing Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2002,10/31/2004
* Norma Hubele, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 10/31/2004
* USD 99,936.00

The objectives of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) are to: 1)
Create general probability models for key quality characteristics of a subset of
the taxonomy of manufacturing processes. The selected taxonomy will specify the
following classifications (a) the type of Geometric dimensioning and tolerancing
(GD&amp;T) requirements for form and location. (b) the type of manufacturing
process and product material; and (c) the type of inspection device. The models
will be chosen based on their accuracy and generality in representing the
realistic behavior of process outputs; and 2) For each of the general
probability models, define an appropriate summary statistic that incorporates
the engineering requirements and the random nature of the process behavior.
Having studied the output from various materials, processes measurement devices,
complex GD&amp;T acceptance zones, and normal/non-normal univariate/multivariate
distributions in the first part of this research, we plan to define a set of
statistics useful for summarizing performance and setting goals. Summary
statistics will be chosen based on their distributional properties and will be
used to define sample size requirements and critical acceptance values useful
for supporting vendor relations and setting process performance
goals.&lt;br/&gt; The results of this research will constitute a complete
methodology for capturing and summarizing the behavior of inspection data (i.e..
probability' models). Data sets provided by industrial partners (Intel.
Motorola. and Simula Safety Systems) will provide the modeling environment and
validation of research. The project's deliverable will be a published catalogue
of probability models that can be directly mapped to form and location GD&amp;T
requirements, manufacturing processes, materials and measurement systems for a
subset of entries in the manufacturing taxonomy. Should this research prove
successful. a follow-on project will be prepared for more categories in the
taxonomy. In total, this research project is expected to have usable models for
industrial decision-making, planning, and analysis as well as the theoretical
contributions in performance summary statistics.