* 0226739
* Bone craft production in early medieval Ireland
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Pam Crabtree, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00

Supported by the National Science Foundation, James Boyle will undertake the
examination of bone and antler artifact production from early medieval Ireland,
c. AD 400 - 800. Irish society, while adopting some aspects of Roman culture,
most notably Christianity, did not receive an impetus from this contact to
develop into a unified state. Instead the island remained a decentralized, non-
urban and mainly pastoral society dominated by numerous competing kingdoms.
Because of this, Ireland has traditionally been ignored in discussions of social
complexity and the emergence of urban states after the European "Dark Ages."
Recent research however suggests that political power was increasingly being
focused in the hands of secular elites towards the end of this period and that
Ireland may have been a significantly complex society, yet one that differed
from its European neighbors. One of the hallmarks of this increasing level of
social complexity is the diversity and decoration of dress fasteners. Irish
bronze brooches and pins are recognized as some of the most important pieces of
Celtic artwork, and during the medieval period these objects would have
represented the wealth and social standing of the individual wearer. The focus
of this research will be on bone and antler pins, a largely overlooked category
of dress fastener. Often considered to be inferior copies of metal pins, these
personal items have been described as status objects marking the lower classes
in Irish society. One of the ways early medieval elites solidified their power
was through the control of the production of status objects such as brooches.
This project will examine whether the production of bone pins was likewise
controlled by the upper classes of Irish society.

This project will entail the examination of all excavated early medieval bone
pins and bone working debris from the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland,
UK. Although bone pins have been recognized as unique artifacts of the early
medieval period since the 1930s, few researchers have ever examined the
collection of pins held in the museums of Ireland. The data collected in this
research will be used to construct the first ever typology of Irish medieval
bone pins. Mr. Boyle will combine the distribution and chronological development
of these pins with complementary data from other studies of bronze brooches and
pins to create a comprehensive computerized database of dress fasteners in the
early medieval period. This project will also determine if the production of
bone pins is limited to high status sites or whether bone pins were the
handiwork of the majority of the medieval population. This research will be the
first examination of the production and distribution of any class of bone
artifact from the early medieval period and one of the first studies in Ireland
to incorporate craft production as an element in social development. This
project will not only inform the debate over the growth of elite power in early
medieval Ireland, but also demonstrate how overlooked aspects of the
archaeological record can be utilized in theoretically important ways.