* 0226216
* ReMarkable Texts: A Digital Notepad for the NSDL
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2004
* Andries van Dam, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 10/31/2004
* USD 425,000.00

This Targeted Research project is investigating capabilities for an innovative
pen-based digital notebook to enable users, particularly students, to work and
interact with NSDL's digital materials in a personalized manner. The main
features of the system include viewing, taking notes on, annotating (e.g.
freehand ink, post-it notes, and bidirectional fine-grained hyperlinks),
organizing, and collaborating on multimedia documents, all with the ability to
replay the temporal sequence of one's notes in the contexts in which they were
made. Whiteboarding activities are also supported along with audio facilities to
capture voice commentary digitally and anchor it to a specific document
location. The primary targeted device is a lightweight, high-resolution tablet
computer used in an environment with ubiquitous wireless LAN in frequented areas
(e.g., on a college campus) and a WAN for other areas. However to ensure
widespread usage, the system also works on standard desktop and laptop
computers. Finally, the system includes facilities for personalized organization
of documents and notes, for example folder and outline views, search, and
default support for personal spatial hypertext provided by the basic annotation
and linking facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort extends
Microsoft Research's DISC project (DIStributed Classroom) in the areas
of&lt;br/&gt;collaboration, fine-grained hyperlinking, multidocument journaling
and synchronization, and document&lt;br/&gt;and note organization. In addition
to partnering with Microsoft, the PI and team are working with other NSDL
projects, such as Carnegie Mellon University's Threading Information Pathways
Through NSDL Video, to help integrate the system with the NSDL's existing and
future services and infrastructure. With the capabilities of this project in
hand users of the NSDL are much better able to make the available materials of
NSDL "their own", forming a personalized, hyperlinked portfolio from their
digital library experience that supports a natural and enjoyable process of
learning.&lt;br/&gt;