* 0226152
* The Development and Use of Digital Collections to Support Interdisciplinary Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Thomas Whaley, Washington and Lee University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2005
* USD 301,674.00

The primary purpose of this project is to mentor emerging creators of digital
collections for educational uses, especially those that are multidisciplinary
and integrate science and technology with the humanities. The Alsos Digital
Library for Nuclear Issues (http://alsos.wlu.edu, DUE Award 0085657) is a web-
based searchable collection of approximately 500 annotated references to
multimedia resources that offers a broad, balanced perspective on current and
historical topics relating to nuclear issues. The Library, due to its relatively
small scale, interdisciplinary focus, inclusion of multimedia materials, and
diverse users make it an excellent example of digital collection concepts. This
project is using the Alsos Digital Library as a model for educators wishing to
develop their own digital collections in the following
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The Alsos Digital Library model is being
disseminated through a series of workshops. The target audience is educators,
often content experts, who wish to build digital collections associated with
courses, and to make their collections accessible through credible, digital,
searchable, annotated references. Each participant brings an interdisciplinary
topic that is to be developed during the workshop. Discussion topics at the
workshop include collection development, software systems, processes for editing
materials, integration of collections into courses and curricula, evaluation,
and dissemination. Mentorship of workshop participants by the PIs is ongoing
during the award period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The software system developed
for the Alsos Digital Library consists of four interconnected tiers, the user
interface, the search engine, the database system, and the metadata system,
constituting a digital resource locator. Work with this system and training in
related concepts in the workshops is serving as the creative stimulus and model
for educators who are creating their own prototype digital
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. As the Alsos Digital Library evolves,
issues that deal with assessment, maintenance, culling, technology migration,
security, collaboration, and integration into large digital libraries are being
encountered and resolved in cooperation with other NSDL
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant co-funding of this project is
being provided by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the NSF
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences in recognition of the
importance of providing access to digital resources for interdisciplinary
education that involve the physical sciences.