* 0226295
* A Digital Library: Collection for Visually Exploring United States Demographic and Social Change
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2005
* David Halle, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 03/31/2005
* USD 317,674.00

This collaborative project between CUNY and UCLA is a collection of web-based
materials that will enable depiction and exploration of growth and social change
in the United States since its beginnings. It is accessible to students from
elementary through postgraduate school, library users, the media, and all others
interested in relating a variety of demographic and other data to one another.
It is being implemented so a high level of technical sophistication is not
required of users to visualize the results in the form of maps and charts, to
download the data for further analysis, and to relate the data to specific
issues in the social sciences.

Specifically the following elements will be part of the project: 1) Census data
and maps at the county level from 1790 through 2000, which depict the sweeping
change. 2) Census data and maps at the tract level, beginning with the largest
cities in 1910 and expanding until 1990, when they become available for the
entire country.

3) Data from the street and road layer of the Census, which are part of the
national map of the United States and used to define Census tracts and other
Census geography.

4) Available images and text that can be geographically located and related to
the underlying demography. The images recorded by the award winning
photojournalist Camilo Vergara, who has documented areas of the large cities for
the past 30 years, illustrate the demographic material. The demographics, in
turn, provide contextual information for his photos.

5) A system for visually displaying and manipulating the maps, data, images, and
texts. This effort draws on several other projects, including, the National
Historic Geographic Information System (NHGIS), Visualizing and Exploring United
States Urban and Rural Social Change, 1790-2000 --Interactive Multimedia and Web
Based Tools (both funded by NSF), and the Great American History Machine, as
well digitization efforts in New York, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, Indianapolis,
Chicago and elsewhere.

In short, the digital library serves as a demographic, geographic and social
grid for the United States. The grid also can accommodate the addition of other
materials on land use, transportation, health care, and the like. Examples are
provided, especially for the major metropolitan areas of New York and Los
Angeles. All materials are developed in standard formats and integrated with a
dynamic mapping system and an interactive multimedia viewer to provide a user-
friendly interface. Materials are freely available for interactive use,
downloading, sharing and enhancement on publicly accessible servers at UCLA and
CUNY. Also, they are being made available to other digital repositories. The
NHGIS at the Minnesota Population Center is distributing the materials, which
ultimately will be archived along with the NHGIS materials at the Inter-
University Consortium for Political and Social Research.