* 0226317
* Advanced Placement Digital Library for Biology, Physics and Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2006
* Michael Johanek, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 10/31/2006
* USD 699,996.00

Rice University, in collaboration with the College Board, is creating an online
digital library for high school Advanced Placement (AP) students and teachers of
Biology, Physics and Chemistry (BPC). The AP program, administered by the
College Board, is accepted both nationally and internationally as a demanding
undergraduate level curriculum taught in high schools. In a two-phased process,
the Advanced Placement Digital Library (APDL) is building a collection of
educationally valid Internet resources. In Phase One, educational resources
directly related to BPC topics and concepts are researched and collected by
project personnel, reviewed and validated by master AP teachers and college
faculty, and cataloged and organized by the topics and concepts taught in these
three courses. In Phase Two, the collection opens to AP teachers and students,
and through their input, APDL serves as a valuable source of dynamically updated
resources. &lt;br/&gt;APDL serves as a reservoir of resources where teachers and
students can educate themselves about BPC concepts, at their own pace, at a time
and place of their choosing, and take individualized knowledge-building paths
based on interest and needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;APDL is collecting resources
for these three subjects through a collaborative construction process using a
content panel for each subject. The review panel consists of several AP
constituents: a higher education faculty member who has in-depth knowledge of
the AP curriculum and holds leadership positions to influence change; five AP
teachers with considerable experience in teaching students and their peers; an
undergraduate student who is studying the subject at the university level; and
two project content experts. The panel selects only those resources that support
advanced study of the topic. A collection created through such a broad review is
then opened to the larger community of AP teachers and students for their use
and input. Peer-review of both teachers and students is visible to the users.
The end result is a body of resources aligned to AP topics in BPC and searchable
by concept. For each course, teachers find a topic outline of that is
hyperlinked to the collected resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AP teachers are
informed about APDL via the more than 60,000 College Board professional
development conferences that occur nationwide. The College Board is committed to
housing the collection on their official site, AP Central, with over 50,000
registered users. While students and teachers of advanced science courses are
the targeted audiences for this collection, we expect it to be useful to others
such as, a large body of Pre-AP teachers, high school teachers and students
taking non-AP courses, undergraduate students and higher education faculty
teaching introductory courses in these
subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant co-funding of this project is being
provided by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the NSF Directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences in recognition of the importance of a digital
library collection of learning resources for students in the disciplines of
biology, chemistry and physics.&lt;br/&gt;