* 0226129
* ComPADRE: Communities for Physics and Astronomy Digital Resources in Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Warren Hein, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2005
* USD 900,000.00

The American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT), the American Physical
Society (APS), the American Institute of Physics/Society of Physics Students
(AIP/SPS), and the American Astronomical Society (AAS) are creating an
interconnected set of digital collections of educational materials and providing
specific learning environments accessible to learners and teachers from
elementary school through graduate school. The initial collections include
resources for introductory astronomy, quantum physics, pre-college physical
science teachers, undergraduate majors or prospective majors in physics and
astronomy, and informal science education. These topics were chosen for their
impact, diversity, breadth of audience, extent of discoverable materials, and
interest of groups within the societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop and
maintain the collections, the project is utilizing the expertise of the
societies' members as editors, content experts, reviewers, and professional
technical staff. Physicists and astronomers add value to existing learning
materials through selection and organization, annotation, review, and feedback
on their use. The project supports these collections through technical,
publication, and librarian services. A dynamic, database-driven Web services
solution provides template-based delivery of the collections for flexibility,
rapid development of sites, and user-enabled maintenance. The different topical
collections employ a unified interface and link their resources wherever
appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ComPADRE's services include the discovery and
collection of resources, and helping authors and collections with standards-
compliant meta-tagging. The project is working closely with existing resource
collections--e.g., online journals, astronomical databases, university
courseware, student sites, and public science information sites, as well as
other digital library projects to share collections and tools. The resulting set
of high-quality collections will have an impact on members of the professional
organizations, the broader community of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics educators and students, and the public at large.&lt;br/&gt;