* 0226850
* SGER: Development of an Interactive Virtual Environment for Delivery of Rehabilitative Intervention to Children with Social Cognitive Deficits
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Cheryl Trepagnier, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2004
* USD 99,958.00

This project explores issues in the application of virtual reality environments
to assist pre-school-aged children newly diagnosed with autistic spectrum
disorder. The PI will develop and evaluate a tool that integrates virtual
reality display with eye-tracking and sensing of other physiological and
intentional signals in an appealing non-restrictive play environment, in order
to deliver a rehabilitative intervention. The system to be developed is driven
both by empirical findings and by theory. The literature reports a high degree
of success for discrete trial training with some autistic children, with greater
success the younger the age at which intervention is begun. Computerized
implementation of discrete trial technology may improve its effectiveness, since
eye-tracking and other sensors will record target behaviors more precisely and
displays will deliver immediate contingent rewards more reliably than human
trainers can accomplish. The theory that informs our approach is that failure to
establish social attention in infancy is a key factor in the autistic
developmental syndrome. The intervention, therefore, uses the discrete trial
methods to teach social attention and other basic social skills that the
typically-developing child acquires (without training) in the first year of
life, and that children with autism lack. A Virtual Playmate will share
enjoyable experiences with the child (music, interactive games, and "rides" in
the motorized chair in which the child is seated) as rewards for gains in target
behaviors such as visual fixation on the playmate's eyes, vocal response to the
playmate's expressions of emotion, joint attention (looking where the virtual
playmate is looking), and other social skills that are vital to social
interaction. Training for skill maintenance and generalization will incorporate
virtual versions of toys and models of individuals from the child's actual
environment. A successful outcome to this project will ultimately improve
autistic children's ability to take part in peer social interactions and move
them closer to a typical developmental path so that they can become
participating members of society.&lt;br/&gt;