* 0226945
* US-Mexico Collaboration: Raman Amplification and Logic Gate in Optical Fibers
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Joseph Haus, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/2006
* USD 32,277.00

0226945&lt;br/&gt;Haus&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Mexico award will support
Prof. Joseph Haus of the University of Dayton (UD) in a research collaboration
with Dr. Evgeni Kuzin of the Instituto Nacional de Astrofisica Optica y
Electronica (INAOE) in Puebla, Mexico. The researchers intend to work on
experimental and theoretical approaches to develop fiber devices and
characterization techniques. The project will also explore potential
applications for the optical communications industry and medical imaging
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers at UD aim to carry out a
theoretical investigation of Raman amplifiers in birefringent optical fibers
while the researchers at INAOE will construct a Raman logic gate using the
modelocked fiber laser developed through previous joint research. The
theoretical investigation will elucidate characteristics of the logic gate and
its potential use with solitons. The modeling will support measurements of Raman
amplification for a fiber span consisting of standard, zero dispersion and non-
zero dispersion shifted fiber to determine the optimal interaction length
between pump pulses and signal pulses. The Office of International Science and
Engineering and the Division of Electrical and Communication Systems of NSF will
contribute funds for this collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;