* 0226060
* Early experience and neurocognitive development: Socio-economic variables.
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Martha Farah, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 02/29/2004
* USD 158,101.00

Early Experience and Neurocognitive Development: Socioeconomic Variables

Abstract

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Farah will conduct a one-year
study attempting to begin to characterize the cognitive outcomes of childhood
poverty in terms of the framework of Cognitive Neuroscience. Dr. Farah aims to
partition the known cognitive disparities, previously assessed with the
relatively blunt instruments of IQ tests and school achievement measures, into 7
key neurocognitive systems using selective behaviorally-based neurocognitive
tasks. These tasks are as follows: Dorsolateral prefrontal/working memory,
Ventromedial prefrontal /reward processing, Anterior cingulate/conflict
monitoring, Parietal/spatial, Occipito-temporal/pattern vision, Temporal/memory,
and Fronto-temporal/language. This partitioning may isolate the neurocognitive
system or systems that are most sensitive to the effects of experiential factors
related to socio-economic-status (SES). If such systems can be delineated, then
researchers may be in a position to discover the potentially causal factors in
the family and home environment, from a wide array of factors previously
measured with the low SES participants, from somatic factors such as lead levels
to psychological factors such as parental depression and stress.

The primary goal of this proposal is to address the question: Given that SES has
been shown to affect cognitive development, what underlying systems of the
developing mind and brain are impacted by the complex bundle of experiential
factors that constitute SES? Brain development involves a complex interplay
between innate and experiential factors. Our understanding of the role of
experience comes from animal and human evidence. Experimental manipulation of
the environment of young animals has demonstrated profound effects of
environmental stimulation and the presence of stressors on brain health. Studies
of children raised under conditions of extreme deprivation, such as Romanian
orphanages, have found measurable differences in brain development. What has not
been established is the effect of differences in early experience within the
normal range for our society. One dimension on which normal children's
experience may differ is related to their family's socioeconomic status (SES).
Furthermore, SES is known to impact a wide range of measures of cognitive
development, from IQ tests to school achievement. The present project begins
with the assumption that these SES disparities in cognitive development are not
to be explained in terms of innate differences between families, but are instead
due to some of the many experiential differences that correlate with SES.