* 0226948
* Mathematical ACTS
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2010
* Michael Rettig, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 10/31/2010
* USD 5,369,323.00

Mathematical ACTS: Achievement and Collaboration for Teachers and Students is a
project that focuses an existing University of California - Riverside (UCR) and
Jurupa Unified School District partnership involving pre-service and in-service
education of teachers to an emphasis on student mastery of Algebra I content. In
this new effort, the partners will establish a spiral of instructional training
for upper elementary and middle school mathematics teachers. Embedded in a
research paradigm, Mathematical ACTS will examine the main effects of preservice
education, professional development and/or extended learning opportunities on
student achievement in mathematics and on teacher career growth. As the project
scales up, the partners will analyze students of teachers with or without
Mathematical ACTS professional development experiences, and with or without a
pre-service candidate available to facilitate re-
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partner school district has a student
population of over 19,000 students of whom 57% are Hispanic and 5% are African
American. Further, the district has sizeable English Learner (24%) and
Free/Reduced Price Meals (52%) student populations. Among the secondary school
mathematics teachers, only 52% have a mathematics major or mathematics teaching
credential. Through Mathematical ACTS, partners will tackle issues of teacher
credentials through 150 annual hours of training lead by district and university
faculty with an emphasis on addressing gaps in student mathematical skills and
mastery. Extended learning opportunities in the classroom, after-school, and in
the summer will be available for remedial and advanced students. Research
results on the scalability of reform will be disseminated in conjunction with
district-wide adoption and structural changes in UCR's teacher education
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;