* 0226544
* SGER:  Ceramic Artificial Ferrite Prepared by Laser Ablation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Carmine Vittoria, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2004
* USD 86,050.00

A novel laser-ablation deposition technique will be used to deposit high quality
multiplayers of magnetic oxides at the atomic scale. The purpose is to
synthesize single crystal films of the spinel structure in which one layer
consists solely of Mn2+ ions and the other alternating layer of only Fe3+ ions.
Although the average chemical composition is that of MnFe2O4, the magnetic
structure is that of a normal ferrite in a spinel structure. The magnetic
structure of MnFe2O4 grown by the natural process is that of an inverse magnetic
structure, in which both Fe3+ and Mn2+ can be found in the same layer, for
example. Thus, this technique allows for the growth of ferrites by artificial
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implication of the success of this technique
is enormous. Scientifically, we will be able to test fundamental theories of
magnetism directly instead of depending what natural process allows. It also
means that one can engineer ferrites for various applications and technical
needs. Magnetic sensors will be improved to the point that it will impact
medical imaging techniques, computer memories (speed and size), and the wireless
communication components. In summary, a new generation of ferrite materials will
be established, which will have impact in all phases of technology. &lt;br/&gt;