* 0226894
* Singular Solutions to Certain Equations in the Physical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Yuxi Zheng, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2003
* USD 35,736.00

0071858&lt;br/&gt;Zheng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to study some
nonlinear partial differential equations from &lt;br/&gt;fluid dynamics and
liquid crystal physics. These equations are the laws of &lt;br/&gt;motion of
their respective physics. The turbulent nature and/or defects in &lt;br/&gt;the
materials make the solutions of the equations singular, unstable, and
&lt;br/&gt;hard to calculate. It is planned to use advanced analytical tools to
study &lt;br/&gt;the structures of the singular solutions. In the case of the
liquid crystal &lt;br/&gt;wave equation, for example, the plan is to study it as
one of the simplest &lt;br/&gt;examples of nonlinear generalizations of the
basic linear wave equation. It &lt;br/&gt;can be seen from its elegant form that
there will be many applications of &lt;br/&gt;the equation in the future.
Singularities of its solutions have been shown to &lt;br/&gt;exist recently by
the principal investigator and his collaborators. It is these
&lt;br/&gt;singularities that block the establishment of a general theory of
existence, &lt;br/&gt;uniqueness, and stability of solutions. It is planned to
do detailed estimates &lt;br/&gt;and analysis on the singularities and improve
current compactness &lt;br/&gt;arguments to form an existence theory of
solutions. The result of the &lt;br/&gt;investigation will be a clear
understanding of the worst possible solutions, &lt;br/&gt;and thereby quantify
our knowledge of the physics and offer guidance in &lt;br/&gt;numerical
computations of general solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
involve the study of some applied mathematical &lt;br/&gt;problems in the fields
of fluid dynamics (which includes motion of the air &lt;br/&gt;and water) and
liquid crystal physics in material science. Scientists and &lt;br/&gt;engineers
have used mathematical equations, called partial differential
&lt;br/&gt;equations, to model the motions. The turbulent nature and/or defects
in the &lt;br/&gt;materials show up in the form of singularities and
instabilities in the &lt;br/&gt;solutions of the equations. It is these
singularities and instabilities that &lt;br/&gt;often spoil accurate numerical
computations of the solutions. It is planned &lt;br/&gt;to use the state of the
art analytical tools to study the structures of the &lt;br/&gt;singular
solutions. In the case of a compressible gas such as air, for
&lt;br/&gt;example, the principal investigator plans to isolate typical
singularities &lt;br/&gt;(hurricanes, tornadoes, shocks, etc.) and investigate
their individual &lt;br/&gt;structures. The result of the investigation will be
a clear understanding of &lt;br/&gt;the worst possible solutions, and thereby
quantify our knowledge of the &lt;br/&gt;physics and offer guidance in high-
performance numerical computations &lt;br/&gt;of general solutions.&lt;br/&gt;