* 0226184
* Teachers' Domain - Physical Science and Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Michele Korf, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey G. Ryan
* 12/31/2004
* USD 874,276.00

This Collections project is allowing WGBH to expand its current Teachers Domain
Digital Library into the content areas of the Physical Sciences and Engineering.
The overarching intent of the Teachers Domain Digital Library project is to get
the high-quality, multimedia resources of WGBH out of their vaults and into the
hands of teachers and students in a form that is directly targeted to their
teaching and learning needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Teachers Domain Digital
Library, with its focus in the Life Sciences, is a mission-driven initiative
that is harnessing the extensive broadcast, video, and interactive programming
resources of WGBH to support standards-based teaching and learning at the K-12
level. The product is a searchable, web-based repository of contextualized
multimedia materials that teachers are easily accessing for their own
professional development as well as to enrich classroom activities for students.
As is the case of the original award, the Physical Sciences and Engineering
materials are being organized to reflect alignment with commonly taught
classroom units and with the performance standards currently applied at both
state and national levels. These multimedia assets are being metatagged and
presented with extensive contextual information to allow for practical,
effective use. Annotations, background essays, standards correlations, and
curriculum integration supports accompany each archival resource, and features
such as personalized resource bins and keyword search capacity enable ease of
use and maximum impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the result of the
longstanding commitment of WGBH to the support of educational reform efforts
nationwide, a commitment most common in the subject area of science. Science
programming, including such series as NOVA, A SCIENCE ODYSSEY, BUILDING BIG, and
EVOLUTION, is recognized to be among the finest on television and is used to
support classroom teaching across the country. These shows collectively
represent thousands of hours of programming and contain real world applications
of abstract concepts, classic science experiments, case studies, primary source
interviews, animations, and historical footage. Much of these materials have
supporting teacher guides and companion web sites that extend their educational
impact. In addition, WGBH has produced numerous, high-quality K-12 teacher
training resources. Many of these video-based materials, including INVESTIGATING
CLASSROOMS, SCIENCE FIRST, TEACHERS AS LEARNERS, LEARNING THAT WORKS, and
PHYSICS BY INQUIRY have been developed with NSF support. These programs,
designed to promote both teacher education and student learning, are usually
accompanied by print and on-line supplements to facilitate use and maximize
effectiveness and address methodological issues as well as pedagogy and content
mastery. The WGBH archives are rich with high-quality, multimedia assets,
especially within the subject area of science. Significant co-funding of this
project is being provided by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences in recognition of the
importance of a digital library collection of video-based resources for K-12
teachers, particularly in the physical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;