* 0226233
* Collaborative Project: To Enhance the Depth, Breadth, and Quality of the Collections of the Digital Library for Earth System Education (DLESE)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Barbara DeFelice, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2006
* USD 78,718.00

This project consists of four tasks aimed at improving the breadth, depth and
quality of the Digital Library for Earth System Education (DLESE): The first
task is an assessment of the collections and is being done by systematically
comparing the scope and balance of the actual DLESE Collection with the
collection desired by the DLESE community, as expressed through searches on the
DLESE Discovery system, in community meetings, and through the DLESE Scope
statement. For the existing collection, data are being compiled on learning
context (grade level), topic, type of learning resource, cost to user,
geographic distribution of resources focusing on a particular locality, and
temporal distribution of resources focusing on a particular slice of geologic
time. For the "desired collection," data area being compiled on search and
browse requests made through the Discovery System. Changes over time of both the
existing collection and the desired collection are being documented and
compared. The second task is building on a prior NSF award supporting a resource
gathering effort in Earth and environmental science to build a starter-
collection with at least a few resources of interest to a wide range of
potential DLESE users. This collections gathering effort is guided by the
Collections Assessment, focusing on filling identified gaps or thin spots in the
collection, seeking to avoid a "lumpy" collection rich only in those areas
collected by specific interest groups. The third task is the cataloging of
resources and is being done by the group responsible for the GeoRef catalog of
professional literature in the geosciences. The fourth task is the further
development and implementation of the Community Review System. The DLESE
Community Review System solicits web-based feedback from educators who have used
the resource with their learners, and combines it with expert reviews to
evaluate resources against a set of seven selection criteria. The scope and
breadth of the Reviewed Collection is increasing and Reviewed Collection
resources are being showcased. Indices based on information gathered during the
review process are being shared with potential resource users, along with
editor's comments and teaching tips contributed by users, via an NSDL-style
"annotation service." In addition to building the DLESE Collection, this project
is contributing to the broader NSDL in several areas of collection development
practice and research: methodologies for collections assessment in a digital
world, incorporation of collections assessment into digital library evaluation,
identification of resources proven effective in challenging and learning and
teaching situations, implementation of a community-based review system, and use
of an annotation system to disseminate information about educational resources.
Significant co-funding of this project is being provided by the Division of
Earth Sciences in the NSF Directorate for Geosciences in recognition of the
importance that this collection and related activities have for K-12 teachers
and undergraduate faculty.