* 0226913
* Single Molecule and Nonlinear Spectroscopic Studies of Water and Other Liquids Above and Below the Glass Transition
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2006
* Gerald Small, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/2006
* USD 345,000.00

The goal of the is project is to attain a deeper molecular level understanding
of the dramatic slowing down of the molecular relaxation processes (rotations,
translations) as the temperature of a supercooled liquid approaches the glass
transition temperature (Tg). This challenging problem on the nature of glass and
the glass transition remains as one of the most important in solid-state physics
and -chemistry. No microscopic theory exists that captures all salient features
of the kinetic glass formation process that marks the onset of non-ergodicity.
The experimental approach is unique in that it uses three laser-based
spectroscopies; single molecule (SMS), photon echo (PES) and nonphotochemical
hole burning (NPHB). The liquids to be studied are water, methanol and ethanol
(probe molecule Al-phthalocyanine tetrasulphonate) at temperatures below and
above Tg. SMS reports on molecular rotational relaxation over a ~1-4000 second
time period while NPHB and PES report on optical dephasing of probe transitions
on a picosecond time scale. A novel hyperquenching apparatus will be used to
prepare the glasses at low temperatures which can then be warned to Tg and
temperatures above Tg. The above liquids will also be studied in confined spaces
of porous materials (pore sizes ranging from a few nanometers to ~ 100
nanometers). Here water is particularly interesting since the non-freezable
water in contact with a pore surface is a model for biological water bound to
proteins. The research will provide students with an excellent training because
of the cutting edge experimental techniques to be used and because the research
is both challenging and important&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This unique experimental
approach employing three state-of-the-art laser spectroscopies and a novel
apparatus for forming a glass by cooling small liquid droplets at a rate of a
million degrees per second will be used to attain a molecular level
understanding of the glass transition. The data will provide new insights on how
the motions of molecules dramatically slow down as the liquid is cooled towards
Tg. What is learned for three important liquids (water, ethanol, and methanol)
may well lead to better glasses for technological applications. Because the
research is cutting-edge it will provide graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers with an excellent training serve them well as independent
researchers with an excellent training serve them well as independent
researchers in an area of high technological importance.&lt;br/&gt;