* 0226532
* GOALI:  Combining Discontinuous Molecular Dynamics and Chemical Process Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2005
* J. Richard Elliott, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/2005
* USD 156,459.00

J. Richard Elliott, University of Akron&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"GOALI: Combining
Discontinuous Molecular Dynamics and Chemical Process
Simulation"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular modeling will be integrated with a
chemical process simulation package to provide a complete, rigorous, and
accurate framework for physical property prediction and correlation. Chemical
process simulators are becoming the primary interface for industrial chemical
knowledge. The PI has recently discovered that perturbation theory is much more
accurate than previously appreciated, especially for polyatomic molecules.
Discontinuous molecular dynamics (DMD) simulation combines with perturbation
theory and the virial expansion to provide a basis for highly leveraged
computational effort in all aspects of molecular modeling. An existing DMD
program will run the minimal number of simulations necessary with reasonable
speed on low-cost microprocessors. The resulting segmental potential models will
act as molecular scale group contributions, analogous to conventional
engineering group contribution models. The PI implement methods of calculating
transport properties like viscosity, thermal conductivity, and diffusivity in
addition to the equilibrium and coexistence properties that he has computed in
the past. This research will use pre-tabulation of the essential simulation data
for reference fluids, with detailed perturbation calculations to be performed
with high efficiency at later times. The accuracy of this fundamental
methodology will be evaluated in comparison with existing semi-empirical methods
by comparison to a large database of experimental values. The PI will establish
the degree to which the perturbation perspective can provide similar leveraging
in the estimation of transport properties, as well as equilibrium properties.
This work will be performed in collaboration with The University of Akron and
the technical staff from ChemStations, Inc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting
product will be an internet site which clients can access for zero cost up front
and relatively low hourly fees varying according to the intensity of the server
side computation requested. Services provided will include molecular modeling of
transport and equilibrium properties like vapor pressure, activity, water
solubility, octanol partition coefficients, viscosity, and the ability to infer
knowledge about one property from measurements of other properties through a
common molecular model. Within the range of options will be a comprehensive
collection of semi-empirical methods with estimates of the accuracy of each
property. The scope of this project includes a thorough evaluation of the
accuracy of semi-empirical models and the molecular based models against a
database of approximately 1800 compounds. Also included will be flowsheeting and
process simulation based on shortcut unit operation models. The sensitivity of
the process capital and production costs to the estimated physical properties
will be a menu option. The shortcut model will serve as a precursor for rigorous
process simulation directly within a web-based
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research
will include integrated research and education and integrated diversity. As the
co-author of a leading text on Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, the PI has
already integrated results of related previous NSF support. The PI is now
involved in teaching Chemical Process Design, a course that should evolve to
include product design requiring extensive molecular insight. In the near term,
the role of physical property estimation in traditional design can be used as a
springboard for introducing many of the tools of molecular based design while
directing applications to physical properties like viscosity and volatility. The
predecessor to this proposal is currently supporting one female graduate student
full-time and one male and one female who are alternating between teaching and
research assistantships. The PI expects to maintain this balance throughout the
remainder of the project.&lt;br/&gt;