* 0227968
* United States Participation in the Activities of the International Arctic Science Committee
* GEO,GEO
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2006
* Patrick Webber, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Louis B. Brown
* 10/31/2006
* USD 81,663.00

United States participation in and leadership of international Arctic science
will be strengthened by a senior U.S. Arctic research scientist representing the
interests of the U.S. Arctic science community in the International Arctic
Science Committee (IASC) and by serving as President of the IASC Council. The
Arctic is very important scientifically and plays a strong role in global,
including climate, change. However the conduct of research in the Arctic poses
many pragmatic problems, e.g., it is a harsh and remote environment; no
permanent facilities can be located in much of the region; and eight different
countries control various parts of the Arctic Ocean and adjacent land areas.
Thus, international cooperation in the Arctic is not only useful, but often
essential. IASC, established in 1990 to encourage and promote such cooperation,
provides a forum for exchange of information among scientists and between
scientists and governments on a wide variety of Arctic science topics. IASC also
supports international coordination of national Arctic research efforts by
supporting small focused scientific planning meetings/workshops. U.S.
participation and leadership in IASC and its Council will assist IASC to address
on a priority basis: an assessment of the impact of the climate and climatic
changes on the Arctic and its peoples; development of an international
bathymetric chart of the Arctic Ocean; a study of the role of humans in
caribou/reindeer grazing systems; a study of biocomplexity and biodiversity in
Arctic tundra ecosystems; and providing scientific advice to the Arctic Council,
an intergovernmental organization that focuses on interaction between the Arctic
environment and its indigenous peoples.