* 0227603
* Deepening Everyone's Mathematics Content Knowledge: Mathematicians, Teachers, Parents, Students, &amp; Community
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2009
* Judith Fonzi, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 09/30/2009
* USD 2,779,655.00

In this MSP project, the University of Rochester partners with the Greece,
Penfield and Rush-Henrietta School Districts as well as a consortium of twenty-
three rural districts through the Genesee Valley Board of Cooperative
Educational Services (GVBOCES) in an effort to develop effective ways to foster
the mathematical content knowledge necessary for a successful implementation of
reform mathematics curricula. The three suburban Rochester districts are in
various stages of the adoption and implementation of curricula while the rural
districts are in the early stages of a curricular reform process. Together, the
districts in this partnership serve roughly 28,000 students. Other partners in
this work are the Education Development Center, Horizon Research and
WestEd.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For curricular reform to succeed, the partners
believe that multiple constituencies need to be engaged in practices that
enhance mathematical knowledge including K-12 teachers and other school support
personnel, parents and other influential community members, and mathematicians
and mathematics educators who prepare future teachers. To this end, they
will:&lt;br/&gt;* Offer a series of reform mathematics courses, each focusing on
different sets of mathematical concepts addressed by the adopted curricula and
targeted to the various constituencies in such a manner that they will
experience learning mathematics similar to ways in which students learn the
discipline;&lt;br/&gt;* Train teacher leaders to facilitate mathematics case
discussions involving in-depth analysis of student thinking; and&lt;br/&gt;*
Engage various groups in evening chats about school mathematics reform, with a
special emphasis on understanding goals and expectations for student learning of
mathematics; chats will involve different combinations of mathematicians,
mathematics educators, K-12 teachers, parents and community members.&lt;br/&gt;