* 0227618
* YIA-PGR: Functional Genomics of Plant Metabolism in Model Rhizome Species
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* David Gang, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,114,787.00

The curcuminoids and gingerols are medicinally important metabolites found in
the rhizome tissue (underground stem) of turmeric and ginger plants. In addition
to their role as colorants and flavorants in these plants, these compounds have
been show to possess anti-inflammatory and other important pharmacological
properties. Because of these properties, turmeric and ginger rhizome powder and
extracts have been used for millennia as spices, as important elements in
traditional Chinese and Indian medicine, and as important parts of modern herbal
remedies that are designed to reduce inflammation. In addition, these compounds
may form the basis for future anti-inflammatory drugs. Despite their importance
to human health, nothing is known about the biochemical pathways (the enzymes or
the respective encoding genes) that produce these and structurally similar
compounds. Furthermore, almost nothing is known about gene expression and
metabolic regulation in plant rhizomes.&lt;br/&gt;The advent of large scale
automated gene sequencing (genomics), related methods for analysis of gene
function (functional genomics), and improvements in instrumentation for protein
purification (biochemistry) and metabolite analysis (metabolic profiling), now
allow for application of a biochemical functional genomics approach to this
problem. These technologies will be used to investigate how turmeric and ginger
produce the medicinally important natural products that accumulate in their
rhizome tissues. A detailed characterization of all metabolites made in rhizomes
of ginger and turmeric plants will be made (metabolic profiling). Genes that are
actively expressed in the rhizomes will be isolated and sequenced. The sequence
information will be used to identify the enzymes responsible for the formation
of the metabolites in these rhizomes. This information will also be used to
identify rhizome-specific genes. Interesting target genes and their
corresponding proteins will be characterized for their specific roles in the
production of specific metabolites in the rhizome or in the development and
biology of the rhizome in general.&lt;br/&gt;