* 0227583
* Nanostructures of Surfactants at Solid-Liquid and Gas-Liquid Interfaces and their Influence on Interfacial Properties
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Jan Miller, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 12/31/2008
* USD 40,692.00

0227583&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award enables Professor Jan
Miller and several graduate students of the Department of Metallurgical
Engineering of the University of Utah to collaborate actively with Dr. Anh
Nguyen and his group at the University of Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia.
The focus of their joint research is the self-assembly of surfactants at solid-
liquid and gas-liquid interfaces and how these self-assembled nanostructures
change interfacial properties. They are developing quantitative models for the
self-assembly of surfactants which they will test experimentally. They will also
determine the associated interfacial properties that would influence some
industrial processes such as wafer cleaning and minerals processing. The
collaborative research exploits the complementary research expertise of the
principle investigators in interfacial properties and particle interactions
(Newcastle) and in-situ nanostructure imaging and surface force measurements by
Atomic Force Microscopy, among other techniques (Utah). Their planned research
is likely to contribute to the fields of particle science and surface chemistry
by providing the basis for greater control over interfacial properties and
thereby a means for improving surface chemistry-based industrial
processes.&lt;br/&gt;