* 0227729
* Creating New Economic Opportunities in Downeast Coastal Maine by Enhancing Marine Education and Research Capacity:  Developing the Infrastructure for Innovation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Brian Beal, University of Maine at Machias
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 05/31/2007
* USD 600,000.00

0227729 Beal

This award is to the University of Maine at Machias to support the activity
described below for 36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the
Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 02060). The partners
include the University of Maine at Machias (Lead Institution), Downeast
Institute for Applied Marine Research & Education, Sunrise County Economic
Council, Eastern Maine Development Corporation, Town of Bealls, Carver Shellfish
Inc, Washington County Commissioners, Maine Aquaculture Innovation Center,
Cobscook Bay Resource Center, The Nature Conservatory, Maine Department of
Marine Resources, Maine State Planning Office, and Maine Science & Technology
Foundation. The goals of the program are to produce a significant increase in
applied marine research and technology transfer leading to commercialization of
products and processes, and to increase the numbers of people from eastern Maine
enrolled in associate and baccalaureate degree programs at the University of
Maine at Machias preparing them for the new workforce in marine technologies. To
accomplish these goals new faculty positions will be created in the areas of
marine ecology, marine biology, and natural resource economics. Research
facilities for marine research will be installed. Positions for managers to
enable technology transfer and commercialization are being established at the
university.

More than 40% of the households in the region have incomes less than $20,000
annually. The economy of the region relies very heavily on renewable marine
resources. Marine aquaculture has a huge potential to revitalize the regional
economy given increased research and education/training to provide the
technological and business support as well as the trained workforce for start-up
companies. The participation of underrepresented minority students in the
program will be increased through several currently existing programs, such as
Alliance for Minority Participation Program, McNair Scholars Program, Bridges to
the Baccalaureate Program, and affiliate programs with the University of Puerto
Rico.