* 0227028
* Appalachian Mathematics and Science Partnership
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2014
* Stephen Henderson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2014
* USD 25,166,890.00

The Appalachian Mathematics and Science Partnership (AMSP) is a partnership
among 38 central and eastern Kentucky school districts (Bath Co., Breathitt Co.,
Carter Co., Casey Co., Clark Co., Clay Co., Clinton Co., Corbin Independent,
Estill Co., Floyd Co., Frankfort Independent, Garrard Co., Harlan Co., Jackson
Independent, Jessamine Co., Johnson Co., Knott Co., Lee Co., Letcher Co., Lewis
Co., Lincoln Co., Madison Co., Martin Co., McCreary Co., Montgomery Co., Morgan
Co., Owsley Co, Paris Independent, Pike Co., Pikeville Independent, Powell Co.,
Pulaski Co., Rockcastle Co., Rowan Co., Washington Co., Wayne Co., Whitley Co.,
Woodford Co.), 9 Tennessee school districts (Alvin C. York Agricultural
Institute, Anderson Co., Campbell Co., Cumberland Co., Grainger Co., Harriman
City, Johnson Co., Oneida Special School, Scott Co.), 5 western Virginia school
districts ,(Dickenson Co., Russell Co., Scott Co., Tazewell Co., Wise Co.), the
Kentucky Science and Technology Corporation (Appalachian Rural Systemic
Initiative), and 10 institutions of higher education, including Eastern Kentucky
University, Kentucky State University, Morehead State University, Pikeville
College, Union College, University of Virginia College at Wise, University of
Tennessee, Prestonsburg Community College, Somerset Community College, and the
University of Kentucky, with the latter serving as the lead organization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student achievement for the almost 170,000 students in the
partner districts is significantly lower than state averages. The Appalachian
regions of the three states are characterized by low socio-economic status
(income rates are 62-81% of national averages) with over one-third of children
living in poverty. In addition, attracting and maintaining a staff of highly
qualified mathematics and science teachers in the Appalachian region is a major
challenge. Within the partner school districts, 38% of the mathematics teachers
and 37% of the science teachers at the middle and high school levels are
teaching with a minor or less in mathematics. Simultaneously, the number of
individuals graduating with teacher certification in mathematics or science from
the partner higher education students is extremely
low.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Partnership will reform science, mathematics and
technology (MST) education in central Appalachia in order to eliminate the
"achievement gap" in MST for regional preK-12 students and to build an
integrated PreK-12 and higher education system to insure the selection,
development and career-long support of a diverse and high quality mathematics
and science teacher workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AMSP involves four
components to address the needs of the region: (1) Preservice teacher and
administrator education; (2) Professional development of preK-12 personnel; (3)
Student learning opportunities including parent/community engagement; and (4)
Research to advance the understanding of rural education
reform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;