* 0227566
* Support for a Workshop: Priorities in Solid Earth Science, October 26, 2002, Denver, CO
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Michael Brown, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2003
* USD 36,748.00

This proposal is submitted by Brown on behalf of an ad-hoc Workshop Planning
Committee, as follows: Michael Brown (Laboratory for Crustal Petrology,
Department of Geology, University of Maryland); Jessica Faust Larsen
(Geophysical Institute, Department of Geology and Geophysics, University of
Alaska Fairbanks); Cathryn Manduca (DLESE Community Issues and Groups, Geology
Department, Carleton College); Tracy Rushmer (Department of Geology, University
of Vermont); Basil Tikoff (Department of Geology &amp; Geophysics, University of
Wisconsin-Madison); and, Ben van der Pluijm (Department of Geological Sciences,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor). The PI's request support for a one-day
workshop to be held on Saturday October 26, 2002, in Denver, CO, which is the
day before the Annual Meeting of the Geological Society of America. The Workshop
is proposed as the first in a series to support a specific agenda - the
integration of the Solid Earth Sciences as the central core of Geology through
the development and promotion of research priorities, educational initiatives
and outreach. The Solid Earth Sciences concern the characterization, origin, and
evolution of planetary lithospheres. Various processes have modified the
lithosphere throughout geologic time. Investigating them requires studies of not
only active environments but also the geologic record of ancient events.
Research in the Solid Earth Sciences is inherently multidisciplinary and
increasingly interdisciplinary. This approach characterizes not only larger
projects supporting multiple scientists (e.g., Continental Dynamics and
Instrumentation &amp; Facilities Programs at NSF) but also most of the smaller
projects within the Solid Earth Sciences (e.g., Petrology &amp; Geochemistry and
Tectonics Programs at NSF). The Solid Earth Sciences represent an essential
element at the core of Earth Sciences; educational programs should reflect the
inherently multidisciplinary and increasing interdisciplinary nature of the
Solid Earth Sciences, and the foundation the Solid Earth Sciences provide for
the other elements of Earth Science. The PI's contend that any new long-range
plans for Earth Sciences at NSF must advocate continued and readily identifiable
support for research, education and outreach in the Solid Earth Sciences.
The&lt;br/&gt;record shows that advances in Solid Earth Sciences are achieved
when research support is provided through small grants to individual PIs (e.g.,
Geophysics, Petrology &amp; Geochemistry and Tectonics Programs), through
support of infrastructure (e.g., Instrumentation and Facilities Program),
through large grants to several PIs (e.g., Continental Dynamics Program) and
through integration among the sub- disciplines (e.g., the Plate Tectonics
revolution). The PI's agenda for the Solid Earth Sciences will complement the
EarthScope initiative, but it is not dependent upon EarthScope being funded.
This request is for support to enable attendance by 50-100 participants (minimum
50, maximum 100) representative of the spectrum of Solid Earth Sciences and
sympathetic to the symbiotic relationship between research, education and
outreach. The participants will be selected from a pool composed of invited and
self-motivated applicants to ensure balance, both across the Solid Earth
Sciences and among research, education and outreach. The primary goal of the
Workshop is to promote an integrated and coherent approach to planning for the
future of the Solid Earth Sciences. The integration will be both across the sub-
disciplines in the Solid Earth Sciences and among the synergistic activities of
research, education and outreach. The outcomes of the Workshop will be: a report
to be submitted to the Division of Earth Sciences by December 1, 2002, and
customized versions to be submitted to Eos, Geotimes and GSA Today during the
month of December, 2002; and, formation of an Integrated Tectonics Forum to
continue the process.