* 0227608
* SGER: Unpredictable Events of Catastrophic Proportions in  Temparate Forest Ecosystems: Developing a Baseline to Assess Cascading Effects and Coupled Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* John Odland, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2004
* USD 20,562.00

Recently developed ecological theories had identified major disturbance events
as crucial factors in large-scale environmental change and evolution. Punctuated
equilibrium and chaos theories posit shifts in systems between alternative
stable states. Inquiries into the complex dynamics of these relatively abrupt
shifts generally have taken place after major disturbances have occurred, with
relatively little data available to characterize conditions prior to the events
because of their suddenness and unpredictability. Periodic emergence of cicadas
in massive numbers are predictable, but they occur infrequently enough to
constitute an excellent model of unpredictable disturbance events of
catastrophic proportions. This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will
establish a set of baseline measurements in central Indiana starting in the
summer of 2002 in anticipation of a major cicada outbreak in mid-2004. Cicada
outbreaks occur every 17 years in central Indiana, where the size of the
outbreak is among the largest found anywhere in the U.S. The time period between
outbreaks is so long that most elements of the forest system that the cicadas
inhabit effectively have no working memory of the form and character of the
outbreak. Before the outbreak, cicadas underground are massive consumption of
tree root systems, while after the outbreak, they can rapidly defoliate tree
canopies. They become prey to a number of species, frequently inducing "predator
saturation" as wildlife gorge on the seemingly endless supply of insects, an
eating pattern that can dramatically alter the survival and reproduction rates
of those predators during the year of the outbreak and in following years. The
laying of eggs can lead to damage or death of affected trees, and loss of tree
canopy can alter the microclimatology of the understory and affect transpiration
rates, which in turn affects groundwater and surface stream hydrology. In order
to develop baseline information against which to evaluate the impacts of the
2004 cicada outbreak in central Indiana, this research team, which includes
members drawn from geography, biology, geology, and public and environmental
affairs departments, will begin taking a series of measurements in mid-2002.
Among variables to be measured are nutrient dynamics, hydrology, canopy cover,
tree physiology, seedling establishment, and socioeconomic
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will help establish baseline
measurements from which follow-up studies can be conducted in the coming years.
In addition to laying the groundwork for a broad range of inquiries into
interactions between natural and human systems, the project will have positive
broader impacts, including the involvement and training of undergraduate and
graduate students and the establishment of databases that can be used for a
broad range of inquiries.&lt;br/&gt;