* 0227828
* ToolingNET: A Partnership for Enhancing the Tooling Industry in Indiana through the use of Information Technology in the Advanced Manufacturing Sector
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Christoph Hoffmann, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2006
* USD 600,000.00

0227828&lt;br/&gt;Ramani &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to Purdue
University to support the activity described below for 24 months. The proposal
was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF 02060). The partners include Purdue University (Lead
Institution), Alcoa, Caterpillar, Metal Technologies, GT Automation, Kirby Risk,
Lear, Office of Technology Commercialization, Innovation Realization Lab, and
WeToollT, 21st Century Research and Technology Fund, Cunningham Pattern &amp;
Engineering, American Foundry Association, National Tooling and Manufacturers
Association, Indiana Manufacturers Association, Mid-America Plastics Partners,
and Central Indiana Corporate Partnership. The goals of the program include the
following: (1) comprehensively integrate industrial tooling marketplace
interactions into a streamlined structure and help manage the network using
information technology, (2) use an advanced three-dimensional communication tool
that will use and link geometry communication to partner manufacturing firms,
and (3) promotion and use of advanced tools for rapid manufacturing by
partnering with state-wide use in the tool and die education programs to enhance
the readiness of the workforce. &lt;br/&gt;The program provides an integrated
and structured development of the tooling/manufacturing capability for the
manufacturing firms in Indiana. The infrastructure provides a common platform
for all types of information exchanges including 3D Computer-Aided Design and
Manufacturing that will streamline and improve efficiency in the design to
manufacturing cycle. Faculty of community colleges will be trained in advanced
manufacturing technology so they can train the new workforce. A product
informatics system is being developed at Purdue and will be made available to
the manufacturing firms in Indiana. Technical support in rapid tooling,
manufacture, and design will be provided to small manufacturing firms in the
state. The program combines information technology with manufacturing technology
and education programs that simultaneously develop the manufacturing workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim is to increase the efficiency and productivity of
the manufacturing sector in Indiana. This will make the manufacturing sector in
Indiana more competitive and contribute to the economic well-being of the
region. Workforce development will provide workers for the growing industry.
Underrepresented groups in technology-businesses will have a greater access to
training and jobs in the manufacturing sector. &lt;br/&gt;