* 0227550
* Collaborative Research:   Holocene Geology and Anthropology:  Paleoclimate, Landscape Evolution, and Human Occupation of the Western Lake Titicaca Basin, Peru
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Paul Baker, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2007
* USD 140,593.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this collaborative study is
to determine how Holocene climate variability affected landscape evolution in
tributary valleys of the western Lake Titicaca basin and how Holocene landscape
evolution in those tributaries influenced human activities. To meet this goal we
will work at the intersection of three disciplines: paleoclimatology, fluvial
sedimentology, and archaeology. We will create a proxy-based, high-resolution
(decadal), properly interpreted paleoclimate time series for the western Lake
Titicaca basin by collecting and analyzing sediment cores from small, high-
sedimentation-rate lakes. We will generate new sedimentologic and geomorphic
data, from three river valleys in the same region, and use those data to create
a basinwide model of fluvial evolution in the context of regional climate change
and base level. And, we will generate new archaeological data that will begin to
fill the gaps in our knowledge of the early prehistory (especially the record of
the Archaic Period, ca. 10,000 to 3500 cal BP) of the basin. These data will
address important questions about the character of the initial occupation of the
basin, the dynamics of the sedentarization process, and the expansion of
agropastoral settlements following sedentarization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
study we aim to produce the best-dated and best-understood reconstruction of
Holocene precipitation in tropical South America. This record is needed to
answer important paleoclimate questions (such as the nature of the sea-surface
temperature forcing of the tropical atmosphere), but it also essential to our
ultimate research goal. Once climate variability is securely known, we can
address questions concerning the evolution of fluvial landscapes within the
proper climatological context. Holocene fluvial&lt;br/&gt;sedimentology in the
western Titicaca basin is largely controlled by precipitation variability, which
affects both riverine discharge and base level (the level of Lake Titicaca). Few
studies of fluvial evolution have been done with the complete knowledge of the
relevant records of both climate and base level, so this is an unusual
opportunity to increase our understanding of both the rates and processes of
sediment aggradation and downcutting, as well as possible non-linearities in the
fluvial response to climate and base-level variability. Because fluvial
variability is a key factor in both landscape evolution and the lives of both
modern and ancient occupants of the basin, a secure knowledge of climate and
landscape variability will allow us to address serious issues relating climate
change and human activities. The new archaeological data we will collect will
complement ongoing work elsewhere in the basin and the data, gathered within a
highly resolved paleoclimatic context accompanied by a well-constrained
reconstruction of natural landscape evolution, unrivaled in many other research
settings, will allow us to document the relative timing of environmental and
cultural change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;