* 0227962
* Late Pleistocene Forager Adaptations at the Gateway to the New World
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,05/31/2004
* William Andrefsky, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2004
* USD 11,990.00

Under the direction of Dr. William Andrefsky, Mr. Jeff Rasic will conduct
research for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze excavated lithic
collections from ten sites in northwestern Alaska that date to between 10,000
and 11,000 years ago. With support from the National Science Foundation Mr.
Rasic will develop two additional data sets. He will conduct excavations at the
Caribou Crossing site and will geochemically characterize chert artifacts from
several sites. Preliminary research at the Caribou Crossing site demonstrates
that it has good spatial integrity, a rich artifact assemblage, and good
potential for recovery of radiocarbon samples. Stone tools and the debris
resulting from their modification are all that remain of these early hunter-
gatherer's camps and are thus an important basis for understanding how they
lived. Technological, functional and raw material source analyses of these
artifacts aim to understand how raw materials were procured, how tools were
manufactured and used, and how they were transported across the landscape. A
primary goal of the study is to increase understanding of the behavioral and
ecological factors that conditioned variation among stone tool assemblages, and
in turn, to learn about the behavioral strategies used by some of the earliest
inhabitants of northwestern Alaska.

Arctic Alaska is a key region in many scenarios describing the initial
settlement of the New World, but the Alaskan archaeological record remains
difficult to incorporate into these arguments since few sites are reliably dated
beyond 10,000 years ago, and the lifeways of these people are poorly known. This
research is important for several reasons. It will generate and disseminate
information in the form of stone tool assemblage descriptions, radiocarbon
dates, and chert provenance data from a series of early Alaskan sites. Models of
human adaptive strategies derived from this study will facilitate comparisons
among early hunter-gatherers in the New World and Siberia and illuminate the
processes by which the Americas were settled. It will also shed light on the
diversity of adaptations known for hunter-gatherer societies both past and
present and assist in the training of a promising young scientist.





