* 0227907
* Enhancing the Emerging Biotechnology Cluster in Southeastern Ohio
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2002,08/31/2009
* David Wight, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2009
* USD 600,000.00

0227907 Wight

This award is to Ohio University to support the activity described below for 36
months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 02060). The partners include Ohio
University (Lead Institution), Intherthyr Corporation, DiAthegen LLC, GeneBact
Biotechnologies, Battelle Memorial Institute, Diagnostic Hybrids Inc, Sen Med
Medical Ventures, Athenian Venture Partners, Adena Ventures, Appalachian
Regional Commission, Edison BioTechnology Center, Governor's Office for
Appalachia, Governor's Regional Economic Development Office. The goals of the
program include accelerating and enhancing the growth of the biotechnology
sector in southeast Ohio region, accelerating the growth of existing companies
and increasing their probability of success, creating the technology pipeline
and creating new companies, sustaining the regional cluster, and keeping the
companies in the region. New start-up companies based on intellectual property
derived from the Ohio University research programs will be launched and
nurtured. Training of the workforce for the biotech industry is a top priority.
Partnering with existing corporate and other private and public partners will
form a strong nucleus to form and retain start-up companies in biotech in the
region.

The aim of the program is to increase the number of new sources of higher-paying
jobs, and to mobilize the underrepresented populations in the region by
providing education, research and technology and business support for new start-
up biotech companies. The economy in southeastern Ohio is among the worst in
Appalachia.