* 0227640
* Workshop on Experimental Infostructure Networks;  Irvine, California
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* William Parker, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Greene
* 06/30/2003
* USD 74,954.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UC Irvine requests funding to convene a
workshop, in Irvine, on May 20-21, 2002, to produce a report that explores and
recommends industry-academic-government infrastructure-building models for
Experimental Infostructure Networks to help define new programs. This Workshop
is being organized as a follow-on to a December 2001 workshop "Grand Challenges
in e-Science" to add industry and private-sector
input.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Infostructure encompasses the emerging
computational, visualization, data storage, instrumentation and networking
technologies that support our nation's major science and engineering research
facilities. These facilities enable e-Science, large-scale networked science,
that studies very complex micro to macro-scale problems over time and space.
Infostructure includes computers and networks, and the middleware that enables
coordinated resource sharing and problem solving among distributed
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networks are the key enabling technology for
transforming infostructure from geographically separated computational
facilities and instruments into a National Information Infrastructure. Three
classes of Research &amp; Education R&amp;E networks beyond the commodity
Internet are:&lt;br/&gt;Production Networks&lt;br/&gt;Experimental
Networks&lt;br/&gt;Research Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this
Workshop will be to answer the questions: Does the computer and
telecommunications industry agree on a need for Experimental Infostructure
Networks for e-Science? If yes, for what reasons, and what should they look like
in the near and longer term? What roles should industry, government and academia
play?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Workshop will result in the publication of a
report that contains a list of recommendations with justification. All
participants' names will appear as contributors to the report. Cal (IT) will
manage the logistics as the host site and will assist the program committee in
planning. The agenda and the final report will be produced by a team at UC San
Diego, headed by Dr. Larry Smarr, under subcontract from UC Irvine. The budget
includes costs for the workshop expenses, for the subcontract, and for staff and
supplies at UC Irvine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;