* 0227802
* Innovations in Business Intelligence: Drexel University's Partnership Between Academia, Industry and the City of Philadelphia
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2004
* O. Bay Arinze, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 10/31/2004
* USD 599,128.00

0227802 Arinze

This award is to the Drexel University to support the activity described below
for 24 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 02060). The partners include the Drexel
University (Lead Institution), University of Pennsylvania, SAP America,
PriceWaterhouseCoopers, Philadelphia area high schools, and The City of
Philadelphia. The proposed goals are: (1) creating theoretical and
methodological knowledge and innovation in the area of business intelligence,
(2) spurring product innovation within the participating private sectors
information technology forms, and (3) educational innovations by creating
business intelligence related training and educational programs for students at
the high school and college levels. The program focuses on basic research,
methodology, knowledge creation and documentation. Business intelligence
curriculum of 3-5 courses with input from the private sector partners is being
developed. Methodologies and toolsets for business intelligence are being
prepared and documented. The methodologies developed are being applied to
specific projects in management in the City of Philadelphia government. The high
school curriculum will be evaluated and assessed after the first year and will
then be disseminated to other high schools.

The development and application of business intelligence methodology to
management of local government and private sector partners will make them more
efficient. The methodology and software will be available for other government
and private sectors once it has been shown to be efficacious. In addition,
workforce training using the business intelligence methodology will prepare
graduates for higher paying jobs in the information economy.