* 0227357
* YIA-PGR: Genomics of Rice Susceptibility to Bacterial Diseases
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Adam Bogdanove, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,126,893.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial diseases cause significant losses in
many crops, and control measures often are limited or unavailable. The majority
arise from invasion of the vascular system or colonization of the tissue between
the veins (the parenchyma). The major classes of molecular tools that enable
bacteria to thrive inside plants are beginning to be understood, but little is
known about the functions within the plant of most of these tools. Less still is
known about the plant signals and targets that render plants susceptible.
Virtually nothing is known of the basis for tissue specificity. An understanding
of the pathogen and host traits that create opportunities for microbes to
exploit different plant tissues is an important goal. It will advance our
fundamental understanding of plant biology and support innovative efforts to
develop strategies to alter plant susceptibility or block pathogen
virulence&lt;br/&gt;This five-year functional genomics project will 1) identify
plant genes differentially expressed in response to two closely related
pathogens of the same host that cause different, representative types of
disease; 2) characterize genetic differences between these pathogens which
likely play a role; and 3) identify plant genes that affect susceptibility or
tissue specificity to the pathogens. The project is expected to yield key plant
molecular targets and signals required for susceptibility and tissue
specificity, and key proteins used by bacteria to infect plants in different
ways. Rice (Oryza sativa), an important crop and a model species, will be used
for these studies. Bacterial leaf blight (vascular) and bacterial leaf streak
(parenchymal) will be examined. These diseases are caused by the two subspecies
of Xanthomonas oryzae, pathovar oryzae and pathovar oryzicola, respectively.
Both diseases are threats to US agriculture. They are also excellent models for
the two most common ways bacteria cause disease in plants. &lt;br/&gt;The
project will have the following broader impacts. It will integrate research and
education by providing training and teaching experience for graduate students
and postdoctoral researchers, and a two-week genomics module for high school
biology students. The project will foster increased participation in science for
underrepresented groups through summer internships for undergraduate women and
minorities. The project will produce versatile molecular resources that will be
useful in many different aspects of rice (and other cereal) biology and in plant
bacteriology. In addition to publication for the scientific community, results
will be disseminated to the public through the educational activities of the
project, a project website, and other outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be
available online at &lt;a href=www.public.iastate.edu/~ajbog&gt;
www.public.iastate.edu/~ajbog &lt;/a&gt;. Clones, and seed from identified
susceptibility mutants will be provided by Bogdanove on request on a cost-return
basis. An important &lt;br/&gt;goal of the project is to construct Gateway
(Invitrogen) cDNA libraries of rice undergoing infection by each pathogen,
Gateway libraries of pathogen type III effector genes, and new compatible
vectors for expression in pathogenic gram-negative bacteria. The Gateway system
allows easy transfer of clones, in-frame and en masse without loss of
representation, to a wide range of expression vectors. The Gateway rice cDNA
library will be provided by Bogdanove &lt;a href=mailto:ajbog@iastate.edu&gt;
ajbog@iastate.edu &lt;/a&gt; or a third party distributor such as the ATCC on a
cost-return basis. The Gateway Xanthomonas effector gene libraries and new
destination vectors will be provided by Bogdanove on a cost-return
basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;