* 0227696
* UMEB: Increasing Diversity at the Annual Botanical Society of America Meetings
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2008
* Karen Renzaglia, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2008
* USD 59,955.00

DEB-0227696&lt;br/&gt;Renzaglia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This UMEB award will
provide financial support and professional assistance for 10 or more
undergraduate students, from groups traditionally underrepresented in science,
to attend the annual conference of the Botanical Society of America (BSA) from
2002 through 2006. A mentoring network of undergraduates, graduates and faculty
will provide support for career development and will foster socialization of
students. Mentors will help integrate students into conference activities
through a series of pre-, during-, and post-meeting activities. At the
conference, mentors will show students around the meeting site, introduce them
to professionals, and accompany them to scientific sessions, field trips,
workshops, and other events. Multiple assessments will be conducted to determine
if program goals/objectives are being achieved. A robust plan for recruiting
students and mentors will be employed, and it will canvass the entire BSA
membership, as well as take advantage of existing professional networks of BSA
members and other external professional societies and consortia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project represents a significant step by the BSA to
attract and retain minority undergraduates to plant biology. It will help foster
the professional growth of minority students, provide a solid mentoring network
for students to participate fully in the conferences, and draw more
underrepresented minorities into environmental biology disciplines. This program
is an important step towards meeting a national need to strengthen the
scientific workforce and to draw upon the full range of intellectual talent from
diverse ethnic and minority
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;