* 0227512
* International Focused Workshop:  Materials in Extreme Environments; Denali National Park, Alaska;  August 23-24, 2002
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Hong Liang, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2003
* USD 62,260.00

This grant supports the workshop to discuss various materials aspects related to
their utilization in extreme environments encountered in Alaska. The funding
will enable around 30 participants from various countries to attend the
workshop. This is the second in series with the first workshop conducted in
Alaska in February 2001 where potential research areas were identified that
would benefit Alaska with emphasis on manufacturing and materials aspects. In
this second workshop, specific materials and manufacturing aspects will be
discussed in detail. A major objective of the workshop is to bring together
leading experts in materials research and manufacturing. Items that are to be
discussed include materials issues in extreme environments, such as sub-zero
temperatures and remote locations with particular attention to stimulate ideas
to direct new or existing materials into commercial products such as those
needed for transport surfaces, pipelines, entertainment, and communication. The
goal of the workshop is to draft a short and long-term plan for Alaskan
materials development and manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many
challenging issues related to materials and manufacturing aspects pertaining to
the extreme environmental conditions and remote access in Alaska. Roads,
harbors, and buildings in arctic environments are generally built on permafrost
and seismically unstable locations, and thus must function at sub-zero
temperatures. There is a need for technological development of materials with
regard to the special needs of the extreme arctic environment such as the effect
on the landscape, energy consumption, and potential accidents. The preservation
of the Alaskan environment is paramount in any commercial development. The
workshop enables participation of experts from academia, government and
industrial institutions in Alaska, surrounding countries and other parts of the
United States. Efforts will be made to invite and recruit minorities. The
organizers of the workshop will review the abstracts and potential candidates
with possible collaborations will be given priority. This grant supports the
travel and registration of around 30 selected participants.&lt;br/&gt;