* 0227553
* Cooperative Research:  Petrogenesis of HP and UHT Granulites from the Brasilia Fold Belt in Minas Gerais and Goias, Brazil
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Michael Brown, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2007
* USD 360,460.00

Brown&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0227553&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, with counterparts
in Brazil, investigates the relationship between high-pressure (HP; P &gt; 1.0
GPa, T &gt; 700EC) and ultrahigh-temperature (UHT; T &gt; 900EC) granulites and
'common' granulites in the core of the Brasilia Fold Belt. The orogenic core of
the Brasilia Fold Belt is composed of a metamorphic complex characterized by
granulite facies rocks, and the recent discovery of HP and UHT granulites within
the southern (Minas Gerais; kyanite-K-feldspar bearing granulites) and central
(Goias; sapphirine-quartz and spinel-quartz bearing granulites) sectors of the
belt provides the principal motivation for this research. We will map the
distribution of HP (Minas Gerais) and UHT (Goias) granulite types within the
metamorphic complex of the core of the Brasilia Fold Belt, and establish their
spatial, temporal, structural and metamorphic relationship with 'common'
granulites. We will investigate the role of melt loss and melt retention in the
preservation and/or retrogression of mineral assemblages formed under conditions
of extreme crustal metamorphism. Melt loss will be evaluated using distribution
of leucosome, bulk rock chemistry, and pseudosections in multi-element model
systems that allow the investigation of subsolidus and suprasolidus phase
equilibria. We will characterize the microstructural relationships and mineral
assemblages within HP and UHT granulites for a range of bulk compositions,
particularly in samples that preserve disequilibrium reaction microstructures
such as symplectites and reaction coronae. Peak and post-peak segments of P-T
paths will be established using these data and detailed mineral chemistry in
rocks with suitably low variance. Of general interest is the relationship
between the development, preservation and mode of exhumation of HP and UHT
granulites to the tectonics of convergent (subduction - collision) orogens. The
Brasilia Fold Belt displays tectonic elements that developed due to ocean basin
evolution and subduction that culminated with continent-continent collision in
Neoproterozoic time. We will evaluate the results of our research within the
framework of current plate tectonics theory, and propose a model that is
consistent with the data and which accounts for the evolution of the Brasilia
Fold Belt.&lt;br/&gt;