* 0227830
* Great Lakes Wood Manufacturing Partnership
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Brian Brashaw, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2007
* USD 599,550.00

0227830&lt;br/&gt;Brashaw &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the University
of Minnesota at Duluth to support the activity described below for 24 months.
The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation
Program Solicitation (NSF 02060). The partners include the University of
Minnesota at Duluth (Lead Institution), Michigan Technological University,
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, Michigan Department of Natural
Resources, Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, USDA Forest Products
Laboratory, Northern Economic Initiatives Corporation, Beaver Manufacturing,
Shell Lake (WI), Besse Forest Products, Ladysmith (WI), Colonial Craft
(Roseville, MN), Conner Sports Flooring (Amasa, MI), Crystal Cabinet Works
(Princeton, MN), Fentech, Inc (Superior, WI), Ferche Millwork (Rice, MN), Glen
Oak Lumber &amp; Milling (Montello, WI), GFP Strandwood Corp Houghton, MI),
Maple Flooring Manufacturing Association (Northbrook, IL), Northern Contours
(Fergus Falls, MN), Northern Hardwoods (South Range, MI), Smurfit Stone
(Ontonagon, MI), TrueRide, Inc (Duluth, MN), Wisconsin Business Innovation Corp
(Spooner, WI). Kaizen techniques are being used to improve the manufacturing
process by implementing lean manufacturing, resulting in reduced costs and
improves profitability. These techniques are being used in development projects
to address technical, material, and market issues for new products and to reduce
the development time cycle. The partnership cooperatively provides assistance to
private companies in adoption of best manufacturing practices, introduction of
new technology, and development of new products. These activities promote and
sustain innovation by training wood products specialists in lean manufacturing
and group facilitation, strengthening their capabilities for contributing to
economic growth and stability of the wood products industry. A model for
promoting future ties between universities, state agencies, federal
laboratories, economic development organizations and private wood products
businesses in other regions of the United States will be developed. The program
will also provide a well-trained workforce for the wood products
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the first phase of the project, 15
companies will participate in company-specific manufacturing process improvement
and/or product and market development projects. In the second phase, an
additional 12+ company partners will be identified for projects. Further
outreach to the wood products companies in the Great Lakes Region will be
completed through short courses and case studies. Improved manufacturing
technologies will make these companies more profitable and new jobs will result.
The creation of new jobs will have a significant impact on the region, which
currently has a high unemployment. In addition, more efficient use of the
natural wood supply will have ecological implications for the future.&lt;br/&gt;