* 0227703
* UMEB: Mathematical and Theoretical Biology Undergraduate Travel to Conferences
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Carlos Castillo-Chavez, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Sally E. O'Connor
* 01/31/2005
* USD 29,972.00

0227703 Castillo-Chavez

This UMEB award will provide financial support and mentoring for up to fifteen
undergraduate students per year from groups traditionally underrepresented in
science to attend national meetings in the area of mathematical biology, with a
focus on environmental mathematical biology. In the first year the students will
all be drawn for Cornell University's Mathematical and Theoretical Biology
Institute, a summer research experience with a very strong record of enabling
minority undergraduates to pursue careers in mathematical biology. In later
years, students not enrolled in MBTI will also be recruited and brought into the
meeting activities and mentoring opportunities provided by this award. The PI
has received endorsements and promised assistance from several professional
societies, including the Society for Mathematical Biology, the Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics.

This project build on efforts undertaken by MBTI and others to bring a broader
range of students into mathematical biology. It will help foster the
professional growth of minority students, provide a solid mentoring network for
students to participate fully in the conferences, draw more underrepresented
minorities into areas where mathematical biology and environmental biology
overlap, and more actively engage several professional societies in ongoing
efforts to broaden participation. This program is an important step towards
meeting a national need of developing a more quantitatively- prepared scientific
workforce and to draw upon the full range of intellectual talent from diverse
populations.