* 0227679
* GLOBEC-01: The Physical Oceanography of Georges Bank and Its Impact on Biology
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Kenneth Brink, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,520,118.00

The U.S. GLOBEC NW Atlantic/Georges Bank program was designed to investigate the
underlying physical and biological processes that control the population
dynamics of marine animals, with the specific target species being the pelagic
early life stages of cod (Gadus morhua) and haddock (Melanogrammus aeglefinus)
and the copepod zooplankton Calanus finmarchicus and Pseudocalanus spp. (GLOBEC,
1992). The resulting combination of broad-scale, long-term and process-oriented
field studies conducted between 1994-1999, together with numerical model
studies, has produced unique data sets and new ideas with which to investigate
specific processes and the integration of these processes into a new level of
understanding of the physics and biology of the Bank. Developing this new
paradigm for physical/biological processes that control the population dynamics
of the target species is a central goal of the Phase IV synthesis effort. This
project has three primary objectives that serve the broader Phase IV effort.
First, this project is seeking to more fully understand the physical dynamics
and interactions of several specific processes (e.g., those associated with the
seasonal evolution of stratification on the Bank, the crucial flow field over
the Northeast Peak, and cross-frontal exchange within the tidal mixing and
northern flank fronts) that are thought to play critical roles in zooplankton
and fish recruitment. Second, this project is combining observationally-based
process synthesis studies into model-based studies to provide our best
descriptions of the Banks physical environment and its variability on time
scales from minutes to monthly to seasonal for the GLOBEC field years. These
model studies are using the finite-volume coastal circulation model (FVCOM)
developed by C. Chen for coupled physical/biological studies. The model
solutions, generated by hindcast and data assimilation approaches, are being
used to define and quantify key physical mechanisms and physical/biological
interactions on the Bank. Third, this project is providing other Phase IV
investigators with as complete a description and understanding of the basic
physical processes affecting their observations as possible. The work has two
long-term goals: (a) to refine and quantify the new physical paradigm and the
physical/biological interactions that impact the target species, and (b) to
develop with Franks and Chen et al. the FVCOM coupled physical/biological model
system to understand the coupled physical/biological system on the Bank,
including why one year might differ from another biologically. These goals are
clearly related, since the data synthesis work will guide model evaluation and
refinement, and the model simulations (both process and seasonal prognostic)
will provide process understanding and realistic property and flow fields that
are essential for quantitative biological modeling.