* 0227541
* YIA-PGR: Genetic, Molecular and Developmental Analysis of Variation in Tomato Fruit Morphology
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2009
* Esther Van der Knaap, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,358,729.00

Breeding and mutation analysis in tomato have resulted in a diverse germplasm
collection, providing a rich resource for studies on fruit morphology. Often,
fruit morphological changes occur during growth and maturation of the ovary
prior to pollination and/or during maturation of the fruit after pollination and
successful fertilization. Therefore, tomato varieties displaying altered fruit
shape may provide unique insights into developmental processes controlling ovary
and fruit growth and maturation. Understanding the molecular-genetic basis of
diversity in fruit form will allow insights into evolutionary processes in
tomato as well as other fruit-bearing crops, and modification of developmental
processes regulating ovary and fruit formation.

The first goal is to identify and fine-map novel genetic loci to obtain a global
view of key loci and developmental pathways controlling variation in tomato
fruit shape. Populations derived from crosses between cultivated tomato
exhibiting extreme fruit shapes and a round-fruited wild relative will be
phenotypically and genotypically analyzed to identify quantitative trait loci
(QTL) controlling fruit shape. These loci will be introgressed into a homogenous
background to permit future genomic analyses and map-based cloning of genes
underlying fruit morphology QTL.

The second goal is to identify changes in gene expression profiles during tomato
ovary and fruit growth, and to correlate these to developmental changes in
morphology. Results from the analyses will provide insights into molecular
events regulating ovary and fruit development. In addition, genes will be
identified whose transcript levels change as a consequence of allelic
substitution at fruit shape loci resulting in changes in fruit morphology. This
information will allow insights into networks of genes and biochemical processes
potentially downstream from fruit shape loci, and how fruit morphology is
regulated.

The third goal is to integrate fruit shape characteristics with gene expression
and genotype information becoming available during the course of the project,
and to develop a searchable database containing this information. In addition, a
software package will be developed to semi-automatically analyze variation in
fruit shape in tomato varieties and in mapping populations.