* 0227837
* Building the "Last Mile" of the Research Enterprise Infrastructure: An Innovative Model to Connect Advanced Agriculture/Bioscience Research to the Resources of the Local Community
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Mark Kapfer, Eastern Iowa Community College
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2006
* USD 599,669.00

0227837&lt;br/&gt;Kapfer &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to Eastern Iowa
Community College to support the activity described below for 36 months. The
proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF 02060).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include Eastern Iowa Community College (Lead Institution), Iowa State
University, University of Iowa, City of Davenport, Kaizen Corporation, USDA-
Peoria Research Lab, and DavenportOne.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program produces
web-based publication of summaries of emerging research written in language for
the business/investment audience, training curriculum to educate entrepreneurs
in AG-based Biotech business, and a model for economic development of rural
communities in the AG-based biotech sector. Continuing education/training for
business developers will be conducted. In addition, they will create a system to
capture and screen emerging Agriculture Technology-Bioscience ideas,
technologies, and patents that have marketplace potential; communicate research
information to potential entrepreneurs and the economic development community of
eastern Iowa; educate potential entrepreneurs, business development
consultants/trainers and economic development professionals on the process of
creating a business based on emerging research; disseminate the results and
practices to other regions; promote the development and effective use of Native
American governments for economic development and management of their lands; and
establish internship programs in industry and government for the workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AG-based Biotech sector produced $1B in 1995, and is
expected to reach $10B by 2005. The community college expertise in training
coupled with the research universities is a powerful team to produce both the
sources of technologies and the trained workforce to create new companies in
this rapidly growing economic sector. The community colleges can also provide
continued business tech support to small emerging companies to improve their
probability of success in the early stages of development. Eastern Iowa is
suited to be a large player in this emerging technology sector, resulting in
economic well being and creation of new jobs. The model will also be helpful to
other rural, agriculture-based regions.&lt;br/&gt;