* 0227838
* Partnering for Innovative Commercialization of Technology: The University of Kentucky Natural Products Alliance
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Joseph Fink, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2007
* USD 600,000.00

0227838&lt;br/&gt;Smith &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to University of
Kentucky to support the activity described below for 36 months. The proposal was
submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation
(NSF 02060).&lt;br/&gt;The partners include University of Kentucky (Lead
Institution), Alltech, Apolmmune, Equine Biodiagnostics Inc, Limestone Capital
Partners LLC, Martek, Neogen, Stoll, Keenon and Parks LLC, Venture Laboratories
Inc, Coldstream Research Campus, KY State Office for the New Economy, KY Science
and Technology Council, KY State Office on Agriculture Policy, KY Tobacco
Research and Development Council, Lexington United, and The Innovation Group.
The activities include launching at least 4 start-up companies based on
intellectual property derived from the University of Kentucky College of
Agriculture research programs, involvement of 4-6 students (some recently
graduated) in the start-up companies, and development of at least 2 new advanced
training courses to provide new technical and business skills in the new natural
products technology sector. The proposed goals include the following: (1)
education of entrepreneurs in management of intellectual property, business
planning, incorporation and other legal issues, financial management and
accounting, human resources management, insurance, financial resource
acquisition and planning, and technology assessment, (2) creation of a mentoring
network to provide new businesses with access tot business and tech support, (3)
provide financial resources to develop novel technologies and proof-of-concept
research, (4) internships for students just completing their degrees (BS to PhD)
to initiate or join new start-up companies, and (5) workforce development in the
agricultural biotechnology sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort will increase
the number of new sources of higher-paying jobs, and mobilize the
underrepresented populations in the region by providing training, technology and
business support, and connecting entrepreneurs with sources of capital for their
companies. The Commonwealth of Kentucky has traditionally been a rural economy
that is stressed by the demise in demand for some of its cash crops. They have
had recent success in attracting business and capitalizing on the intellectual
property generated by the University of Kentucky. The proposal is based on their
traditional strengths in agriculture and life sciences to create agricultural-
based biotech start-up firms to create new jobs and economic output.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;