* 0227925
* Innovations in Aquaculture Feeds
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Charlette Kohler, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2006
* USD 600,000.00

0227925&lt;br/&gt;Korpchak &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the Southern
Illinois University at Carbondale to support the activity described below for 36
months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
02060).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners for the proposed
scope of work are Southern Illinois University at Carbondale (Lead Institution),
ADM Animal Health and Nutrition, Illinois Fish Farmers Cooperative, Illinois
Department of Commerce and Community Affairs, City of Carbondale/Southern
Illinois Research Park. ADM Animal Health and Nutrition is contributing its
trademarked animal feed supplements to be used by the Southern Illinois
University at Carbondale Fisheries and Illinois Aquaculture Center in dietary
/feeding experiments. The Illinois Fish Farmers Cooperative will contribute
technical support in fish processing and storage, and coordinate participation
of its members in field trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aquaculture is the most
rapidly growing sector of U.S. agriculture. Illinois is the largest inland state
consumer of seafood and the second leading consumer of farm-raised fish in the
country. The state of Illinois has recently invested $12 million to build a
state-of-the-art fish processing facility. This effort will build on this
initiative by addressing the issues of feed for farm-raised fish, which is the
most costly factor in aquaculture. The following innovations are included: (1)
farm-raised fish with substantially higher levels of long-chain, omega-3 fatty
acids in their edible fillets, (2) healthier fish in terms of growth and
survival in winter, (3) higher survival percentage for the hatchlings. Potential
economic benefits include, less expensive food for farm-raised fish, higher
production yields for fish farms, reduction of over fishing of thee oceans, and
increased new jobs in fish-processing plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation
of new jobs will have a significant impact on the region, which currently has a
high unemployment. In addition, lowered food costs and environmental
improvements from less over fishing of the oceans plus a fish supply from waters
known to be free from industrial contaminants will have obvious benefits to
society.&lt;br/&gt;