* 0227919
* NativeView: A Geospatial Curriculum for Native Nation Building
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Michael Kalb, Sinte Gleska University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2004
* USD 599,055.00

0227919 Bordeaux

This award is to Sinte Gleska University to support the activity described below
for 24 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF 02060). The partners include Sinte Gleska
University (Lead Institution), The Rosebud Sioux Tribe, Global Sciences and
Technology Corporation, and Earth Satellite Corporation. The goals of the
program include developing and implementing a curriculum in geospatial
information technology that is focused on the natural and cultural resource
information needs of tribal governments. The program creates an academic program
that is focused on the cultural and land management information needs of Native
American communities. This academic program provides training in geospatial
technology, and increases the level and quality of science and math education in
Native schools. A series of workshops for tribal elders will help ensure that
the development of the proposed curriculum will be relevant to and will address
real operational needs of the Tribes. In addition, the program is developing a
business plan for a geospatial services enterprise that will serve indigenous
communities, federal and state agencies, and will ultimately be able to compete
successfully for geospatial services work for public and private sector clients
worldwide.

The aim of the program is to create a self-sustaining Native American business
that provides the skills to manage land resources with the initial focus on
Native American communities and government agencies. Remote sensing and
geospatial services that provide real time agriculture weather and storm
information will be made available to Indian Nations throughout North America.
The model will be made available for other indigenous communities. Unemployment
and underemployment are widespread, and self-sustaining enterprises are rare
among the Native Americans in this region. The geospatial industry exports work
in foreign countries, and this program is designed to provide trained workforce
to keep these jobs in the U.S. The creation of new jobs, training for future
employees plus providing a service to Native American communities to give them
tools to help them manage their land will have a significant impact on the
region.