* 0227667
* Dissertation Enhancement (Ireland):  The Effects of European Integration and Late Capitalism on Feminist Political Practices in the Republic of Ireland
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Sherry Ortner, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2004
* USD 15,500.00

0227667&lt;br/&gt;Ortner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year award for
dissertation enhancement involves US-Ireland cooperative research in ethnology
and cultural anthropology. Under the guidance of her US advisor, Sherry B.
Ortner of Columbia University and Irish mentor, Carmel Quinlan of the Centre for
Women's Studies, University College Cork, Jennifer DeWan will explore the
effects of rapid social changes augured by European integration and late
capitalism on contemporary feminist activism in Ireland. The objective is to
determine if the economic success of the "Celtic Tiger", Ireland's membership in
the European Union, secularization and immigration and other factors have
dramatically changed the social environment in Ireland. Using participant
observation and ethnographic interviews of the institutions and groups that make
up Ireland's fragmented and diversified women's movement, the investigator will
focus on the methods, spaces and subjects that constitute feminist political
practices. This will be supplemented by textual ethnography, historical and
archival research. The research will take place in Ireland's two largest cities,
Dublin and Cork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF will cover travel funds and living
expenses for the US graduate student during her one-year residence in Ireland.
&lt;br/&gt;