* 0228863
* Participation of Qualified Oceanographers from Developing Countries in International Scientific Meetings
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Edward Urban, Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR)
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2005
* USD 225,000.00

This award provides funds to the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR)
for a long-standing program of travel assistance to qualified and active
oceanographic researchers from developing countries and nations with economies
in transition. SCOR travel grants are awarded to enable such individuals to
attend international meetings relevant to their scientific interests and to
those of SCOR and the Division of Ocean Sciences of NSF. This ongoing project
has become the cornerstone of SCOR's efforts to provide assistance to marine
scientists in the third world and, more recently in Russia and Eastern Europe.
All recipients of funds are informed that this assistance is made possible
through a grant to SCOR from the US National Science Foundation. Project
objectives include: broading the participation of scientists from developing
countries, eastern Europe, and Russia in international marine science events;
encouraging contacts between scientists from the United States and other
developed countries with their colleagues in developing countries, and to
facilitate the transfer of knowledge in all disciplines of oceanography; making
available specialized regional knowledge and expertise at meetings where this is
needed, for example, in the planning of regional components of large-scale
experiments; and providing opportunities for involvement of developing country
scientists in international collaborative programs.