* 0228133
* PPD-DEI: Supporting Youth with Disabilities in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics: The SIU SY-STEM Project
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Karen Renzaglia, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 07/31/2005
* USD 76,836.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to our nation's capacity for
increasing the number of&lt;br/&gt;people with disabilities employed in the
science, technology, engineering, and&lt;br/&gt;mathematics (STEM) work force by
demonstrating the effectiveness of an innovative&lt;br/&gt;combination of person
centered career planning activities, ongoing mentoring, and hands&lt;br/&gt;on
experiences in the sciences. This combination of activities is designed to 1.)
increase&lt;br/&gt;recognition of the interests and needs of students with
disabilities in the STEM career&lt;br/&gt;areas, 2.) create a more supportive
academic and professional climate for persons with&lt;br/&gt;disabilities, 3.)
promote accessibility and appropriateness of instructional materials
and&lt;br/&gt;educational technologies at multiple levels (high school,
community college, and&lt;br/&gt;university), and 4.) increase the availability
of academic enrichment experiences such as&lt;br/&gt;mentoring and hands-on
experiences in the STEM areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet these broad goals,
the SIU SY-STEM project will:&lt;br/&gt;*Identify students' preferences and
interests for specific STEM-related career&lt;br/&gt;areas.&lt;br/&gt;*Increase
receptivity of educators (secondary and post-secondary math and
science&lt;br/&gt;educators) and of guidance counselors for including of
students with disabilities&lt;br/&gt;in STEM-related curriculum
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;*Impact adaptations, accommodations, and instructional
strategies used by&lt;br/&gt;educators in STEM classes and labs at multiple
levels.&lt;br/&gt;*Foster academic and professional development in STEM related
career areas by&lt;br/&gt;increased access to career exploration experiences and
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental premise of this project is that
the best way to impact employment of&lt;br/&gt;persons with disabilities in the
sciences is by simultaneously increasing the numbers of&lt;br/&gt;people in the
pipeline leading to these careers and enhancing the capacity of
secondary&lt;br/&gt;and post-secondary training institutions to successfully
include students with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;Twenty-five teams of students,
parents, educators, and guidance counselors from 25 high&lt;br/&gt;schools in
southern Illinois will participate in intensive one-day workshops on
person&lt;br/&gt;centered career planning. From these 25 student teams, six
students will be selected to&lt;br/&gt;participate in an intensive, on-campus
Summer Institute at Southern Illinois University.&lt;br/&gt;This Institute will
expose students to a variety of careers in the sciences and engage
them&lt;br/&gt;in a series of rotations in various lab sciences. University
students with disabilities will be&lt;br/&gt;recruited to work in close
affiliation with a graduate student mentor and faculty mentors&lt;br/&gt;to
provide ongoing support for the workshop and Institute
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SIU SY-STEM project will impact
involvement of persons with disabilities in&lt;br/&gt;STEM areas of study at
multiple levels, including the personal and professional&lt;br/&gt;development
of high school and college students with disabilities, and changes in
the&lt;br/&gt;educational resources, willingness, and capacity to support these
students in high school,&lt;br/&gt;community college, and university programs.
Although this project is designed as a&lt;br/&gt;regional demonstration
involving high schools, consortia of community colleges, and&lt;br/&gt;Southern
Illinois University, it is the intention of the applicant to sustain this
initiative by&lt;br/&gt;building broader, more comprehensive regional/national
networks and alliances. To that&lt;br/&gt;end, the project includes a
comprehensive evaluation component and widespread&lt;br/&gt;dissemination plan.