* 0228137
* Student/Faculty Mentor Teams for SIAM Symposium on Computational Models and Simulation; October 4-5, 2002; Washington, DC
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Richard Alo, University of Houston - Downtown
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2003
* USD 14,936.00

EIA - 0228137 Alo, Richard A. University of Houston - Downtown

Title: Student/Faculty Mentor Teams for SIAM Symposium on Computational Models
and Simulation

This project supports teams of mentors and students to participate in the SIAM
Symposium on Computational Models and Simulation for Intra-Cellular Processes to
be held in Washington, DC, October 4-5, 2002. The project provides access to a
high quality technical symposium encouraging a new generation of students to
come together with key researchers in the filed, hear research presentation and
discuss both technical and community building topics. Developments in High
Performance Computing and communications technologies have advanced quickly
allowing its tools of visualization and simulation to become new research tools
in advancing knowledge in areas where researchers were not traditionally major
users of high performance computing such as the soft science of biology. HPC is
now becoming a modality for major advances in both systems and intracellular
biological processes. Advances are needed in mathematical and statistical
methods to impact the prediction of spatio-temporal cellular behavior. The areas
require further development in high speed data mining and data analysis
techniques, knowledge acquisition tools, new information architectures, scalable
computing, collaborative technologies, simulations methods and geometric
software promoting and enhancing visualization as a research tool. The project
contributes to stimulate students in these areas.