* 0228099
* Information Technology in the Integrated Civil Engineering Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Neil Grigg, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 02/29/2004
* USD 98,144.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0228099 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Grigg, Neil INSTITUTION NAME:
Colorado State University TITLE: Information technology in the integrated civil
engineering curriculum

Abstract

The proposal is to plan for integration of next generation information
technology into the civil engineering curriculum at the department level. The
rationale is that civil engineers have lead roles in infrastructure and
environmental systems, and the power of information technology can be used in
design, construction, and operations to relieve problems of traffic congestion,
infrastructure integrity, construction productivity, environmental monitoring,
systems security and other sectors of civil society. To address this rapidly
changing field requires new thinking about the curriculum. Old curriculum
organization, consisting of loosely connected subjects, will not provide the
integration needed for expanding applications of information technology across
civil society sectors. Twenty-first century problems require integration of new
technologies and new approaches to the organization of engineering work, shaped
by information technology. Early application of information technology in
engineering education focused on computer programming, but only a few civil
engineers engage in much programming. Most use software to apply wide bands of
technology to problems with highly dispersed spatial, technological, and social
dimensions. Teaching civil engineers how to apply the methods that underlie the
software is a main goal of the integrated curriculum at Colorado State.