* 0228246
* Optimal Structural System Design for Catastrophic Unforeseen Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Roger Ghanem, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Realff
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

The events of 9/11 demonstrate the need for consideration of a decision-making
framework for structural building safety in response to unforeseen events. This
research project will provide such a framework for decision-making and
constrained optimization of building structural safety under unforeseen
catastrophic events. Unforeseen events (i.e., terrorism damage, corroded
members) occur with a surprisingly short return period and break the traditional
link between environmental loads and the probability of structural failure (Pf).
Current design, using only component-wise reliability, ignoring redundancy, and
lacking a formal decision-making framework, is inadequate. By extending recent
ideas in structural sensitivity, redundancy, and probabilistic earthquake
engineering we propose a characterization for Pf in unforeseen events through
two stochastic variables: an intensity measure (IM) and an engineering demand
parameter (EDP). The IM describes the magnitude and correlation of the
unforeseen damage. The EDP provides a link to Pf for a given IM. The use of a
redundancy index (R) to provide a coarse, but computationally cheap indicator of
Pf, will also be considered. Using Pf and/or the stochastic variables IM, EDP
and R we will explore decision-making for low-probability, high-risk,
catastrophic events. Such events force us to reconsider the applicability of the
von Neumann Morgenstren utility theory. Recent research in catastrophic risk
insurance will be utilized to develop an appropriate objective function for
optimization of building safety.

Whether one views the behavior of the World Trade Center during the attacks of
9/11 as a design success, because so many people were able to get to safety, or
a design failure, after all the buildings collapsed - one issue that may have
been lost in the resulting discussion is that the building's behavior is not a
direct result of our "building codes" nor our current design methodologies. The
proposed work combines new findings in structural sensitivity, redundancy,
probabilistic earthquake engineering, optimization under uncertainty and
catastrophic risk insurance. This research will lead to better decision-making
in the design of buildings and insure a higher level of building structural
safety, within realistic economic constraints, when considering the possibility
of catastrophic damage events.

