* 0228419
* Stochastic Network Interdiction Models for Homeland Security
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2005
* David Morton, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Realff
* 10/31/2005
* USD 99,960.00

This research attempts to solve a stochastic network interdiction model for
deterring and preventing smuggling of nuclear material. The interdiction model
consists of two adversaries, a nuclear smuggler and an interdictor who installs
sensors to detect the smuggler. The smuggler selects a path through a
transportation network that maximizes the probability of avoiding detection. The
interdictor installs sensors to minimize that maximum probability. This problem
is formulated as a bi-level two-stage stochastic mixed-integer program. It is
stochastic because the smuggler's origin and destination are unknown at the time
the detectors are installed. The model is reformulated as a stochastic mixed-
integer program that one can attempt to solve with commercial software. For
larger instances of the problem, a decomposition procedure that exploits the
model's special structure is proposed. The model's data requirements include the
probability a smuggler can traverse an indigenous arc, an arc with an undetected
sensor, and the probability distribution governing the smuggler's origin-
destination pair. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efforts of terrorist organizations,
such as al Qaeda, and rogue nations, such as Libya and Iraq, to obtain nuclear
material and technology to produce a nuclear weapon have been well documented.
Securing U.S. borders from the possible smuggling of nuclear/radiological
weapons or precursor materials is an important step in minimizing the associated
threat. Other U.S. organizations are focusing on issues needed to secure the
border. For example, scientists at &lt;br/&gt;Los Alamos National Laboratory are
developing radiation sensor equipment to detect minute quantities of nuclear
material and data on terrorist groups. The Immigration and Naturalization
Services, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the Customs Department are
collecting data on potential smuggling routes. Significantly less effort is
being devoted to developing methodology to use this data to determine where
these detectors should be located. This grant supports research to help provide
the technical basis for locating such detectors.&lt;br/&gt;