* 0228699
* ATOL: Assembling the Tree of Life: Phylogeny of Spiders
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Gustavo Hormiga, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2008
* USD 2,762,600.00

Abstract

Assembling the Tree of Life: Phylogeny of Spiders

Ward C. Wheeler, Jonathon A. Coddington, Gustavo Hormiga, Lorenzo Prendini, and
Petra Sierewald

American Museum of natural History

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Ward Wheeler of the American Museum of Natural
History and his colleagues Dr. Lorenzo Prendini (AMNH), Dr. Jonathan Coddington
(National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution), Dr. Gustavo
Hormiga (George Washington University) and Dr. Petra Sierwald (Field Museum of
Natural History) to examine the evolutionary history and biodiversity of
spiders. Spiders are among the oldest and most diverse groups of terrestrial
organisms on our planet, with fossils dating back to the Devonian (c. 380
million years ago) and a current diversity of over 37,500 described species
placed in 3,471 genera and 109 families. Spiders stand out because of their
ecological importance as the dominant predators of insects. It is no
exaggeration to say that without spiders, insect pest populations would soar and
humans would be greatly affected. Furthermore, spiders are already model
organisms in biochemical (silk proteins and venom), behavioral (especially
sexual and web-building behaviors) and ecological (foraging, predator-prey
systems, integrated pest management) research. Accordingly, understanding their
evolutionary history is a critical component in the NSF's Assembling the Tree of
Life program. The aim of this Tree of Life proposal to produce a robust
phylogeny of all the deepest branches within the spiders, by combining a massive
amount of newly generated comparative genomic data with a substantial set of new
and re-assessed data on morphology and behavior. The PIs will use high-
throughput DNA sequencing to examine at least 50 "loci" for representatives of
at least 500 genera of spiders and their closest relatives (the whipscorpions
and allies). The computational challenges posed by the resulting large data
matrices will be analyzed using new computer software, designed in large part by
members of the group and using massively parallel processing to achieve
supercomputing capability. These organisms included in the study will
purposefully include all the previously most-favored study organisms of
ethologists, ecologists, physiologists, and developmental and molecular
biologists, thus integrating and contextualizing their research.