* 0228544
* CAREER: Controllable Visual Cues: Analysis and Applications of Images as Sensory Signals in Complex Control Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2001,02/29/2004
* Stefano Soatto, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Junku Yuh
* 02/29/2004
* USD 111,468.00

This project is concerned with the study of vision as a sensor for engineering
systems operating in complex, dynamic and unknown environments. It entails the
analysis of measurable properties of images that depend upon controllable
parameters such as the geometry and optics of the imaging device. These
properties are called "controllable cues" and they include, for instance,
stereo, motion and accommodation. In the project, the purposeful aspect of
vision is emphasized: knowledge and representation of the environment are only
functional to the accomplishment of control tasks, as for instance visual-based
navigation, docking, manipulation, endoscopic surgery, Human-Machine
Interaction. In order to address the issue of modeling and representation, it is
necessary to understand how the geometry and the dynamics of the environment are
related to the information coming from the imaging sensor. In the long term,
these issues will become crucial in the study of complex systems, where low-
level information needs to be organized in order to perform effective
communication between different levels of a control hierarchy, or between
different agents involved in the control structure. The research material will
be integrated into an educational plan that spans graduate, undegraduate and
pre-college levels. In addition, to emphasize physical intuition, the PI plan to
develop an experimental setup on the use of controllable cues, which will be
accessible by precollege students through an Internet educational service.