* 0228592
* Petrology and Mineral Chemistry of Crust and Mantle Fragments in an Archean Ophiolite from the North China Craton
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Claude Herzberg, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2004
* USD 74,562.00

Herzberg&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0228592&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theories on the FeO content
of the Archean mantle are difficult to test because direct rock samples that
were melted to produce basaltic crust have never been identified and described.
Uncertainties in mantle FeO content have profound consequences on understanding
mantle dynamics because Fe is much heavier than all other rock-forming elements,
and even a modest iron-enrichment must be compensated by large temperature
increases in order to maintain neutral buoyancy. Therefore, the recent discovery
of a complete ophiolite with tectonized mantle peridotite from the North China
Craton (Kusky et al., 2001; Science 292, 1142-1145) is of monumental importance
because it has created an unprecedented opportunity for constraining the FeO
content of the Archean mantle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, the mantle
samples from the North China Craton have been metamorphosed, and the extent to
which the original Archean geochemistry has been modified is not presently
known. We plan on evaluating whether it is feasible to extract from these
samples the original mantle FeO content in a 1-year exploratory pilot project.
We will use the JEOL-8600 Superprobe with Advanced Microbeam upgrade at Rutgers
University to obtain chemistry data on metamorphic and possible relect igneous
minerals. Microimage software will be used to obtain modal analyses of 1-4
million points per thin section, and this will permit a mass balance calculation
to be made of whole rock major element geochemistry. Mineral and whole rock
chemistry obtained at Rutgers University will be crosschecked with whole rock
major element geochemistry obtained by collaborator A. Polat at Windsor
University (Canada) using XRFS. These data will be compared with the composition
of mantle peridotite from abyssal peridotites and ophiolites of Phanerozoic
ages. Any differences in composition will be evaluated in terms of possible: 1)
different igneous T-P histories, 2) metamorphric alteration effects, or 3)
secular variations in mantle composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;