* 0228912
* HPNC:   Colorado School of Mines High Performance Network Connection
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Phillip Romig, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Gatchell
* 09/30/2004
* USD 156,000.00

Colorado School of Mines (CSM) is a special-purpose university that does
internationally recognized science and engineering research while maintaining a
nationally acclaimed commitment to engineering education. In support of the
needs of its researchers, CSM is planning a high performance network connection
(HPNC). CSM proposes to make a connection to Internet2's Abilene Network through
the Front Range GigaPop to achieve this objective. Five research projects, each
which would significantly benefit from a HPNC are described in this proposal:
The Squier Group, led by Dr. Jeff Squier, focuses on three dimensional nonlinear
microscopy and optical histology. The Center for Commercial Applications of
Combustion in Space (CCACS), led by Dr. Frank Schowengerdt, conducts research in
scientific areas related to combustion with a special focus on those areas where
the results can be applied to the development of commercial products and
processes and where the research can benefit from the unique properties of
space. Dr. Panos Kiousis performs research involving the modeling of high
strength concrete structures when subjected to static, cyclic, and dynamic
excitations such as strong earthquake motions. The McCabe Group, headed by Dr.
Clare McCabe performs research on molecular modeling and computational
chemistry. The OpenChem Workbench Project (Dr. Glenn Murray and Dr. J. Thomas
McKinnon) plans to expand into real time collaboration on chemical modeling.