* 0228717
* Louisiana State University Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Scholars Program [LA-STEM]
* MPS,MPS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Su-Seng Pang, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan G. Hamm
* 08/31/2009
* USD 4,080,000.00

With this award, Connie Stelly, Saundra McGuire, Su-Seng Pang, Gregory Vincent,
and Isiah Warner of LSU will lead the establishment of the Louisiana State
University Research Scholars Program (LA-STEM). LA-STEM is a strategically
planned, cooperative, comprehensive activity that will put in place at LSU a
system that will increase the numbers of minority students - primarily African
Americans - who obtain undergraduate degrees in science, engineering, and
mathematics, and who go on to graduate degrees in these fields. The LA-STEM
strategy is to (1) identify pre-college (high school) students with high
potential for achievement and recruit them for the program; (2) facilitate the
development of these students' necessary skills and competencies in addition to
their undergraduate education in a STEM discipline that will (3) prepare these
students to go on to earn graduate degrees in their STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modeled after the widely-acclaimed University of Maryland
- Baltimore County 'Meyerhoff Scholars Program,' LA-STEM is projected to reach ~
115 students in the initial five-year period of the activity through a
disciplined combination of 'innovative intervention activities'
including:&lt;br/&gt;A Summer Bridge Program prior to the freshman fall
semester;&lt;br/&gt;Association with a faculty mentor upon acceptance into the
program;&lt;br/&gt;Peer advising and counseling along with academic program
advising and counseling;&lt;br/&gt;Monthly social and informational sessions;
&lt;br/&gt;A sustained On-Campus Academic Year Internship/Research Experience
beginning the fall semester of the freshman year;&lt;br/&gt;Intensive On- and
Off-Campus Summer Internships/Research Experiences;&lt;br/&gt;Professional
Conference Participations and Presentations;&lt;br/&gt;Tutoring and Workshops
for instruction in essential skills for academic and personal
success;&lt;br/&gt;Communication Skills Instruction that will help to develop a
positive self-concept and increased self-confidence;&lt;br/&gt;Instruction in
applying Study Skills and Personal Skills for the successful completion of the
undergraduate program;&lt;br/&gt;Coaching for the successful Admittance to
Graduate Programs across the country through Graduate Preparation Workshops
(application and interview process, test preparation, etc.); and
&lt;br/&gt;Career Planning Workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that
outcomes of the LA-STEM project will guide further diversification of
undergraduate STEM majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;