* 0228679
* ATOL: Collaborative Research: Deep Green Plant Phylogenetics: Novel Analytical Methods for Scaling Data from Genomics to Morphology
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2009
* Karen Renzaglia, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 09/30/2009
* USD 453,626.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Karen S. Renzaglia of Southern Illinois
University to investigate green plant evolution. Humans rely on green plants for
food, shelter, clothing, and for providing the oxygen that is essential to life.
From a biological perspective and as one of the oldest and most diverse branches
of the tree of life, green plants provide an unparalleled system in which to
explore interrelationships of living organisms and to approach some of the most
significant and intriguing questions concerning the diversification of life on
earth. Many of these questions relate to fundamental evolutionary events, such
as the transition of organisms from single-celled to multicellular body plans,
the colonization of land, and the derivation of different life-cycle modes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this collaborative project, including principal
investigators from the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, the University of
California at Berkeley, Southern Illinois University, Utah State University, the
University of Washington, and Yale University, the focus will be: 1) resolving
the primary pattern of diversification among green plants; 2) investigating
questions relating to the long evolutionary history of these organisms; 3)
providing a model for analysis that will be applicable to other groups of
organisms with extensive evolutionary histories. The team will emphasize the
development of novel analytical methods that make it possible to conduct
analyses across multiple scales and to use all of the available data from
heterogeneous sources. A solid backbone of relationships based on genomes and
structure for 50-100 plants, representing the critical deep-branching lineages,
will enable the integration of previous and ongoing studies of many more plants
into a comprehensive picture of green plant genealogy. The primary objectives of
the project are: 1) complete a matrix of whole genome sequences for chloroplasts
and mitochondria, and develop Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) nuclear
genome libraries; 2) produce a comprehensive set of comparable morphological and
ultrastructural data for the same plants; and 3) incorporate inferences from
across the phylogenetic hierarchy in green plants using methods designed to
permit scaling across studies. Multiple integrated training, educational and
outreach activities will result in continual dissemination of the activities and
progress of this research group to the scientific community and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Karen Renzaglia will have primary responsibilities
for collecting and data basing morphological and ultrastructural data for the
land plants included in this study. She will also assist in the interpretation
of land plant molecular data, in the generation of dissemination tools such as
web sites, and in educational and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;