* 0228412
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Determinants of Scapegoat-selection in Zimbabwe
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Gerald Murray, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 12/31/2003
* USD 11,700.00

0228412 Murray / Rodlach With more than 25% of the adult population estimated to
be infected, Zimbabwe has one of the highest rates of HIV-infection in the
world. In assigning blame for AIDS, people frequently argue about causes of the
epidemic over which they have virtually no pragmatic control (poverty,
conspiracies emanating from others, negligence on the part of their political
leaders, etc.). In contrast, those working in the field of HIV/AIDS awareness
and prevention highlight biomedical causes (sexual behavior, mother-to-child
transmission, and blood-transfusions). This contrast is striking and
problematic. The objective of this dissertation research in cultural
anthropology is to document the direction and inner logic of such folk causal
explanations in Zimbabwe and to test hypotheses on the factors leading different
subgroups within society to invoke different explanations. Five hypotheses will
be tested: (i) the more dissatisfied an individual is with the current politics,
the more he/she will blame political forces for HIV/AIDS; (ii) the lower the
socio-economic status of the individual, the more he/she blames the wealthy for
HIV/AIDS; (iii) the more an individual perceives common strategies for HIV/AIDS
awareness and prevention as blaming the victim, the greater will be the tendency
to blame the medical profession for HIV/AIDS; (iv) the more an individual is
experiencing a split between his/her values and beliefs and their actual
practice, the more he/she blames the guardians of the value and belief system
(God and the ancestors) for HIV/AIDS; and (v) the more intimate the network to
which one belongs, the more he/she expresses belief in sorcery and points at
other members of his/her social network as the cause of HIV/AIDS. Data will be
collected (assisted by local residents and sociology faculty and students from
the University of Zimbabwe) during a 12 month period of field research in an
urban township in Zimbabwe. The project will interview samples of township
residents, engage them in focus group discussions, do in-depth ethnographic
probes of selected households, analyze messages in the mass-media on HIV/AIDS
prevention, and survey a representative sample of the township in order to
gather date to test the hypotheses. This research will evaluate theoretical
concepts to interpret folk-explanatory models for undesirable events for the
southern African context, shedding light on their cross-cultural variability.
The broader impacts of advancing knowledge about the popularly assumed causes
for the AIDS epidemic and the explanation of these dynamics of causal
attribution and of processes of scapegoat-selection are their importance for
medical and development officers designing effective AIDS prevention and
awareness messages. This research will enable them to tailor their messages and
programs to fit their audience and consequently improve their effectiveness. The
project also contributes to the training of a young social scientist.