* 0228996
* Operation of a National Ocean Sciences Accelerator Mass Spectrometry Facility at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2009
* Mark Roberts, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Cooperative Agreement
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2009
* USD 9,382,535.00

0228996&lt;br/&gt;Hayes&lt;br/&gt; This 5-year cooperative agreement award to
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Massachusetts provides support for
continued operation of the National Ocean Sciences Accelerator Mass Spectrometry
(NOSAMS) facility. NOSAMS provides analyses of 14C at natural abundance levels.
Such data are essential for radiocarbon dating, for studies of dynamic
geophysical processes in earth's surface environment (for example, the
circulation of the oceans), and for studies of the biogeochemical cycling of
carbon. The facility accepts samples from all qualified laboratories and charges
fees that vary according to the difficulty of the analysis and the nature of the
project. During the four years ending 31 March 2002, the facility completed more
than 18,000 analyses and recovered more than 56% of its operating costs from
user fees. The facility provides both sample-preparation services and
quantitative analyses of 14C. Graphite suitable for mass spectrometric analysis
is prepared from samples of carbonate minerals, organic carbon, or inorganic
carbon dissolved in water. Quantitative analyses are obtained using a mass
spectrometer system for which the minimum sample size is 25 micrograms of C.
Attainment of full precision (+/- 3.5 parts per thousand for the 14C /12C ratio)
requires a sample size of at least 500 micrograms C.&lt;br/&gt; During the five-
year period of the cooperative agreement, the capabilities of the facility will
be enhanced. A gas-accepting ion source will be installed in order to allow
analyses of 14C in a continuously flowing stream of carrier gas. This
development will provide tens of low-precision analyses per hour for samples as
small as 0.1 micrograms C and will be uniquely applicable to surveys and to
monitoring of highly diluted radiocarbon tracers. Procedures for treatment of
sediments and other samples containing organic carbon will be automated. The
capacity of the sample-preparation laboratory to respond to surges of sample
submissions and thus to minimize increases in turnaround time will be increased.
Components of the mass spectrometer itself will be rebuilt in order to improve
and to stabilize performance. As these improvements are made, the facility will
continue to serve the ocean sciences research community, promptly providing
radiocarbon analyses as needed each year.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;