* 0228036
* SGER:   Biomechanical Modeling to Forensic Estimation of Time Since Death
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Ted Conway, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Oscar Dillon
* 06/30/2004
* USD 55,000.00

Biomechanical Modeling to Forensic Estimation of Time Since
Death&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposal is
designed to address the question: "Can the time of death for a human be
estimated from measured changes in mechanical material properties of specific
tissues post-mortem?" A multidisciplinary team, consisting of a Forensic
Anthropologist, an Anatomist and a Mechanical Engineer, has been formed to
attempt to answer this question. Since this research is at such a preliminary
stage the NSF "Small Grants for Exploratory Research" is the appropriate
mechanism for initial funding of the project.&lt;br/&gt; To gain insight into
the mechanical degradation of human tissue after death, the tissue must be
chosen from a location in the body which decomposes at a relatively slow rate.
Because of tissue encapsulation, we have chosen intervertebral discs (annulus
fibrosus) in the spine as the most likely test specimens for this study,
however, other tissues (e.g. teeth) will be considered as the testing protocol
is developed. Initially, three (limited by cost) human vertebral columns will be
harvested from fresh (unpreserved) cadavers for which time of death is known.
The intervertebral discs will be surgically extracted from the thoracic and
lumbar regions of the spinal columns at specified time intervals. These
harvested discs will be described macroscopically and microscopically, then
mechanical material properties will be determined from quasi-static, dynamic and
time-dependent compression testing imposed by an Instron 8511 Mechanical Testing
Machine. Additionally, pilot studies using ultrasound techniques will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt; The load and deformation data acquired from the
mechanical tests will be modeled using the power law, exponential law,
homography or other applicable constitutive laws appropriate for biological
material to determine material parameters at specific times since death. It is
expected that a trend between the material parameters and time since death will
emerge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;