* 0228343
* Scaling Up Mathematics: The Interface of Curricula with Human and Social Capital
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2009
* Lauren Resnick, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 12/31/2009
* USD 5,999,817.00

This project will study scaling-up of curriculum adoption in elementary school
mathematics. The researchers propose to develop a theoretically-driven model of
the conditions necessary for successful scale-up of interventions using a human
and social capital approach. Specifically, the investigators will
explore:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. How human and social capital within the school
interact to affect the breadth, depth and endurance of curricular
implementation;&lt;br/&gt;2. How the characteristics of the curriculum moderate
the relationship between human and social capital and
implementation;&lt;br/&gt;3. How district strategies influence the human and
social capital in schools via the structure and organization of professional
development opportunities and curriculum roll-out strategies;&lt;br/&gt;4. How
the breadth, depth and endurance of implementation of a research-based
curriculum ultimately influence student achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
assess these questions, the investigators propose to examine the scale-up of two
research-based elementary-level mathematics programs in four urban school
districts (including three conventional districts and the Edison Schools). They
will use a quasi-experimental, nested, mixed method design to examine the
conditions and factors that support and impede the successful large-scale
implementation of promising programs as well as the changes in student
achievement that ultimately result from implementation. The design leverages the
multiple levels at which scale-up plays out (teacher, school, and district). The
interdisciplinary team of researchers undertaking the study at LRDC and RAND is
forging connections across multiple disciplines, including cognitive psychology,
educational sociology, organizational behavior, human resource management,
statistics, and public policy.&lt;br/&gt;