* 0228204
* Optimal and Near-Optimal Resource Allocation for Information Security and Critical Infrastructure Protection
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Vicki Bier, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 01/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This grant provides funding for the investigation of optimal and near-optimal
strategies for defense of critical infrastructure from an intelligent and
adaptable adversary. Game-theoretic optimization models will be developed taking
into account the structure of the system to be defended (e.g., series and/or
parallel subsystems), and also varying assumptions about the goals, knowledge,
and constraints of both the defender and the adversary. Systems that are too
complex to yield closed-form optimal results will be analyzing using a heuristic
attack strategy that is demonstrably near-optimal for a wide range of cases, as
a basis for developing optimal or near-optimal defenses against those attack
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will lead to improved guidance for allocation of resources to critical
infrastructure protection. The primary goal of this work is to identify
defensive investment strategies that are optimized to defend against attackers
with varying assumed goals, knowledge, and constraints. For example, attacker
goals may include maximizing the probability that an attack succeeds, maximizing
the damage caused by an attack if successful, or maximizing the expected value
of the damage caused by an attack. Similarly, attackers may have differing
levels of knowledge about the system's defensive investments, and differing
constraints (e.g., limits on the number of failed attacks before the attacker is
detected and disabled. Determining optimal or near-optimal strategies to defend
against attackers with varying characteristics will help both to improve the
security of our critical infrastructure, and also to reduce the cost of critical
infrastructure protection. This work will also contribute to the computational
tools and methodologies available for resource allocation problems in complex
systems.