* 0228803
* SGER:  Simulation Modeling of Systems With Complex Entity Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Jeffrey Smith, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 07/31/2005
* USD 93,951.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) provides funding for the
classification of discrete-event simulation models involving complex entity
interaction and the development of several sample models using commercial
simulation packages. Complex interactions are those in which the flow of the
entities and the behavior of the resources are highly dependent on the system
state. Simulation models of these systems are characterized by having numerous
"user-defined" wait states for entities. In these models, resources can not be
simply passive capacity maintenance mechanisms, but rather they must implement
specific allocation logic. There are a surprising number of seemingly
straightforward models that belong to this class. This class of systems will be
characterized and documented and modeling methodologies for problems is this
class will be developed. In addition, a test suite of problems will be developed
and models for these problems will be developed using several commercially
available simulation software packages. These models will be compared with each
other and with hand-coded event-oriented models of the same
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
provide methodologies for developing discrete-event simulation models of a class
of systems involving complex entity interactions along with a suite of example
models implemented in several commercially available simulation packages. The
long-term goal of this research is to develop an open-source simulation toolkit
to specifically support the development of models for complex systems. The
result will be a freely available simulation software package along with
significant educational materials. Note that the goal of the toolkit is not to
compete with the commercial simulation packages, but, rather, to supplement them
and to provide tools to support the teaching and understanding of general
simulation principles. Actually, improving the understanding of general
simulation principles will benefit the commercial packages by increasing the
probability of success for simulation projects.