* 0228103
* SGER: Protein Based Nano-Motors and Nano-Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Martin Yarmush, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Julie Chen
* 08/31/2003
* USD 50,000.00

This project studies the development of protein-based nano-motors and nano-
robots. The goal is to develop novel and revolutionary biomolecular machine
components that can be assembled and form multi-degree of freedom nanodevices
that will be able to apply forces and manipulate objects in the nanoworld,
transfer information from the nano to the macro world and also be able to travel
in the nanoenvironment. These &lt;br/&gt;machines are expected to be highly
efficient, economical in mass production, work under little supervision and be
controllable. The vision is that such ultra-miniature robotic systems and nano-
mechanical devices will be the biomolecular electromechanical hardware of future
planetary, military or medical missions. Some proteins, due to their structural
characteristics and physicochemical properties constitute potential candidates
for this role. The specific aims of this project are: a) To identify proteins
that can be used as motors in nano / micro machines and mechanisms. We will
focus our studies on the mechanical properties of viral proteins to fold or
unfold depending on the pH level of environment. Thus, a new, powerful, linear
biomolecular actuator type is obtained that we call: Viral Protein Linear (VPL)
motor. Various viral proteins will be studied and from them different VPL motors
will be produced; b) To develop dynamic models and realistic simulations /
animations to accurately predict the performance of the proposed VPL motors; c)
To perform a series of biomolecular experiments to demonstrate the validity of
the proposed concept of VPL motors; d) To study, both computationally and
experimentally, the interface of the proposed protein motors with other
biomolecular components such as DNA joints and carbon-nanotube rigid links so
that complex, multi-degree of freedom machines and robots are
formed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and outreach activities of this
project are: a) the initiation of undergraduate students in research; b) the
establishment of collaborative projects on nanotechnology with the science and
technology high schools of New Jersey with the objective to attract new students
in this field; c) the organization of a special session at the annual ASME
International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition (IMECE) on nano-
robotics; and d) the development and maintenance of a webpage on bio-nano-
robotic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;