* 0228116
* NCAM Dissemination Project to Community Colleges
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2004
* Lawrence Goldberg, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 10/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NCAM Dissemination Project to Community
Colleges&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Demonstration, Enrichment and Information
Dissemination project is a collaboration&lt;br/&gt;between the CPB/WGBH National
Center for Accessible Media (NCAM) and the League for&lt;br/&gt;Innovation in
the Community College. NCAM will work with the League to disseminate
and&lt;br/&gt;institutionalize use of resources that can make technology-enabled
science, technology,&lt;br/&gt;engineering and math (STEM) learning resources
accessible to students, faculty and&lt;br/&gt;administrators at community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;Project goals are to elevate the issue of accessibility
within the community college system;&lt;br/&gt;disseminate NSF-funded
demonstration models, guidelines, tools and resources that
enable&lt;br/&gt;creation of accessible STEM content; and encourage the
community college system to&lt;br/&gt;participate in the development and
implementation of accessible specifications for distributed&lt;br/&gt;learning
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;NCAM will conduct presentations and workshops at annual
League conferences, offer on-site&lt;br/&gt;Accessibility Forums at member
colleges, and deliver online training and resources through
the&lt;br/&gt;League's Web-based learning community, Transformational Learning
Connections&lt;br/&gt;(LeagueTLC). Products and demonstration models that will
be shared include:&lt;br/&gt;* distributed learning industry specifications and
standards&lt;br/&gt;* developers' guidelines to creating accessible content,
focused on math and science solutions&lt;br/&gt;* accessible online physics
curriculum with multimedia lectures, quizzes, and electronic texts&lt;br/&gt;*
demonstration models of accessible math and science content within
software&lt;br/&gt;* access authoring tools including shareware and commercial
products and tutorials&lt;br/&gt;Project activities will strengthen capacity
within community colleges to create and utilize&lt;br/&gt;accessible math and
science content in technology-enabled learning. Guidelines and
technical&lt;br/&gt;resources will facilitate community college creation,
maintenance, control, packaging and&lt;br/&gt;presentation of accessible digital
content.&lt;br/&gt;Results will serve a wide array of users of online community
college content " people with&lt;br/&gt;sensory disabilities, people with
learning or print disabilities who benefit from multiple modes&lt;br/&gt;of
presentation, and people with physical disabilities who use assistive
technologies for&lt;br/&gt;navigation and control of
content.&lt;br/&gt;Accessible content and systems will improve the quality of
learning, teaching and/or work life&lt;br/&gt;for all of these users, whether
they are community college students, faculty members
and/or&lt;br/&gt;administrators.&lt;br/&gt;Through this initiative, the League
for Innovation in the Community College will encourage use&lt;br/&gt;of its
resources to connect and empower learning between innovative leaders and
model&lt;br/&gt;programs in community colleges that are recruiting and preparing
students with disabilities for&lt;br/&gt;STEM careers. This Project will also
serve to build support and generate strategies within the&lt;br/&gt;League to
mount a major learning thread on accessibility at one of the League's
conferences.