* 0228022
* Workshop: Managing Plant Genomic Resources,  June 12-14, 2002,  Asilomar,  CA
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Douglas Cook, University of California Div of Agriculture & Natural Resources
* Standard Grant
* Jane Silverthorne
* 06/30/2004
* USD 30,039.00

The genomic and post-genomic eras of biological research have produced large
quantities of information and novel genetic products that have challenged
traditional means for conservation and access. Altogether, these resources may
be termed "genomic resources" and for the most part research funding agencies
require them to be publicly available to researchers.

A workshop will be held with the goals of addressing the longevity, uniqueness,
and utility of plant genomic resources and their curatorial status; determining
strategies for their future curation, storage, and distribution; and
recommending strategies for funding, infrastructure, and personnel needs. The
workshop will address the common components of a genomic resource management
system and determine a conceptual framework applicable to all plant genome
research. This framework will provide guidance for researchers and funding
agencies in developing both short- and long-term management plans for public
genomic resources. Further, this framework will provide a basis for estimating
financial, human, and physical needs for sustaining genomic resources.

The meeting will open with presentations to demonstrate the diversity of types
of genomic resources, the current means of curation and management, the types of
uses and demands for the resources, and the nature of financial support and
anticipated duration. Results of two surveys conducted in advance of the
Workshop will be presented. One will assess genomic resources produced by the
NSF Plant Genome Research Program projects and the other will address research
user expectations and needs for genomic resource access. Periods of open
discussion will be held to define the components of a genomic resource
management plan and determine the issues that impact them. The final product
from this workshop will be a report that will provide guidance for researchers
and funding agencies in developing both short- and long-term management plans
for public genomic resources. Participants will represent existing genomic
resource management programs, genomic projects with needs for biological
resource management, and expertise with the components of biological resource
management.