* 0228999
* Constraining the Timing and Nature of Life's Emergence in Extrema:  the Geology and Geochemistry of Akilia Island, West Greenland
* GEO,EAR
* 05/30/2002,12/31/2003
* Stephen Mojzsis, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2003
* USD 43,646.00

&lt;br/&gt;Stephen J. Mojzsis, T. Mark Harrison, Craig E.
Manning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of the first life on Earth
can be viewed as having occurred in the context of an extreme environment at the
global scale. A detailed program of fieldwork and geochronological studies
coupled with stable isotopic (C, N, S) investigations is used to explore the
oldest known marine sedimentary rocks, from southern West Greenland, that
contain a record of these earliest times. These rocks are between 3.7 and 3.9
billion years old. A two-pronged approach is taken to study the sedimentary
record of Earth's earliest extreme environments. First, P. Is.' are revealing
the geological context and history of the rocks related to petrogenesis and
subsequent protracted metamorphism from field studies, metamorphic petrologic
observations, and U-Pb zircon geochronological investigations. Second, their
study searches for isotopic tracers in the form of C, N, and S fractionations
induced by life and preserved in the oldest sediments. P.Is.' view is that these
two approaches together will lead the advance in understanding the extremes of
early environments for life on Earth. This research is utilizing new ultra-high
resolution mass spectrometric techniques (MC-SIMS, C-GC-IRMS, LEC-SMS) developed
by UCLA and project collaborators to make these measurements. With this work,
the number of biogeochemical tools will increase in power and diversity for
detecting potential evidence for early life and the timing of its appearance, in
older rocks from Earth when they are found, and eventually in samples from other
worlds, like Mars, and Europa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;