* 0228835
* Space-Time Rainfall:  Scaling, Extremes and Prediction
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Daniele Veneziano, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/2007
* USD 285,995.00

0228835 Veneziano

The objective of the project is to study the scaling of rainfall in space and
time and develop models for hydrologic application including extremes and short-
term forecasting. This is an extension of work done recently by the PI and co-
workers on temporal rainfall. The main issues to be addressed are:

Scaling invariance: Determine whether and in what form the limited multifractal
scaling properties of temporal rainfall (at small scales and within synoptic
events) extend to space-time. Modeling: A new type of renewal models with
multifractal pulse-based rainfall events has proved successful in modeling
temporal rainfall series. Extend these models to space-time in a way that
reproduces on/off statistics, scaling invariance, spatial and temporal
dependencies, extremes, and other key properties of rainfall. Extremes: Derive
theoretical scaling laws for the Area-Intensity-Duration-Frequency curves based
on properties of space-time rainfall. Use these theoretical laws to extrapolate
beyond the observation range. Forecasting: Develop short-term forecasting
methods based on the scaling properties of time-space rainfall.

These issues are of great theoretical and practical importance to hydrology.
They will be pursued through a combination of statistical modeling, theoretical
scaling analysis, numerical simulation and validation, and analysis of space-
time rainfall records (from the GATE and TOGA-COARE experiments).

In the past, rainfall models have emphasized either the conceptual pulse
structure of meso-scale atmospheric circulation or the multifractal cascade
structure of turbulence. The models we shall develop combine both aspects and
use a parsimonious parameterization. Extremes are of obvious importance for
hydrologic design and risk analysis. Theoretical determination of their scaling
behavior will allow more confident extrapolation beyond the observation range as
well as linkage to climatic parameters. Of equal importance is real time
forecasting, for which we intend to develop flexible and practical methods that
take advantage of the scaling properties of space-time rainfall. The
developments under this project are directly relevant also to space-time
rainfall downscaling and disaster prevention through short-term rainfall
prediction and long-term flood risk assessment.