* 0228106
* HPNC:   High Performance Network Connection for Middle Tennessee State University
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Ralph Butler, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Gatchell
* 12/31/2004
* USD 150,000.00

Middle Tennessee State University (MTSU) is establishing a high performance
network connection to support its increasingly strong research mission. Among
the researchers who will use this connection are

Ralph M. Butler (Computer Science). Dr. Butler conducts research in the
development of algorithms/software for parallel processing and computational
biology. The high performance network connection will enhance his collaboration
with colleagues at Argonne National Laboratory and at the University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign.

Ngee-Sing Chong (Chemistry). Dr. Chong conducts research in the development of
new materials for the removal of environmental pollutants. The high performance
network connection will also allow him to carry out computational simulation of
the transport of atmospheric pollutants using the resources available from
various government agencies. Dr. Chong will also make use of remote access to
instrumentation for student research projects and laboratory instruction.

Preston J. MacDougall (Chemistry). Dr. MacDougall is the Principal Investigator
for the Materials Theory and Molecular Design Project at MTSU. The most
computationally intensive area of his research program is the development of
molecular visualization tools, and involves collaboration with computer
scientists at the NASA Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. The
high performance network connection at MTSU will enable Dr. MacDougall and his
students to utilize the key interactive features of his visualization software
remotely, and in "real time".

Zachariah Sinkala (Mathematics). Dr. Sinkala focuses on research in applied
differential equations. He will use the high performance network connection to
obtain rapid access to powerful computer systems capable of numerically solving
systems of hundreds of simultaneous, nonlinear, partial differential equations.
MTSU has a network backbone using Gigabit Ethernet. The campus standard is 100
Mbps switched Ethernet to the desktop, providing a full 100 Mbps dedicated
connection to the campus data network. The network includes over 7000 active
ports. The high performance network connection will be achieved by purchasing a
router to provide connectivity to Vanderbilt University via a full DS3. MTSU
will also purchase the necessary equipment to interface the DS3 circuit with
Vanderbilt's network equipment as specified by Vanderbilt's Information
Technology department. MTSU traffic destined for Abilene will then combine with
Vanderbilt Abilene traffic on an OC-12 connection to the Southern Crossroads
(SoX) regional high-speed network.