* 0228807
* Analysis and Potential Theory in Metric Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Jeremy Tyson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 99,196.00

Professor Tyson's proposed research concerns linear and nonlinear potential
theory in nonsmooth (i.e., non-Riemannian) environments. It consists of three
parts. Part I is a joint project with Ilkka Holopainen and Nageswari
Shanmugalingam. Certain conformally invariant compactification operations arise
naturally in the context of nonlinear potential theory. Understanding the
structure of these compactifications should have important consequences for the
boundary behavior of quasiconformal maps. These questions will be explored in
the setting of metric spaces of bounded geometry, which is a general framework
encompassing both smooth and nonsmooth examples. In Part II, Tyson will consider
quasiconformal geometry and analysis on Dirichlet spaces. The goal is to relate
the already well-developed theory of Dirichlet forms to the recently developed
theory in the bounded geometry case. Work of Kigami, Strichartz and others has
shown that Dirichlet spaces include various nonsmooth, fractal-type objects
which are not covered by previous developments in quasiconformal analysis on
metric spaces. Part II is joint work with Pekka Koskela and Shanmugalingam. In
Part III, Tyson will consider specific applications of nonlinear potential
theory in sub-Riemannian spaces, specifically, Carnot groups. These applications
include sharp constant questions for geometric inequalities as well as strong
A-infinity deformations of geometry. Part III is a joint project with Zoltan
Balogh. This proposal is part of a larger investigation into nonsmooth analysis
which is being carried out by a number of research groups worldwide. In informal
terms, analysis is the mathematical study of motion and change; its historical
roots lie in the development of the Calculus by Newton and Leibniz. The modern
subject of analysis can be traced back to the pioneering work of Laplace, Cauchy
and Poincare (among others). The classical setting for analysis is flat
Euclidean spaces; this is the subject typically covered in multi-variable
calculus. The Euclidean theory serves in turn as a model for analysis on curved
spaces (surfaces and higher-dimensional manifolds); here the smooth structure of
the underlying Riemannian space permits one to transport the Euclidean theory
directly. In contrast, the proposed research focuses on nonsmooth and fractal-
type settings. In extending the theory to this more general context the
principal difficulties are twofold: first, the relevant concepts and definitions
must be reformulated in an intrinsic manner suitable for such an extension, and
second, new techniques and ideas must be introduced to prove basic results in
the absence of the usual ambient Euclidean structure. The motivation for
carrying out such an extension stems from the desire for better mathematical
models for the nonsmooth and disordered media which arise in applications. Put
simply, although classical smooth calculus has served for many years and
throughout the sciences as an essential tool in the mathematical study of
physical processes, it is reasonable to expect that further insight will be
gained if the underlying mathematics is developed a priori on spaces of minimal
inherent smoothness.