* 0228571
* SGER: Formation Time and Past Changes in the Atmospheric Circulation System over Northwest Mongolia--A Pilot Study of Lake Hovsgol Sedimentary Proxy Records
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Alexander Prokopenko, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2003
* USD 11,856.00

This award, under the auspices of the Small Grants for Exploratory Research
(SGER) program, will analyze select sediment cores collected from Mongolia's
largest water body, Lake Hovsgol, to determine their suitability for detailed
paleoclimatic investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, the researchers
want to test the hypothesis that atmospheric circulation during the Holocene
period was undergoing periodic fluctuations capable of causing pronounced
changes in the regional precipitation regime in northwest Mongolia leading to
droughts and desertification in the area where 75% of present-day population of
Mongolia now resides. Lake Hovsgol, whose water budget is strongly dependent on
the regional precipitation pattern, is ideally located to examine large-scale
changes in atmospheric circulation as it lies beneath the Siberian High and the
moisture-bearing westerlies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At this point in time,
however, it is not clear if the recovered cores are of sufficient quality to
answer any of the posed science questions. So, the research will address the
following three basic questions:&lt;br/&gt;What is the age span of the new
recovered Lake Hovsgol cores?&lt;br/&gt;What proxies of lacustrine sedimentation
and productivity might be most useful to indicate regional climate
changes?&lt;br/&gt;When did the present-day climatic system in the Lake Hovsgol
area of continental interior Asia become established and how variable was it
through time?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This basic information will have broad impact
in providing an understanding of climate variability in northwest Mongolia from
the Last Glacial Maximum through the Holocene.