* 0228927
* HPNC:   Internet 2 Connectivity for UTHSCSA and UTSA
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Borries Demeler, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 150,000.00

This project partners the University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio (UTHSCSA) and the University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA), in the
south Texas region, for connectivity to an advanced network. Southwest Research
Institute (SwRI) will serve as the sponsor for UTHSCSA and UTSA and will provide
experienced technical and engineering staff to assist in connecting to the
Abilene network through the Austin POP via a DS-3 line. UTHSCSA and UTSA have a
combined annual research budget of over 113 million dollars, enroll over 21,000
students and both are Hispanic-serving institutions with 56% female enrollment.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed high-speed network will enhance
collaborations with scientists at 21 other Abilene-connected institutions and
will immediately support eleven research projects via Abilene:
&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio &lt;br/&gt;
Global Analysis of Hydrodynamic and Thermodynamic Properties of Macromolecules
&lt;br/&gt; Development of a Remote NMR Data Acquisition Infrastructure
&lt;br/&gt; Single Molecule Video Microscopy &lt;br/&gt; High-Speed Data Sharing
of Brainmap Images &lt;br/&gt;University of Texas at San Antonio &lt;br/&gt;
GEneral NEural SImulation System (GENESIS) Software System &lt;br/&gt; Analysis
of the information content of cortical waves in the turtle visual system
&lt;br/&gt; IP-friendly Quality-of-Service Mechanisms &lt;br/&gt; Adaptive
Transport Protocols for High-Speed Networks &lt;br/&gt; A Tool for Distance
Learning &lt;br/&gt; Learning Community Across Campuses and Institutions
&lt;br/&gt; Grid Computation Analysis of Uncertainty Management in the Design
and &lt;br/&gt; Construction of Blast Resistance Structures for Anti-Terrorist
Applications &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research projects range from strictly
biological (e.g., biochemistry at the level of single molecules) to strictly
computer science (e.g. network transport protocols that adapt rapidly to the
available network capacity). Between the extremes are interdisciplinary research
projects at the interface of biological science and mathematics (e.g., general
neural simulation system, probabilistic reference system for the human brain,
and numerical modeling of a turtle's visual system) plus education of future
teachers (e.g., development of teaching strategies and the application of
technology).&lt;br/&gt;