* 0228938
* HPNC:    Connecting the Visual History Foundation 180 Tera-Byte Archive to Internet 2
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Sam Gustman, Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Gatchell
* 09/30/2004
* USD 269,500.00

Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation was established by Steven
Spielberg in1994 to collect the testimonies of a large number of Holocaust
survivors, witnesses, liberators, and rescuers. Since then, the Shoah Foundation
has videotaped over 51,700 testimonies in 57 countries and 32 languages. The
testimonies comprise approximately 120,000 hours of video.

Currently, the Shoah Foundation is supported by a National Science Foundation
grant under the ITR program to enable Johns Hopkins University, the University
of Maryland, and IBM to perform research experiments in voice and speech
recognition in Holocaust testimonies. The Shoah Foundation requests funding to
establish a high performance network connection (155 Mb/s) between the
Foundation digital library and researchers on Internet2. Initially, this network
connection will facilitate the voice and speech recognition efforts by
increasing the amount of data and the speed of access to data these researchers
currently have. Once this connection is established, other academic research
efforts can be enabled in the future. Currently the Shoah Foundation is a
sponsored affiliate of Internet2 by the University of Illinois at Chicago. This
sponsorship, and hundreds of requests from university researchers, show the
desire of the academic community to gain access to the archive. It will also
help bring testimony material directly into classrooms, meeting the Shoah
Foundation new mission to overcome prejudice, intolerance, and bigotryand the
suffering they causethrough the educational use of the Foundation visual history
testimonies.