* 0228617
* ATOL: Collaborative Research: Early Bird: A Collaborative Project to Resolve the Deep Nodes of Avian Phylogeny
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* William Moore, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2007
* USD 406,753.00

Early Bird is a large-scale, cooperative effort among five institutions in the
U.S., one in Scotland and two in Australia to determine the evolutionary
relationships among all major groups of birds. The project will make these
relationships known to the research community and the public, and make it
possible to use these relationships as a comparative framework with which to
organize and understand the vast amount of information already available on
avian ecology, evolution, physiology, and behavior. The project will generate
large amounts of DNA sequence data for all major avian lineages from a series of
carefully selected genes. These data will be integrated with existing and new
morphological and fossil data to bring all relevant evidence to bear on the
problem. Extensive analysis of the evidence will be conducted with the rapidly
expanding suite of computational tools available for the inference of
relationships, divergence times, and evolutionary patterns. The data will be
made accessible to other researchers in an online database with tools for
analysis and export, and to the general public through a website with background
information on the importance of evolutionary relationships, progress reports on
the project, and interactive educational tools with which interested persons can
explore the data themselves.&lt;br/&gt;The immediate results of this project
will be to provide a detailed, comprehensive and robust estimate of the "family
tree" of avian relationships, and to facilitate the use of that tree to organize
and interpret other information about birds. The impact of this project on
science and society will be far-reaching. Birds are among the most prominent and
engaging creatures in most ecosystems worldwide. They have been the subject of
an extraordinary number and diversity of scientific studies that figure largely
in our understanding of the natural world and humanity's place in it. Their
position high in many food chains together with their great mobility makes them
sensitive indicators of environmental quality, and monitoring of bird
populations is widely used to set conservation and management priorities. Their
powers of flight, physical beauty, and captivating behaviors amaze and inspire
us, and birds provide tremendous amounts of recreation for serious hunters and
birders, as well as millions of backyard birdwatchers each year. All of these
human interactions with birds will be enriched by a better understanding of
avian evolutionary history and genetic diversity, which Early Bird will provide.
&lt;br/&gt;