* 0228833
* Dissertation Research - Reconstructing Trincheras: A Study of the Role of Cerros De Trincheras in the South-West United States and Northern Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2003
* Randall McGuire, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2003
* USD 11,951.00

Under the direction of Dr. Randall McGuire, MsBridget Zavala will conduct
archaeological fieldwork in Arizona and Sonora, Mexico. Ms. Zavala's research
will help to systematize and gather information on the enigmatic site-type
'cerros de trincheras' or hills with stone terraces and walls. Recent
investigations at a handful of the terraced hill sites now show that cerros were
a long-lived architectural tradition beginning 3000 years before present and
continuing well into the 15th century. Cerros de trincheras are found in the
modern day states of Chihuahua, Sonora, Arizona and New Mexico, crosscutting
five archaeological traditions. To date, different researchers have posited
multiple functional explanations for these sites- either defensive, ceremonial,
architectural or residential. In the past two decades, investigators involved in
the first large scale excavations of these sites at Cerro Juanaquena, Chihuahua;
Las Trincheras, Sonora; the Fortress in New Mexico; Linda Vista Hill, Tumamoc
Hill and Cerro Prieto in Arizona have finally collected the kind of data that
will make it possible to reassess our understanding of terraced hill life. Wit
is now known that these particular cerros were multidimensional in their
function and they were the site of many of the activities of daily life. Ms..
Zavala will conduct badly needed cross-regional analyses of the role of cerros
de trincheras in their regional and chronological settings. Fieldwork in Sonora
and Arizona will involve site recording of at least 31 cerros de trincheras on
both sides of the U.S./ Mexico border. Sites will be mapped, and details will be
recorded.. A GIS database will then be created to articulate field observations
with information gathered by other projects. Ms. Zavala's investigation will
either verify or discredit one of three working hypotheses for cerros de
trincheras: 1) all cerros de trincheras had one specialized use: defense,
agriculture, ceremonial or habitation that remained constant through time; 2)
cerros de trincheras had several specialized uses: defense, agriculture,
ceremonial or habitation that remained constant through time; or 3) the site
type was used in different ways at different times by different archaeological
traditions.

This research will not only help to dispell the mystery surrounding cerros de
trincheras but it will also help address the role of upland sites all over the
world. Hilltop enclosures in the southeastern U.S. and hill forts in Ireland and
England, among others, all evoke the same kind of questions from anthropologists
yet they are often ignored in comparison to their flood plain counterparts. We
need to look uphill and incorporate upland pre-Hispanic land use if we intend to
create accurate reconstructions of the past. This project will also contribute
to training a promising young scientist.