* 0228842
* Boron in Antarctic granulite-facies rocks: under what conditions is boron retained in the middle crust?
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2009
* Edward Grew, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 11/30/2009
* USD 147,152.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to investigate the role and fate of
Boron in high-grade metamorphic rocks of the Larsemann Hills region of
Antarctica. Trace elements provide valuable information on the changes
sedimentary rocks undergo as temperature and pressure increase during burial.
One such element, boron, is particularly sensitive to increasing temperature
because of its affinity for aqueous fluids, which are lost as rocks are buried.
Boron contents of unmetamorphosed pelitic sediments range from 20 to over 200
parts per million, but rarely exceed 5 parts per million in rocks subjected to
conditions of the middle and lower crust, that is, temperatures of 700 degrees C
or more in the granulite-facies, which is characterized by very low water
activities at pressures of 5 to 10 kbar (18-35 km burial). Devolatization
reactions with loss of aqueous fluid and partial melting with removal of melt
have been cited as primary causes for boron depletion under granulite-facies
conditions. Despite the pervasiveness of both these processes, rocks rich in
boron are locally found in the granulite-facies, that is, there are mechanisms
for retaining boron during the metamorphic process. The Larsemann Hills, Prydz
Bay, Antarctica, are a prime example. More than 20 lenses and layered bodies
containing four borosilicate mineral species crop out over a 50 square kilometer
area, which thus would be well suited for research on boron-rich granulite-
facies metamorphic rocks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While most investigators have
focused on the causes for loss of boron, this work will investigate how boron is
retained during high-grade metamorphism. Field observations and mapping in the
Larsemann Hills, chemical analyses of minerals and their host rocks, and
microprobe age dating will be used to identify possible precursors and deduce
how the precursor materials recrystallized into borosilicate rocks under
granulite-facies conditions. The working hypothesis is that high initial boron
content facilitates retention of boron during metamorphism because above a
certain threshold boron content, a mechanism "kicks in" that facilitates
retention of boron in metamorphosed rocks. For example, in a rock with large
amounts of the borosilicate tourmaline, such as stratabound tourmalinite, the
breakdown of tourmaline to melt could result in the formation of prismatine and
grandidierite, two borosilicates found in the Larsemann Hills. This situation is
rarely observed in rocks with modest boron content, in which breakdown of
tourmaline releases boron into partial melts, which in turn remove boron when
they leave the system. Stratabound tourmalinite is associated with manganese-
rich quartzite, phosphorus-rich rocks and sulfide concentrations that could be
diagnostic for recognizing a tourmalinite protolith in a highly metamorphosed
complex where sedimentary features have been destroyed by deformation. Because
partial melting plays an important role in the fate of boron during
metamorphism, our field and laboratory research will focus on the relationship
between the borosilicate units, granite pegmatites and other granitic
intrusives. The results of our study will provide information on cycling of
boron at deeper levels in the Earth's crust and on possible sources of boron for
granites originating from deep-seated rocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
undergraduate student will participate in the electron microprobe age-dating of
monazite and xenotime as part of a senior project, thereby integrating the
proposed research into the educational mission of the University of Maine. In
response to a proposal for fieldwork, the Australian Antarctic Division, which
maintains Davis station near the Larsemann Hills, has indicated that they will
support the Antarctic fieldwork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;