* 0228340
* Conference on Plant Biology: Functions and Control of Cell Death; to be held April 10-16, 2003; Snowbird, Utah
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2004
* Jeffery Dangl, Keystone Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Lolle
* 02/29/2004
* USD 18,000.00

0228340 Dangl

This meeting will impact several very diverse areas of plant science, from
disease and disease resistance to various aspects of plant cell death control
during normal development and response to plant hormones. As such, the meeting
will attract a very diverse audience. Programmed cell deaths occur at many
stages in normal plant growth and development, and is also induced during
successful response to infection (the common hypersensitive response) and in
response to abiotic stress, particularly those stress responses involving
reactive oxygen intermediates. Yet, despite the physiological characterization
of a variety of programmed cell deaths over the last 20 years, very little is
know about the molecular control of either cell death signaling or cell
execution. Moreover, analyses of the complete Arabidopsis and draft rice genomic
sequences show that there are no obvious homologues of the common animal cell
death control genes in plants. Nevertheless, several studies have shown that
expression of animal anti- or pro-cell death control genes in plants can either
block or exacerbate plant cell death, respectively. These data argue that some
of the mechanisms may be shared between plant and animal cell death control. The
meeting proposed will address these issues. This interdisciplinary meeting will
result in much cross feeding of disciplines as diverse as plant hormone
physiology and plant genomics. A broad participant portfolio with respect to
organism studied and biological question asked is assured. The meeting will
stress the notion that research in easily accessible models must be translated
to scientists applying that basic knowledge to crop plant biology. Thus, the
meeting will foster translational agriculture. In order to achieve this goal,
the organizers will select participants with broad sets of educational and
experiential backgrounds. As part of this aspect of designing the meeting, they
will be particularly aware of increasing participation of women, under-
represented ethnic groups, and under-represented institutions of higher
learning. The speakers include nearly every relevant female principal
investigator working in this arena today. The Keystone Symposia are very
educationally and community oriented and the selection criteria will include the
ideal of capturing the widest participant pool possible while maintaining
scientific excellence. The Keystone Symposia are advertised by direct mailings
to a huge number of higher educational institutions and the organizers have
already received inquiries from potential participants from very "out of the
way" universities and colleges. Finally, and perhaps most critically, the
organizers have included as many early career scientists as possible. In fact,
this NSF award will go exclusively to defraying the costs of doctoral students
and non-tenured principal investigators. The organizers will prioritize these to
fund as many participants as possible from non-standard research I universities,
and will use the guidelines established above to guide our choices.