* 0228011
* Moduli of Pointed  Curves and Relative Stable Maps
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,06/30/2004
* Ravi Vakil, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2004
* USD 79,092.00

The investigator proposes to use Kontsevich's space of "stable
maps"&lt;br/&gt;(originally motivated by mathematical physics last decade) and
related&lt;br/&gt;objects to tackle problems in a variety of fields.
Traditionally, the&lt;br/&gt;space of stable maps has been studied using facts
about the fundamental&lt;br/&gt;"moduli space of curves" defined by Deligne and
Mumford. The investigator&lt;br/&gt;proposes to conversely study the moduli
space of curves by studying maps&lt;br/&gt;from curves to varieties. Some of the
proposed work will likely rely on&lt;br/&gt;Jun Li's recent extension of
Kontsevich's work, the definition of a space&lt;br/&gt;of "relative stable maps"
in the algebraic category.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has long been known that
nodal algebraic curves are a powerful tool in&lt;br/&gt;algebraic geometry. They
can be thought of as surfaces with holes&lt;br/&gt;(picture a ball, a donut, or
a french cruller) with pairs of points "glued&lt;br/&gt;together". Earlier this
decade, ideas from string theory in physics led&lt;br/&gt;to the introduction of
"stable maps", parametrizing certain kinds of maps&lt;br/&gt;of nodal curves
into another space. This development has proved to be&lt;br/&gt;incredibly
fruitful, sparking advances in a variety of fields. The&lt;br/&gt;investigator's
area of research is the use of these ideas in the field of&lt;br/&gt;algebraic
geometry, in particular with applications to many other fields&lt;br/&gt;(such
as enumerative geometry, arithmetic geometry, combinatorics,
and&lt;br/&gt;physics).