* 0228692
* ATOL: Phylum Nematoda: Integrating Multidisciplinary Expertise and Infrastructure for Resolving Relationships in a Major Branch of the Tree of Life
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2009
* James Baldwin, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 09/30/2009
* USD 2,547,284.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. William K Thomas at the University of New
Hampshire and his colleagues Dr. James Baldwin and Dr. Paul De Ley (University
of California, Riverside), Dr. David Fitch (New York University) and Dr. Steven
Nadler (University of California, Davis) to examine the evolutionary history and
biodiversity of nematodes. The phylum Nematoda (roundworms) is argued to be one
of the most abundant and genetically diverse animal phyla on earth. In addition,
they play a key position in animal evolution and understanding of controversial
invertebrate evolutionary relationships. Phylogenetic studies of this enormous
phylum have been impeded by the difficulty of working with such diverse taxa,
most of which are microscopic and known by relatively few experts. Nematode
phylogenetics has also been impeded by the fragmentation of taxonomic
specialists among different disciplines and by bias toward economically or
medically important parasites of plants, vertebrates and invertebrates.
Accordingly, understanding their evolutionary history is a critical component in
the NSF's Assembling the Tree of Life program. &lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a higher-level tree for the nematodes to provide a framework for
interpreting their diversity. The work will use both molecular (18S ribosomal
genes) and morphological data for over 1000 species. In a parallel effort, they
will use the results of this work as a basis for selecting 50 nematode species
for construction of cDNA libraries to provide greater insight into genetic
diversity in the phylum and to possibly resolve the longstanding questions about
of the deepest branches of the nematode tree or even its phylogenetic position
in the animal kingdom.&lt;br/&gt;