* 0228860
* The Arctic Community-wide Hydrological Analysis and Monitoring Program (Arctic-CHAMP) Project Office
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Larry Hinzman, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 06/30/2006
* USD 468,736.00

The Arctic constitutes an important environment, central to the dynamics and
evolution of the Earth system. The region, is currently experiencing rapid
environmental change, but the sources and consequences of such change are still
poorly understood. In response to calls by the science community to assess the
current state-of-the-art in Arctic hydrology and to formulate a new research
effort to study water and water cycle change in the Arctic system, NSF-ARCSS
convened an Arctic System Hydrology Workshop in September 2000 at the National
Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis (NCEAS) in Santa Barbara, CA. A
chief recommendation of that workshop was for NSF to invest in development of a
pan-Arctic Community-wide Hydrological Analysis and Monitoring Program (Arctic-
CHAMP) for synthesis studies of the water cycle and its role in the Arctic
system. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Through a series of meetings, reports and a
newly-funded Announcement of Opportunity (ASOF/CHAMP; NSF-02-071) supporting the
multi-agency SEARCH initiative, progress is rapidly being made toward an
operational Arctic-CHAMP. The primary goal of this proposal is to establish an
Arctic-CHAMP Science Management Office (SMO) to assist ARCSS in coordinating
emerging Arctic-CHAMP science and outreach efforts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
anticipated Arctic-CHAMP synthesis and integration issues are complex and multi-
faceted and a dedicated Science Management Office is needed to provide an
efficient mechanism for executing the initiative. The SMO will provide
logistical and administrative support to ongoing activities of the Arctic-CHAMP
Scientific Steering Committee, organize Arctic-CHAMP scientific meetings,
workshops, and symposia to catalyze interdisciplinary water cycle studies,
support the timely delivery of CHAMP-related science data products, perform
liaison activities with other thematic elements of ARCSS, other US and
international agency partners through dedicated communication efforts by SMO
personnel, and disseminate findings of Arctic-CHAMP to scientists and the
broader user community. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The SMO is
structured to foster not only research, but also graduate education, post-
graduate training and outreach to policy-makers and the public. A proposed
series of science meetings and workshops, particularly those directed at young
student scientists, is designed to foster the educational mission of CHAMP. A
post-doc, serving as Executive Director, will help to satisfy what we see as an
important need -- to train young science managers, who must increasingly deal
with complex, interdisciplinary and often international research programs. Data
dissemination, web pages, and newsletters help to broaden interest in CHAMP-
related environmental change. Proposed cooperation with partners in Canada,
Russia, and the Nordic countries fosters US diplomatic interests, good will, and
open communication through science. &lt;br/&gt;