* 0228690
* Sonoluminescence for Groundwater Remediation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Richard Ray, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Juan M. Pestana
* 09/30/2003
* USD 55,667.00

0228690, Richard P. Ray, University of South Carolina -
Columbia&lt;br/&gt;"Sonoluminescence for Groundwater
Remediation"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action is to explore the use of
sonoluminescence for groundwater
remediation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sonoluminescence, the process of turning sound
into light, was discovered over 60 years ago. As sound waves propagate through a
liquid, dissolved gases are forced out of solution to form bubbles. The wave of
rarefaction is succeeded by a wave of compression, which compresses the gases
inside the bubble. When sufficient energy is applied at the proper frequency
(usually about 20 kHz) sonoluminescence occurs. For a fraction of a second, the
temperature in the bubble can reach ~5,000 ?K and pressures of 500-1000
atmospheres. Such conditions turn the bubble's contents into an incandescent
plasma of electrically charged ions, neutral atoms and electrons. At the same
time, the bulk solution remains near ambient pressure and temperature. The small
gas bubbles make it possible to break apart molecules and produce chemical
reactions. The cycle repeats itself with each new wave of rarefaction and
compression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will begin by reproducing the
simplest geometry and system, i.e. single-bubble sonoluminescence, and proceed
to more complex conditions. At each stage of experimentation, test parameters
such as excitation frequencies, wave shapes, and transducer positioning will be
performed. Additionally, the amount of energy input to the system will be
carefully monitored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental results should show
remediation of the groundwater to drinking level standards with decreased
remediation time and cost. This study will focus on bench-scale performance,
with pilot-scale potential. Experimental work will be preceded and augmented by
standard laboratory testing and computational simulations. The simulations will
aid in determining test intensities and durations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Presently there exist a wide variety of techniques to
remediate contaminated groundwater. These technologies are often limited by
borehole placement, and collect media (air, water) indiscriminately. Therefore,
a great deal of treatment energy goes toward handling media that is already
clean. The method of sonoluminescence is unique in that it produces heat and
cavitation bubbles at a distance from its source. If this process can be
manipulated, it should be possible to focus the energy within a prescribed
field, releasing, transporting, and possibly breaking down contaminants in soil
and groundwater insitu. This process may be coupled with other remediation
methodologies (for example, vacuum extraction, pump and treat, surfactant
injection) to achieve target levels in a more timely and efficient manner.
Economies of treatment are further realized when dealing with DNAPLs (dense non-
aqueous phase liquids) and recalcitrant compounds as well as vadose or capillary
zone contamination.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;