* 0228138
* Conference on Frontiers of NMR in Molecular Biology - VIII to be held in Taos, New Mexico at the Taos Covention Center, February 4-10, 2003
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* James Prestegard, Keystone Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 12/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00

This project supports attendance of students at the Keystone Symposium on the
Frontiers of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) in Molecular Biology, which will
be held at Taos, New Mexico from February 4-10, 2003. The timely topic of this
conference reflects the fact that NMR has continued to evolve to meet new
challenges of molecular biology and genomics. Already the challenge of providing
structures of proteins on a genomic scale has produced new NMR approaches to
efficient structure determination. The prospect of having more targets to
implement in biotechnology applications has spawned new means of screening for
small-molecule and macromolecule interactions. The realization that biological
function often involves the interplay of groups of macromolecules in a dynamic
setting has led to new methods for monitoring interactions and motion in large
macromolecular complexes. With new approaches and new realizations come
additional challenges. Large volumes of data and new types of data demand
innovative approaches to analysis, assemblies of interacting macromolecules
means working with ever-larger structures, and new sources of data on protein
dynamics require new connections to mechanistic models. New technological
advances needed to work with larger systems often come from combining solids NMR
with solution NMR approaches. Computational biology is well poised to organize
diverse types of data, generate molecular models, and turn them into predictive
tools. The ultimate challenge for the meeting will be to stimulate discussion
among scientists coming from these diverse fields. The meeting will highlight
new approaches to the challenges defined above and provide a forum for
discussion among molecular biologists, NMR spectroscopists, and computational
biologists.

The program will be organized around problem areas and integrate talks by
scientists having different perspectives on their solution. Scheduled breaks
between formal presentation sessions are ideal for simulating discussion among
participants, and promoting contact between students and established leaders in
these diverse fields. The interdisciplinary character of the meeting, as
described above, will broaden its potential impact. The meeting will also have a
distinct educational component by its support for the attendance of graduate
students and postdoctoral associates. Discussion of more practical aspects of
the field will be promoted by the organization of afternoon workshops having a
less formal structure. These will enhance opportunities for interaction of
students with established scientist working in the area.