* 0229523
* SGER: Microbial Degradation of Animal Chemosignals
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Dale Madison, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 75,000.00

Microbial Degradation of Animal Chemosignals

Project Summary

The arms race between predator and prey has been played out endless times in
evolutionary history, and so adaptations for predator defense are ubiquitous in
animals. Defense against microorganisms is at least as important as defense
against predatory macro-organisms, for the threat imposed can be much more
insidious. Microbes up to a trillion per gram of soil compete intensively for
the energy in the chemical secretions, excretions and bodily structures of
macro-organisms, and so it is surprising that little if anything is know about
whether microbes feed on those chemical signals that organisms release into the
environment to coordinate or influence important activities ranging from
predator defense to reproduction. Until now, evaporation and diffusion were
thought to be the eventual fates of chemical signals, not microbial consumption.
If microbes have this impact, the signaling organisms must compensate production
to offset the anticipated loss to microbes, and so the costs of producing a
chemical signal will always be higher than predicted based on loss due to
evaporation and diffusion. Models that attempt to correlate chemical design with
behavior will have to be revised if microbes routinely degrade the chemical
signals of higher organisms.

The red-backed salamander, Plethodon cinereus, is the most common terrestrial
vertebrate in the northeastern United States, but it also is fast becoming a
model species for chemical signal production spanning predator defense,
territorial defense, and courtship behavior. P. cinereus can chemically label
and avoid the scent trails of garter snake predators that feed on salamanders.
P. cinereus also scent marks and defends feeding territories, and the males
produce scent to attract mates. All these chemical signals are energy-containing
molecules that microbes can potentially utilize, and so microbes could have a
considerable energetic impact on salamanders attempting to survive predation,
defend resources, or influence reproduction through the production of chemical
signals.

The investigators will use ultraviolet sterilization and microfiltration
techniques in both the laboratory and field to test whether the presence or
relative absence of microbial communities have consequences for the duration of
the chemical signal produced by P. cinereus to label and avoid garter snake
predators. Microbial impacts on territorial and courtship chemosignals may also
be examined if time permits. The demonstration of microbial impacts on chemical
signals will be immediately relevant to many issues relating to signal
production and duration in chemical ecology, and especially to a better
understanding of the diverse ways microorganisms may impact broad categories of
behavior among higher organisms.

This research will be undertaken with a strong emphasis on mentoring and
interdisciplinary problem solving that have resulted in high levels of
productivity and numerous awards among undergraduates and graduates working on
the research team. This process has resulted in student-driven linkages with
industry and the medical community that have made the research not only more
informative but more broadly relevant to societal needs. One outcome of this
mentoring and interdisciplinary thinking is the idea developed for study in this
proposal.