* 0229079
* Quantification of Hexavalent Cr Reduction in Groundwater Using Cr Stable Isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Thomas Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/2006
* USD 207,292.00

0229079&lt;br/&gt;Johnson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
chromium (Cr) stable isotope ratios as a new tool for understanding how this
toxic element moves in contaminated groundwater. Cr contamination is widespread,
because the electroplating, leather tanning, and wood treatment industries use
large volumes of highly concentrated Cr(VI) (hexavalent Cr) solutions. Cr(VI)
moves readily with groundwater as a highly soluble oxyanion, but in many
groundwater systems, it undergoes chemical reduction to Cr(III), which is less
soluble and less toxic. Preliminary work by this group has demonstrated that
this reduction reaction involves a fractionation of the stable isotopes 53Cr and
52Cr. The products of the reduction reaction are enriched in 52Cr, the lighter
isotope, relative to the reactants, and as reduction proceeds, the remaining
unreduced Cr(VI) becomes progressively more enriched in the heavier isotope
relative to its starting composition. The working hypothesis of this project is
that the 53Cr/52Cr ratio of the Cr(VI) in groundwater provides a quantitative
indication of the amount of Cr(VI) reduction that has occurred. &lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses several basic questions raised in previous work that must be
answered before this new approach can be used quantitatively and with confidence
in practical applications. The primary objectives are 1) to assess variability
in the size of the isotopic fractionation during Cr(VI) reduction, 2) determine
the isotope fractionations, if any, that are induced by Cr(VI) sorption and
Cr(III) oxidation, and 3) assess 53Cr/52Cr variability among contaminant
sources. The work will involve several experiments in the laboratory, analysis
of groundwater samples from Cr(VI) contamination plumes, and analysis of
industrial and natural Cr. This laboratory-based study will be complemented by a
field study to be funded from other sources. It will be carried out as three
separate projects for graduate students, who will be trained in environmental
geochemistry, hydrogeology, and isotope geochemistry. The focus is on
groundwater contamination, but most of what is learned here may be applied to
other areas of geochemistry and oceanography. &lt;br/&gt;