* 0229778
* Santa Cruz Tayata and Emergent Social Complexity in the Mixteca Alta
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Andrew Balkansky, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 05/31/2004
* USD 99,074.00

In 2003 and 2004, the National Science Foundation will support archaeological
field research in the Mixteca Alta of Oaxaca, a mountainous area in southern
Mexico. Recent NSF-sponsored research suggests that this little known area had
some of the highest population densities, and most politically complex
societies, anywhere in Mexico during the Formative Period (ca. 1500 B.C. to A.D.
200). One important site in the Mixteca Alta, called Santa Cruz Tayata, was the
apparent political center for a chiefly society lasting more than 1,000 years.
By about 300 B.C., however, this center was abandoned and a new urban capital
and state-level society established nearby. This project, directed by Dr. Andrew
Balkansky from George Washington University, will examine the beginnings of
social inequality at Santa Cruz Tayata, the relationship of this site to its
contemporaries in ancient Mexico, and the reasons for this site's abandonment at
the dawn of the urban era. These research questions are regional in scope, and
derive from earlier regional surveys encompassing several thousand square
kilometers of highland Oaxaca, including Santa Cruz Tayata and many of its
contemporary centers. The field methods for this new project will involve
controlled mapping and surface collection of artifacts from Santa Cruz Tayata,
using a total station and systematic sampling procedure. The map and surface
data will then be used to identify the changing site boundaries through time,
detect intra-site variation, and select promising excavation contexts.
Excavations will follow, designed to uncover both public structures and private
residences. The household will be the basic unit of analysis, providing links
between individual features through the household, residential ward, site-level
organization, and finally the regional settlement pattern. It is anticipated
that relationships among households, in terms of status, wealth, and exchange
patterns will change over time, as will the political organization of the site
and it relationships with neighboring centers. These results will answer
specific questions about how social hierarchies formed in the Mixteca Alta, and
how interregional dynamics among competing centers (including exchange patterns,
belief systems, and warfare) shaped these developments. We will also have a
better understanding of the urban transition by examining the context from which
the first cities formed. This project will also have broader impacts, including
the training of a new generation of students for archaeological research. The
collaboration with colleagues and students from Mexico also contributes to the
emerging "global archaeology" and the preservation of this important site for
the future.