* 0229035
* The Topology of Manifolds of Dimensions 3 and 4
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Cameron Gordon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2005
* USD 23,500.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS 0229035&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Cameron
Gordon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a conference in 3- and 4-dimensional
topology.&lt;br/&gt;Satisfactory accounts of manifolds of dimension greater than
or equal&lt;br/&gt;to 5 were achieved by the late 1960's. Since then, attention
has&lt;br/&gt;naturally focused on dimensions 3 and 4. Despite dramatic
advances&lt;br/&gt;(Thurston, Freedman, Donaldson, Jones, Witten...), many major
problems&lt;br/&gt;in these low dimensions remain unsolved, for example the
classical&lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional Poincare Conjecture and its smooth
4-dimensional analog.&lt;br/&gt;The topological classification of 1-connected
4-manifolds was achieved&lt;br/&gt;by Freedman in the early 1980's, but in the
smooth case there is not&lt;br/&gt;even a conjectural picture. By contrast,
Thurston's Geometrization&lt;br/&gt;Conjecture provides a beautiful and coherent
description of all&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds, but is far from established. In the
mid 1980's, Jones'&lt;br/&gt;discovery of his polynomial link invariant,
together with work of&lt;br/&gt;Witten, led to the introduction into
3-dimensional topology of methods&lt;br/&gt;from quantum physics. The current
situation in low-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;topology is that there are many different
directions and methods, but&lt;br/&gt;little understanding of the relations
between them. Thus in dimension&lt;br/&gt;3 we have hyperbolic geometry,
foliations and laminations, normal&lt;br/&gt;surfaces, combinatorial geometric
methods, quantum invariants, finite&lt;br/&gt;type invariants, Floer
homology,..., while in dimension 4 there are&lt;br/&gt;the Donaldson and
Seiberg-Witten theories, symplectic structures,....&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the
conference is to address these topics, and the&lt;br/&gt;connections between
them, and to provide a forum for interaction and&lt;br/&gt;exchange of ideas
between experts in the different areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric topology
aims to understand n-dimensional manifolds, which&lt;br/&gt;are objects that
locally look like ordinary n-dimensional Euclidean&lt;br/&gt;space (whose points
are described by n co-ordinates), but whose global&lt;br/&gt;structure might be
quite complicated. The cases of dimensions 3 and 4&lt;br/&gt;are particularly
interesting, being the dimensions of our spatial and&lt;br/&gt;spatial-temporal
universes, and it is a striking fact that it is&lt;br/&gt;precisely these
dimensions that are mathematically anomalous. There&lt;br/&gt;have been many
developments and considerable progress in the fields of&lt;br/&gt;3- and
4-dimensional topology over the last twenty-five years, but, in&lt;br/&gt;both
dimensions, a complete picture is still lacking. One of the aims&lt;br/&gt;of
the conference is to encourage interaction and collaboration&lt;br/&gt;between
experts in the several different aspects and techniques that&lt;br/&gt;are
currently being pursued in low-dimensional topology, and in&lt;br/&gt;particular
between those people working in dimension 3 and those in&lt;br/&gt;dimension 4,
where the methods in the two areas tend to be quite&lt;br/&gt;different, but
where there are several hints of connections between&lt;br/&gt;them. The current
disparate state of the subject makes it difficult&lt;br/&gt;for people beginning
research in low-dimensional topology to get a&lt;br/&gt;good overview of the
area, and so by encouraging the participation of&lt;br/&gt;graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers, we intend that the&lt;br/&gt;conference should also
provide an opportunity for young researchers to&lt;br/&gt;get a broad
perspective of the present state of knowledge, directions&lt;br/&gt;begin
pursued, and the main open problems. The invited speakers&lt;br/&gt;include some
of the world's leading 3- and 4-dimensional topologists,&lt;br/&gt;whose
expertise together covers all the major aspects of the
two&lt;br/&gt;fields.&lt;br/&gt;