* 0229795
* Upper Triassic Terrane Faunas and Their Use in Paleogeographic Comparisons within the Cordilleran Region
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,09/30/2008
* George Stanley, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2008
* USD 312,903.00

Upper Triassic Terrane Faunas and Their Use in Paleogeographic Comparisons
within the Cordilleran Region&lt;br/&gt;George Stanley, Robert Blodgett
EAR0229795&lt;br/&gt;University of
Montana&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
employ a combination of field work, laboratory, and museum collections research
to assess invertebrate faunas during a critical time in the Late Triassic. It
seeks to document the taxonomic composition, paleoecology and paleogeographic
significance of various tropical to subtropical, shelly fossils from Alaska,
western Canada, Nevada, and Mexico and to make comparisons with coeval fossils
from other regions of the world, such as western Europe and parts of the former
Tethys. &lt;br/&gt; Fossils to be studied are corals, sponges, hydrozoans,
articulate brachiopods, bivalves and gasropods. These are abundant and
widespread but little is known about the species taxonomy. The study will assess
both taxonomy and paleoecological associations. During the Triassic time, some
of these invertebrate faunas inhabited the western shores of North America but
many others inhabited volcanic islands, now regarded as displaced terranes. The
terranes from which faunas will be extracted, include the Alaskan portion of
Wrangellia and the Farewell terrane, as well as Chulitna, Wallowa, Alexander and
Junco terranes. &lt;br/&gt; In Triassic time, these terranes were located at
unspecified distances off the western coast of the craton and their faunas
provide unparalleled opportunities to test and better resolve the
paleogeography, specifically to work out the paleobiogeographic affinities and
relationships between some key terranes such as Wrangellia and the Alexander
terrane. Many terranes represent active island arcs which, during and following
cessation of volcanism, subsided and were replaced by sedimentary deposition,
thus fostering rich invertebrate marine associations. Some of the fossils to be
studied occur in thick carbonate deposits and even reefal associations. These
organisms once developed at tropical to subtropical latitudes somewhere in the
ancient Pacific ocean. Because many biotic assemblages proposed for study are
silicified, fossils will be etched in dilute acids which are expected to free
large numbers of fossils for study. Taxonomic study these silicified faunas will
provide a wealth of new and important data. The project also is expected to
benefit by collaboration with a number of outside specialists. &lt;br/&gt;
Statistical paleobiogeographic methods will be employed and the project also
will benefit from the development of an electronic paleontological database for
many of the Triassic taxa. This paleontological project is expected to provide
the necessary data for a general paleobiogeographic synthesis and to lay the
foundation for testing some tectonic postulates for terrane
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;