* 0229652
* Peer Instruction for Student Engagement
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Joseph Chase, Radford University
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 04/30/2007
* USD 250,000.00

The Peer Instruction for Student Engagement project is placing peer instructors
in selected&lt;br/&gt;introductory courses in STEM disciplines and measure the
impact that their use has on student&lt;br/&gt;engagement with those courses.
Departments have chosen courses (i) which students have&lt;br/&gt;historically
found difficult and (ii) which are either required of majors or from which
majors &lt;br/&gt;are normally recruited. To keep costs down, departments were
asked to determine how peer&lt;br/&gt;instructors could be effectively used no
more than three hours per week per class. The six&lt;br/&gt;different
disciplines use four different models for peer instruction. Geology and
Chemistry &lt;br/&gt;are following the Supplemental Instruction model, using
peer instructors to provide voluntary&lt;br/&gt;problem-solving sessions.
Computer Science and Biology are following a model already used &lt;br/&gt;by
the Computer Science Department in one course, using peer instructors to assist
with &lt;br/&gt;small-group learning in laboratories and to hold office hours.
Physics is adapting a model, &lt;br/&gt;best known from the University of
Washington's Physics Education Group, in which peer &lt;br/&gt;tutors help small
groups of students to work, in mandatory laboratory sessions, through
&lt;br/&gt;tutorials devised by faculty members. Mathematics is employing a
modification of the &lt;br/&gt;Peer-Led Team Learning strategy, combining a web-
based homework delivery system with &lt;br/&gt;mandatory problem-solving
workshops based around problem sets written by the
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's two objectives are (1) to increase
retention in STEM majors at Radford &lt;br/&gt;University by 15%, and (2) to
measure the effect of peer instruction on student engagement&lt;br/&gt;in STEM
disciplines. Five different assessment measures are used: retention rates,
grades, &lt;br/&gt;competency exam scores, surveys and interviews of
participants, and the National Survey &lt;br/&gt;of Student Engagement. Each
department involved has a department coordinator for the &lt;br/&gt;project who
manages recruitment and departmental training of peer instructors, and who
&lt;br/&gt;meets with peer instructors as a group during the semester. Global
training is provided by an&lt;br/&gt;experienced consultant. The project's co-
Principal Investigators are visiting workshops and &lt;br/&gt;tutorial sessions,
talking with faculty and students involved, and conducting extensive
&lt;br/&gt;assessment of all aspects of the project. The project addresses the
NSF merit review criteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary intellectual merit of this project is the
measurement of the impact of peer &lt;br/&gt;instruction on student engagement
with introductory courses in STEM disciplines. Peer &lt;br/&gt;instruction,
especially when combined with small-group work, is considered a prime
&lt;br/&gt;strategy for increasing engagement; this project will determine,
through a number of &lt;br/&gt;assessments, the extent to which this is true at
Radford University. It will also look &lt;br/&gt;for differences in results
among competing models for peer instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project improves education using proven
techniques while investigating the important&lt;br/&gt;question of why those
techniques work. Its results, both the expected increase in retention
&lt;br/&gt;rates and the measurements of student engagement associated with peer
instruction, should &lt;br/&gt;be of interest to all who wish to increase
student learning in STEM disciplines. Peer &lt;br/&gt;instructors can add
diversity to instruction in fields dominated by white males, and all
&lt;br/&gt;departments participating have indicated that they could hire
significant numbers of &lt;br/&gt;female or minority students to serve in that
capacity. The principal investigators will &lt;br/&gt;disseminate the project's
results both through the web and through the usual outlets &lt;br/&gt;for
publication and presentation.