* 0229715
* SBIR/Phase I:    Native Accent Pitch
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Maxine Eskenazi, Carnegie Speech Company
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase 1 project will develop automatic
pitch error detection (pinpointing) for non-native speakers and determine
whether software using this detection method helps people improve their
pronunciation. Over 50 million people worldwide spend over $50 billion per year
learning to speak English. Carnegie Speech's NativeAccent teaches English sounds
and rhythm, but not pitch since its detection was unreliable in the past. New
detection methods, however, will enable the software to show differences between
non-native and native speakers' utterances. Correct pitch makes speech
understandable over more than one sentence as the listener is guided from one
high-content word to the next. Recent cognitive science findings have produced
successful techniques for training non-native speakers to contrast phone sounds.
This project will adapt those techniques to pitch contrast, specifically, tones
in Mandarin. Tonal training breaks the pitch problem down into one basic type
variation, later building up to larger, more complex pitch contours and applying
the techniques to English. Trainees will use a game with feedback piloted by
NativeAccent pinpointing and intelligent tutoring techniques. Success in Phase 1
will be measured by whether people can be taught to produce tones more
effectively with NativeAccent Pitch than with classical methods.&lt;br/&gt; If
the major long term target application of this technology to enable effective
English prosody instruction succeeds, the firm will have advanced the state-of-
the-art in language teaching and will have provided an important capability to a
number of people especially in business contexts for whom the ability to speak
more than one language is becoming increasingly important The system could be
used across diverse educational settings and could be further extended to other
languages.&lt;br/&gt;