* 0229877
* Shackleton Glacier Area:  Evolution of Vegetation during the Triassic
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Edith Taylor, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 06/30/2007
* USD 432,341.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports a study of the Triassic plant fossils from
the Central Transantarctic Mountains. The terrestrial rocks of the central
Transantarctic Mountains have been a source of outstanding fossil discoveries
over the last 30 years, including Permian and Triassic permineralized peat,
fossil forests silicified in growth position, and compression floras with
cuticular preservation, as well as the interesting Sirius Group fossils, and the
first Jurassic dinosaur from the continent, to name only a few. The rare
juxtaposition of sites that include many different types of plant preservation,
the exceptional quality of the plant fossils, and the biodiversity of the sites
make this area unique in the world. The Paleozoic/Mesozoic transition is a
critical time in plant evolution. A unique variety of seed plant groups existed
and several of these have been suggested as angiosperm (flowering plant)
ancestors. There was also a massive floral change from the Permian to the
Triassic. The Permian of Gondwana is dominated by glossopterid seed ferns (leaf
type = Glossopteris), but these plants disappeared at the boundary to be
replaced by the corystosperm seed ferns (leaf type = Dicroidium), which
persisted throughout the Triassic. Although the Corystospermales were the
dominant plant group in the Triassic of Gondwana, we currently know very little
about their biology and evolution. Recent additions to our knowledge of
corystosperm phylogeny have come from permineralized peat from the Beardmore
Glacier area and from exceptionally well-preserved compression fossils from the
Shackleton Glacier area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While most fossil plants occur as
disarticulates leaves, stems, and reproductive organs, many in the Shackleton
Glacier area are partially articulated, thus making it possible to relate the
diversity of plant parts and gain a more accurate picture of the entire plant
and its place within the ecosystem. This project will center on the collection
and study of Triassic floras from the Shackleton Glacier area. Fieldwork will be
conducted in the 2003-2004 field season using two remote camps established via
Twin Otter of helicopter. The sites to be collected include Collinson Ridge and
an unnamed ridge southeast of Schroeder Hill. The latter has already yielded the
only known example of a Dicroidium frond organically attached to an axis bearing
Umkomasia reproductive organs, which has allowed a better understanding of the
phylogenetic position of these enigmatic seed plants, especially in relationship
to flowering plants. In addition to compression fossils, this site also includes
some permineralized peat and in situ fossil stumps. The Collinson Ridge site is
important because it contains fossil peat and logs in presumably Lower Triassic
rocks. Megafossil plants of this age are currently unknown on the continent,
although palynomorphs have been recovered and root traces are relatively common.
Preliminary analysis of petrified material collected during the 1995-1996 field
season, however, shows a large number of Glossopteris leaves in this peat,
suggesting that perhaps it is Late Permian rather than Early Triassic. Thus the
fossil flora, as it is currently known, is at odds with the age based on
vertebrate fossils. It is important to elucidate the biostratigraphy of this
area because the position of the Permian-Triassic boundary is crucial in
understanding the timing of terrestrial extinctions around the boundary. Further
collecting at both of these sites and analysis of the fossil material in the
laboratory will address these discrepancies and yield important new information
about Triassic plant evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleobotany is ideally
suited to education and outreach activities. Workshops and temporary exhibits
have been developed on Antarctic science through the public outreach programs of
the University of Kansas Natural History Museum and Biodiversity Research
Center, and this activity will be continued under this project. Student
involvement has also been extensive and will be continued through research
experiences for undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;