* 0229156
* Developing Computer Simulations of Protein Laboratory Procedures for Case-Based Learning in International Biology Curricula and Pre-service Science Teacher Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Mark Bergland, University of Wisconsin-River Falls
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 06/30/2008
* USD 374,057.00

We are developing open-ended computer simulations of protein
laboratory&lt;br/&gt;procedures for case-based learning in international biology
curricula. We are distributing&lt;br/&gt;these simulations freely via Internet
download so that they are available to university and&lt;br/&gt;high school
students worldwide. Existing protein software applications lack the ability
to&lt;br/&gt;produce realistic, easily understandable output for procedures such
as enzyme&lt;br/&gt;immunoassays, hemagglutination inhibition,
immunofluorescence, protein&lt;br/&gt;electrophoresis, and western blotting.
Such procedures are especially useful for the&lt;br/&gt;analysis of cases
involving infectious diseases of humans and domestic animals
including&lt;br/&gt;anthrax, foot-and-mouth disease, influenza, HIV infection,
hantavirus, encephalitis, Lyme&lt;br/&gt;disease, genital herpes, hepatitis,
brucellosis and rinderpest, among many others. They&lt;br/&gt;provide a vehicle
for making topics in molecular biology more interesting and relevant
to&lt;br/&gt;students, particularly female non-science majors. Protein
simulations complement&lt;br/&gt;DNA simulations we have previously developed
and freely distributed for the analysis of cases&lt;br/&gt;based primarily on
human genetic diseases. The proposed simulations have
wide&lt;br/&gt;applicability because they can be adapted to any protein-based
case scenario. Students&lt;br/&gt;can participate in Internet "poster sessions"
via an online integrated web editor /&lt;br/&gt;conferencing system we developed
with prior NSF support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pre-service science teachers are
being used as research assistants for assessment, and results&lt;br/&gt;are
being widely disseminated via presentations, workshops, and publications
including the&lt;br/&gt;BioQUEST Library. The BioQUEST Curriculum Consortium
strongly supports this&lt;br/&gt;proposal and is assisting in the evaluation and
dissemination of project results.