* 0229470
* Igniting Continental Arcs; A Petrologic Study Of  Mafic Rocks And Peridotites From The Coast Ridge Belt, Santa Lucia Mountains (California)
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Mihai Ducea, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2005
* USD 221,727.00

Ducea and Chesley &lt;br/&gt;EAR-0229470 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is strong
evidence that major continental magmatic arcs are being built in episodic
"flare-ups" separated by periods of magmatic quiescence, although the mechanisms
responsible for the high magmatic fluxes are not resolved. Moreover, flare- up
events appears to be fueled by a mafic input, thought to be largely derived from
continental lithospheric mantle. This requires the existence of a mantle
lithosphere an order of magnitude thicker than allowed by observations in mantle
wedges and tectonic models. However, most of this evidence comes from
subordinate mafic rocks found in shallow exposures of batholithic terranes.
Either the voluminous mafic input to the arc lower crust is not (predominantly)
from the lithospheric mantle during high magmatic fluxes, or if it is, we need
to revise our thinking regarding the dynamics of subduction beneath continents
and the ability of continental lids to episodically feed melt-fertile mass to
the mantle wedge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These issues will be addressed in a
petrologic study of mafic rocks from a mid-crustal arc exposure in the Big Sur
area of the Santa Lucia Mountains, central coastal California. The basement
rocks exposed there represent a tilted exposure of a magmatic arc representing
paleo-depths ranging from 25 km to 10 km. At about 25 km beneath the arc there
is a transition from large intrusions of tonalite to granodiorite composition
separated by steeply dipping screens typical of the Sierra Nevada batholith to
near horizontal, foliated gneissic rocks with numerous mafic intrusions. Mafic
intrusions, now either amphibolites or granulites, are abundant at this level,
where they stalled due to buoyancy reasons. Our mapping, petrographic, chemical
and isotopic results will be used to resolve crustal vs. sub-crustal, and
lithospheric vs. asthenospheric reservoirs involved in continental arc magmatism
and provide new constraints for the mechanisms of generation of large
batholiths. &lt;br/&gt;