* 0229450
* Study of Natural Ventilation in Buildings by Large Eddy Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Qingyan Chen, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 06/30/2003
* USD 82,000.00

9877118 Chen MIT Study of Natural Ventilation in Buildings by Large Eddy
Simulation

U.S. buildings use about onethird of the total energy used in the nation, and
the Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning (HVAQ systems in the buildings
use a major part of it. The use of HVAC systems does not necessarily create a
more comfortable and healthy indoor environment. On the other hand, natural
ventilation generally improves indoor air quality, provides the occupants a high
comfort level, and saves the energy used by the HVAC systems. The U.S. has a
great potential to use natural ventilation. In many regions in the U.S., no air-
conditioning system is needed during the summer with proper natural ventilation.
This will save the first costs of the airconditioning systems.

The overall objectives of the proposed research are to develop a reliable method
to study natural ventilation in buildings, and to study the impact of the
thermal and geometrical conditions in buildings on natural ventilation. The
empirical data and equations available in literature are not suitable for
accurate estimation of natural ventilation. The study of natural ventilation
requires either experimental measurements or computer simulations. The
experimental approach needs a wind tunnel to study the airflow around buildings
and a full-scale environmental chamber to study the airflow in buildings.
Although the approach can generate reliable data, it is expensive and time
consuming. The computational approach includes Direct Numerical Simulation
(DNS), Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equation modeling and Large Eddy
Simulation (LES). DNS requires a computer not available at present. RANS is not
accurate enough and cannot predict single-side natural ventilation. Only LES
seems most appropriate for natural ventilation study.

The investigation will develop a reliable Sub-Grid-Scale model for LES. The new
SGS model will be validated by the experimental data from the literature and an
environmental chamber. Then the validated LES model will be used to study the
impact of thermal and geometrical conditions of a building on natural
ventilation. The thermal conditions to be studied are: forced convection (no
thermal buoyancy); natural convection (no wind); and mixed convection (the
momentum force due to the wind is comparable to the buoyant force due to the
heat gain in the building and the solar radiation on the outside of the
building). The geometrical conditions to be studied are cross natural
ventilation (an indoor space with openings in two or more walls) and single-side
natural ventilation (an indoor space with only one opening)

The LES program will calculate instantaneous and averaged distributions of air
pressure, air velocity, air temperature, and contaminant concentrations, such as
CO 2, in and around the building. The study is to understand how momentum and
buoyancy forces can change the airflow pattern and pressure distribution around
the building and how natural ventilation is interacted with the building opening
location. The results are useful to determine the ventilation rate as a function
of the flow Reynolds and Grashof numbers. Measurements in a wind tunnel at a
Taiwanese university and in the environmental chamber will be conducted to
further validate the computed results.

A Chinese university will conduct on site measurements in an actual apartment
building in Beijing. The LES model will be used to simulate the situations
measured on site. The LES results are useful to analyze the impact of wind
velocity and direction on natural ventilation, the impact of thermal buoyancy on
natural ventilation, and the feasibility to design single-side ventilation

LES should be a next-generation tool to study natural ventilation in buildings.
The results of this project will provide detailed and accurate information to
analyze indoor air quality and thermal comfort in buildings with natural
ventilation. The results present a scientific basis to architects and HVAC
engineers to design healthy and comfortable buildings and to save energy used by
the HVAC systems. This will increase occupants' productivity and efficiency.