* 0229240
* International Collaborative Network of Geographers:  U.S. and the Southern Tier of Post-Socialist States
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Robert Kaiser, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 02/28/2005
* USD 116,245.00

Prof. Robert Kaiser of the University of Wisconsin, Madison, will lead this
effort to construct an international collaborative network of geographers that
involves U.S. researchers and Eurasian counterparts from post socialist
countries in Central Asia, the Caucasus, and the Balkans. On the US side,
members of the Russian, Central Eurasian and Eastern European Specialty Group
(RCEE) of the Association of American Geographers will serve as core
participants. The overall goals are to identify and connect geographers and
scholars working in disciplines related to priority subfields and to build a
virtual network linked electronically and through research partnerships.

To accomplish their objectives, Prof. Kaiser and University of Wisconsin
graduate students will create and maintain a specialized website and a
listserver for this participant community. They also will organize and hold a
first year planning workshop in Madison to define a future research agenda.
Topics of special interest include: new forms of reterritorization of power and
identity across a multiplicity of geographic scales; socioeconomic
transformation of the states in the region; environmental conditions and issues
related to environmental justice, and regional geopolitical and geocultural
realignments at differing geographic scales. Initial results will be presented
at a substantive conference in Baku during the second year. The establishment of
this geographers' network and the anticipated research results should add
significantly to our understanding of the dynamic ways in which these regions
are being transformed socio-economically, culturally, demographically, and
politically. If successful, results may be useful to national and international
decision-makers, including those in the nations of the study region.

These collaborative networking activities fulfill the program objective of
advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and
Central and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and share research
resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.