* 0229837
* Pathways for the Abiotic Formation of Organic Compounds in Geologic Environments
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Thomas McCollom, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2005
* USD 201,806.00

McCollom&lt;br/&gt;EAR- 0229837&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is an
experimental investigation of reactions that synthesize abiotic organic
compounds in geologic environments. Although the common occurrence of abiotic
hydrocarbons in geologic samples indicates that their formation has been
widespread throughout the history of the Earth, the circumstances under which
these compounds form remain poorly understood. The study will employ several
experimental approaches to examine reaction pathways for the formation of
organic compounds from reduction of CO2, and define the geologic conditions that
allow these reactions to proceed. &lt;br/&gt;In particular, the experiments will
address: &lt;br/&gt;(i) the role of aqueous phase versus vapor phase reactions
in abiotic organic synthesis, &lt;br/&gt;(ii) the generation of abiotic
hydrocarbons during hydrothermal alteration of olivine-rich rocks
(serpentinization), and &lt;br/&gt;(iii) formation of graphite and organic
matter during thermal decomposition of iron-bearing carbonates. &lt;br/&gt;The
results will enhance our understanding of the origin of abiotic organic
compounds in geologic samples such as igneous rocks, hydrothermal fluids,
serpentinites, and meteorites. This information will be useful in constraining
the magnitude of the flux of abiotic hydrocarbons and their potential role in
global carbon cycles. The results will also be useful in understanding the
contribution of abiotic sources to the reduced carbon found in rock samples from
the early Earth, and in defining sources of prebiotic organic compounds for the
origin and early evolution of life.&lt;br/&gt;