* 0229093
* Department-Level Reform of Undergraduate Industrial Engineering Education: A New Paradigm for Engineering Curriculum Renewal
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Delbert Kimbler, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 09/30/2005
* USD 105,116.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0229093&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Leonard,
Michael&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Clemson University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Department-Level Reform of Undergraduate Industrial Engineering Education: A New
Paradigm for Engineering Curriculum
Renewal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective
of the proposed planning project is the development of a new scalable and
deployable industrial engineering baccalaureate-degree renewal model. This model
will be designed to permit scaling up from an information technology kernel to a
fully integrated industrial engineering undergraduate curriculum. The model will
also serve as a deployable template for the redesign of other baccalaureate
degree engineering programs through its use of problem-solving approaches that
draw directly from fundamental models in the physical and biological sciences,
and its emphasis on the use of nontraditional learning methods. A secondary
objective for the planning project is an assessment of the appropriateness and
likely impact of the new model. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;For the first time, a
planning process will be developed that will lead to the identification of
opportunities to extend tested asynchronous learning mechanism and synthetic
environments to support an industrial engineering curriculum in systems and
engineering design as it relates to the three emphasis areas of information
technology, biotechnology and cognitive theory. The successful completion of
this effort will lead to the ability to fill a state and national need for well-
prepared industrial engineering graduates. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Impact: The
planning project activities presented in this proposal are expected to lead to a
novel curriculum model that will impact both the education of industrial
engineering students and, through time, the education of students in other
engineering disciplines. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;