* 0229315
* Hydrous Spinelloids and the Hydration State of the Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Joseph Smyth, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2004
* USD 88,754.00

Smyth&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0229315&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogen is perhaps the most
poorly constrained compositional variable in the Earth, yet it has a controlling
effect on many if not most geologic processes. This is a proposal to improve the
understanding of the hydration state of the interior by investigation of the
stability, crystal chemistry and equation of state of hydrous olivine, spinel,
and spinelloid phases that would occur in and near a hydrous Transition Zone. In
collaboration with colleagues at the Bavarian Geological Institute (Bayerisches
Geoinstitut), we will perform synthesis experiments on hydrous peridotite
compositions at temperatures and pressures corresponding to depths of 300 to 700
km. At the University of Colorado, we will characterize these materials by
single crystal X-ray diffraction, electron microprobe and IR spectroscopy. We
will use single-crystal X-ray diffraction measurements in the diamond anvil cell
(DAC) at the University of Colorado to measure compressibilities (isothermal
bulk moduli) and thermal expansion of the hydrous olivine, spinel and spinelloid
phases observed in these experiments. With a single year of funding, we expect
to be able to complete characterization of a series of hydrous ringwoodites,
wadsleyites and olivines and to perform high-pressure compression experiments on
several of these samples. Because the bulk modulus is directly related to
seismic velocity, if the compressibilities of these phases differ greatly from
the anhydrous modifications, it may be possible to place some constraint on the
amount of OH actually present in the minerals of the Transition Zone. In
addition, we will continue our collaborative studies on measurement of elastic
properties by Brillouin spectroscopy and GHz ultrasonic interferometry, and make
samples available to other groups. &lt;br/&gt;