* 0229251
* Austral High-Latitude Atmospheric Dynamics
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Gonzalo Hernandez, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 07/31/2007
* USD 495,750.00

The study and determination of the latitudinal extent of the high-latitude zonal
wavenumber one character mesospheric waves recently discovered (by the PI and
others) near the South Pole are the most compelling and contemporary
investigations in the polar aeronomy. These mesospheric waves have not been
observed elsewhere, because at lower latitudes the spectrum is much richer in
larger zonal wavenumbers of mesospheric waves that are seldom directly measured.
As one approaches the very high latitudes near the rotational poles, the higher
wavenumber oscillations observed at lower latitudes must either transform into
the observed higher latitude wavenumber one oscillations, or else lose their
energy to the mean flow and as heat dissipation. A unique opportunity to
determine where and how this oscillation wavenumber mode transition region
occurs is offered by the combined and simultaneous observation from the combined
and presently-existing ground-based sites at South Pole and Arrival Heights, in
conjunction with the TIMED satellite. This is a unique opportunity for
investigating this problem, which is unlikely to happen again in the next ten to
fifteen years. These investigations can only be carried out in Antarctica
because the defining observations must be made from the rotational pole. Another
special problem at high geomagnetic latitudes is the existence of persistent and
predictable thermospheric vertical neutral winds, first reported by the PI from
the South Pole observations. The existence of these vertical winds, likely to be
caused by the divergence of the horizontal wind motions due to ion drag, has
profound effects on the energetics of this region of the atmosphere. With the
present solar activity maximum, a more complete characterization and
investigation of these vertical winds becomes possible, because they are
geomagnetic activity dependent. These investigations from South Pole,
simultaneously with Arrival Heights and the observations of our Austral Alliance
colleagues at Mawson and Davis stations, as well as those with the TIMED
satellite will enlarge the geographic and geomagnetic coverage of this neutral
vertical wind study. These investigations are possible because of the existing
highly versatile ground-based Fabry-Perot spectrometers present at South Pole
and Arrival Heights. These devices are able to simultaneously and independently
address both of these investigations in the mesosphere and thermosphere. The
instruments are capable of resolving the zonal wavenumber structure at
mesospheric heights while, at the same time, gathering thermospheric neutral
wind observations. In addition to the wind motion, the neutral atmosphere
kinetic temperatures can simultaneously be observed. These latter measurements
provide another powerful tool to understand the behavior and properties of the
upper atmosphere at the very high latitudes. The polar aeronomy has become one
of the four initiatives in the CEDAR atmospheric community addressing the Global
Climate Change effects and their implications.