* 0229908
* Classroom Assessment Tools for Introductory Programming Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2004
* Richard Anderson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Stephen R. Cunningham
* 02/29/2004
* USD 74,978.00

This project develops instructional materials to support in-class instruction of
introductory programming. The materials supplement existing curricula to
encourage greater student participation and understanding and are compatible
with many teaching styles and modes of instruction. The approach is to
specialize various Classroom Assessment Techniques (CATs) [Angelo and Cross
1993] for use in introductory programming classes. CATs provide a mechanism for
students to supply feedback to the instructor about the instructor's teaching,
about the course material, and about their own learning. CATs can also be used
to create more active learning experiences for students by engaging them in
classroom activities. The CATs developed in this project will be evaluated in
introductory computer science courses at the University of Washington.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals for the materials include: to provide active
learning experiences for students in introductory computing courses, to provide
instructors a means to assess students, understanding of introductory
programming concepts, and to widen the communication channel between students
and the instructor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classroom Assessment Techniques and
supporting technology will be constructed to accomplish these goals. The
deliverables for this project are: &lt;br/&gt;- Classroom assessment tools for
use in CS1/CS2 courses based on either C/C++ or Java. &lt;br/&gt;- Preliminary
usage notes for instructors on how to use individual assessments in class.
&lt;br/&gt;- Prototype work on technological support for classroom assessments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The materials will be evaluated through four quarters of
classroom use at UW. At the end of the project, the classroom assessment tools
will be made available for other instructors to use. The distribution mechanism
will be to publish the materials available on the web for instructors to
download them. &lt;br/&gt;