* 0229918
* Water is Life:  Immersing the Public in Aquatic Diversity
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Terrence Gosliner, California Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,467,240.00

The California Academy of Sciences will produce"Water is Life," a 30,383 square-
foot permanent exhibit with educational programming. The exhibit is designed to
engage the public with the living world of water, to foster environmental
stewardship and increase science literacy. Three habitat components --
Philippine Coral Reef, California Coast and Global Rainforests -- are
conceptually and experientially linked through "Water Planet," which explores
water's physical properties and how they impact living organisms and lead to
aquatic diversity. Each component also reinforces the importance of conserving
aquatic resources. Educational programming takes "Water is Life" to local
schools and community events and onto the World Wide Web, as well as provides
venues for formative evaluation of exhibit design elements. The development of
lending kits, plus supporting manuals and workshops, will extend the reach of
"Water is Life" regionally and nationally. Similarly, instruction manuals and
workshops for creating desktop, living reefs will have national impact. The
compelling draw of live organisms, hands-on activities, and exhibit enrichment
through educational programming provide accessibility to a large, diverse
audience. The exhibit will reach over one million annual visitors, and a larger
audience will experience distributed educational programs.