* 0229651
* Collaborative Research:    An Integrated Assessment of the Arctic Freshwater System:    Analysis of Retrospective and Contemporary Conditions
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Mark Serreze, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2008
* USD 365,464.00

This proposal is a synthesis and integration study of the pan-Arctic water
cycle. An Expanded Arctic Regional Integrated Monitoring System (E-RIMS) will be
developed that links an existing, operational hydrological monitoring system for
the pan-Arctic landmass and atmosphere (Arctic-RIMS) to an Arctic Ocean and sea
ice component. On the terrestrial side, E-RIMS will produce time varying
aerological and land surface water budgets including river and ice melt inputs
to the Arctic Ocean. For the ocean, freshwater fluxes from the atmosphere and
land will be used in concert with observed mass, heat and momentum forcing to
drive a coupled ocean-sea ice-atmosphere model. The linked models will be used
to examine the origin of freshwater fluxes in the atmosphere and landmass and
how water is then partitioned between solid (sea ice) and liquid forms in the
ocean. E-RIMS will also track freshwater transport off the shelf, downward below
the mixed layer, and laterally toward the straits leading to the North Atlantic
Ocean. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The near real-time monitoring program and
historical analysis (from 1960) provides an important benchmark for
understanding future change to the arctic hydrologic cycle. In keeping with
current Arctic-RIMS protocols, provisional data sets (ca. 1-2 month delay) will
be made available and then re-analyzed at yearly intervals for improved quality
assurance. All key elements of the terrestrial and ocean water balance will be
provided, including an assessment of potential error. Operational data sets will
be freely accessible on partner institution web sites and through NSIDC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;E-RIMS will complement efforts by other investigators
using more fully coupled air-land-ocean models, by providing to them initial and
boundary conditions and by carrying-out a set of preliminary numerical
experiments to help design their more computationally expensive feedback
studies. As a final part of this work, NWP predictions and medium-term forecasts
will be used to explore how much skill will have been developed over the course
of this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;