* 0229087
* CAREER: Directed Assembly of Nanoparticles; A Tool to Enable the Fabrication of Nanoparticle Based Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2010
* Heiko Jacobs, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 01/31/2010
* USD 399,997.00

Goals. The first research objective of this CAREER program is to develop a
parallel tool to position nanoparticles and small components onto surfaces. The
strategy that will be developed is based on directed self-assembly; it uses a
patterned surface with areas (receptors) that interact with nanoparticle based
device components. The interaction driving the assembly process is based on
electrostatic forces. The central goal of the research is to demonstrate that
nanotechnological devices can be assembled by the directed self-assembly of
nanoparticle building blocks. As a first device example the research will focus
on the fabrication of a vertical flow field effect transistor that uses a
silicon nanoparticle as channel element. The specific CAREER objectives
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop a parallel tool that is based on directed
self-assembly to position nanoparticles and small components on surfaces with
sub 100 nm resolution. &lt;br/&gt;To study the key factors and ultimate
resolution in theory and experiment.&lt;br/&gt;To apply the developed tool to
fabricate nanotechnological devices in general and a vertical flow FET in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;To foster a cross-disciplinary education and outreach to a
broad community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits. Nanoparticles can
provide a variety of functions and are considered as building blocks for future
nanotechnological devices. Examples of such devices are single electron
transistors, quantum-effect-based lasers, photonic bandgap materials, filters,
and wave-guides. Device prototypes have been realized using random particle
deposition and single particle manipulation. Such strategies are useful to
fabricate and explore new device architectures; however, their lag in yield and
speed will have to be overcome in the future. Fabrication strategies that are
based on self-assembly and directed assembly may overcome these difficulties.
This program will advance the knowledge in the area of directed self-assembly.
&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus on electrostatic interactions because they
are long-range and non-material specific (any particle can be trapped). The PI
invented a parallel process to pattern charge at 100 nm resolution (published in
Science 2001, see bibliography). In a preliminary experiment, these charge
patterns allowed to direct the assembly of nanoparticles from the gas phase and
liquid phase. These findings demonstrate that electrostatic forces resulting
from surface charges or externally biased electrodes can be used to guide
nanoparticles to specific locations on a substrate. The investigator believes
that such an electrostatically-directed self-assembly, because it is based on
long-range electrostatic interactions, will give a significant advantage over
other strategies that use protein recognition, DNA hybridization,
hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity, and magnetic interaction. The CAREER program lays
down the ground work to accomplish the PI's long term research goal, which is to
use a variety of different short range and long range interactions to direct the
assembly of small components and nanoparticles to fabricate functional devices
in two- and three dimensions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. It is
difficult to overstate the broader impact of the research component of this
CAREER pogram, if it proves successful. For example, materials could be created
as nanoparticles in the vapor or in solution, where they could be processed
using well established methods. The ability to localize particles and small
components of arbitrary materials on arbitrary substrates could allow the
merging of technologies based on otherwise incompatible materials. Examples of
applications include quantum electronic devices (addressed in this program),
integrated circuits on plastics or fabrics for wearable intelligence, and merged
optical/electronic structures for optical off-chip and cross-chip communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational objectives. The educational objectives of the
CAREER program focuses on creating awareness and transmitting excitement about
the PI's research as well as exploratory, interdisciplinary research in general.
It emphasizes on the importance of providing continuous opportunities for
student involvement throughout their academic careers. Strongly influenced by
the PI's educational experiences, the educational approach includes the
following key points: 1) outreach to high school students and teachers, 2)
undergraduate education, 3) undergraduate research, 4) graduate education, 5)
graduate research, and 6) outreach to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Societal implications. "Advances in nanoscience and
nanotechnology promise to have major implications for health, wealth, and peace
in the upcoming decades. Knowledge in this field is growing worldwide, leading
to fundamental scientific advances. In turn, this will lead to dramatic changes
in the ways that materials, devices, and systems are understood and create." -
after Mihail C. Roco. This research is one element to advance knowledge. It
suggests a dramatic change in the way that devices and systems are
created.&lt;br/&gt;