* 0229344
* Collaborative Research: Training Environmental Statisticians Using Complicated Data Sets to Make More Informed Environmental Decisions
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Nagambal Shah, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel P. Maki
* 01/31/2007
* USD 246,137.00

With the increased emphasis on the application of statistical techniques in
hands on and practical settings, it is important for members of academic
statistical community to develop working relationship with other academicians
and members of the private and governmental sector to create active research
consortiums. This collaboration between North Carolina State University, Spelman
College, and members of governmental agencies presents an innovative solution to
addressing the needs of getting more practical applications of statistical
techniques by statistics students while assisting in the management of huge and
complicated data sets obtained by governmental agencies. The collaboration stems
from the Environmental Statistics Practicum developed and tested at North
Carolina State University and the program adapts the current practices of this
successful endeavor for use at Spelman College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of protocols for training undergraduates in analyzing complicated
data sets and analyzing environmental data to make better environmental policy
decisions using modern statistical techniques lends itself to the intellectual
merit of the proposed project. In addition, the broader impacts are established
through the retaining of undergraduate students in the graduate studies pipeline
in order to pursue higher educational aspirations, adaptation and adoption of
these programs in a historically black college for women, and developing student
- industry interactions that lead to successful employment in STEM related
careers.&lt;br/&gt;