* 0229913
* Collaborative Research: Uplift and Exhumation Along the San Andreas Fault Zone; An Empirical Study of Transpression
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Robert Brady, California State University Bakersfield Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2005
* USD 35,296.00

Transpression occurs along 42% of the San Andreas fault system. Its influence on
the behavior of the transform fault is thus of first-order importance and may
represent one of the most important complications in developing a comprehensive
understanding of how strike-slip faults and plate boundaries behave. With this
in mind, the PI's propose a collaborative study that will systematically and
quantitatively integrate geological constraints on the manner in which
transpressional deformation is accommodated at several sites along the San
Andreas fault. A functional understanding of transpression would make patterns
of vertical deformation easy to predict where primary boundary conditions, such
as the degree of plate motion obliquity and the mechanics of the main transform
fault, are known. However, the material properties of the San Andreas fault are
debated, and considerable evidence suggests that secondary factors (structural
and lithologic heterogeneity, erosivity) play a significant role in shaping the
geologic response to transpression. As a result, a general understanding of how
transpressional plate motion becomes manifest as deformation in the crust has
not been developed. One of the PI's objectives is to quantitatively evaluate the
effects of external factors on deformation partitioning, so that we may
ultimately evaluate models of transpressional deformation that are predicated on
assumptions of the mechanical properties of the San Andreas fault. Their
approach will be to use the spatial and temporal distribution of vertical
motion, manifested in bedrock uplift (surface uplift + exhumation), as a
representation of transpression. They will combine thermochronologic constraints
((U-Th)/He dating) on the age and magnitude of exhumation with geomorphic and
structural constraints on surface uplift, erosion, and the architecture of
deformation that drives this bedrock uplift. They will use these complementary
techniques to determine how patterns of vertical motion are spatially
distributed with respect to the San Andreas fault (i.e. near vs. far field) and
its obliquity to plate motion. The PI's objective is thus to develop a
functional relationship between transpressive deformation and these key
variables. This will require developing controls on how the chronology of
vertical motion relates to the emergence of transpression at each site as well
as controls on the effects of independent boundary conditions (e.g. geological,
structural, climatic) along strike. They will focus on four sites (Carrizo
Plain/Temblor Range, San Emigdio Mountains, northern San Gabriel Mountains, and
Coachella Valley), each of which represents a major gap in understanding of
transpression along the San Andreas fault. The integrated results from these
sites, when synthesized with previous studies, will provide the full range in
boundary conditions and transpressive parameters needed to create specific tests
of different models of transpressional deformation. A key aspect of this
proposal is the collaboration that will be employed in attaining our goal. The
PI's have extensive knowledge of southern California geology and the analytical
techniques to be employed. Spotila was among the first to apply this type of
integrated approach to understanding portions of the Transverse Ranges. House
has actively pursued new applications of the thermochronologic technique that
will be employed in this study. Brady provides a robust foundation in structural
geology and geophysics that will link uplift estimates with individual
structures. Post-doctoral associate Niemi will add an additional expertise in
Cenozoic stratigraphy, structural geology, and field mapping. This number of
PI's will also enable us to begin work at all field sites concurrently and
represents a science team strong enough to tackle this significant problem.