* 0229269
* RUI: Fabric in Granite: the Vinalhaven and Cadillac Mountain Intrusive Complexes, Maine
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Michelle Markley, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2006
* USD 109,551.00

Granitoid plutons constitute much of the earth's crust, and most show magmatic
foliation and lineation (i.e. fabric). Although structural geologists have made
great strides in quantifying magmatic fabric and interpreting its significance
in the context of pluton emplacement, problems remain in using fabric to
understand tectonic and magmatic processes, identifying fabric overprinting or
modification, and integrating different scales of observation. Does fabric form
during magma chamber processes such as deposition of crystal mush on the magma
chamber floor, during tectonic processes such as deformation in an active shear
zone, or as a composite record of multiple events? Although many processes
probably contribute to fabric formation in granites, and the mechanisms by which
fabric forms in one pluton may be different from those in another, few widely
accepted criteria exist for testing the different models of fabric formation
against one another. This project integrates structural and petrological methods
in order to test&lt;br/&gt;hypotheses about fabric formation in and emplacement
of two shallow Silurian plutons in coastal Maine: the Cadillac Mountain and
Vinalhaven Intrusive Complexes. Both plutons show quantifiable variations in
magmatic fabric, and neither shows evidence for solid-state deformation. In
addition to developing new methods for quantifying magmatic fabric in granite,
this proposal takes a hypothesis-testing approach to interpreting the origins of
fabric. It also supports research by six undergraduate women in a field in which
they are under-represented. The research goals are three-fold:&lt;br/&gt;Goal 1:
Test models for fabric development and modification by quantifying
outcrop-&lt;br/&gt;scale gradients in granite fabric, texture, and composition.
Working on mutually orthogonal faces of large, oriented hand samples of granite,
the PI's will use a state-of-the-art fabric analysis technique to quantify the
strength and symmetry of fabric defined by each mineral population. They will
also use a petrological technique that has never been integrated into a
structural study: qualitative assessment of the relative volumes of cumulus
crystals and melt present during fabric development. The focus is on gradients
in three settings: (a) granite that is associated with a preserved magma chamber
floor because it is interlayered with mafic sheets, (b) typical homogeneous
granite, and (c) granite associated with mafic schlieren. &lt;br/&gt;Goal 2:
Conduct pluton-scale studies of magmatic fabric in order to further constrain
our&lt;br/&gt;interpretations of the origin and the significance of magmatic
fabric in both plutons. Using the anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility (AMS),
the PI's will map the orientations of magmatic foliation and lineation with
respect to both the wall-rock contact and major boundaries between granite
facies. The AMS study will be accompanied by detailed work on magnetic
mineralogy and the relation of the AMS ellipsoid to rock fabric.&lt;br/&gt;Goal
3: Test the hypothesis that the magma chamber floor sagged during pluton
emplacement. Previous work, based on mapping of polarity criteria and paleo-
horizontal&lt;br/&gt;indicators preserved in mafic and felsic layers, has
generated a testable model for the&lt;br/&gt;emplacement of these plutons by the
downward sagging of the pluton floor. With alternating field demagnetization
measurements on all cores collected for Goal #2, the PI's will use a
paleomagnetic study to attempt to quantify the relative rotation of different
parts of the pluton.