* 0229771
* Tracking the Late Mesozoic Strike-Slip System of the Western U.S. Cordillera
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Sandra Wyld, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2007
* USD 219,590.00

Large-scale strike-slip faulting is increasingly recognized as an important
process in the development of orogenic belts, including the North American
Cordillera. These faults can accommodate substantial displacement of terranes
and shuffle their relative positions in complex ways, resulting in a collage of
terranes whose relationship is difficult to decipher. Regional strike-slip
faulting in orogenic belts can also yield crucial insight into ancient plate
interactions. In the North American Cordillera, pre-Cenozoic strike-slip
faulting is believed to have played an important structural role in terrane
transport and assembly, but the specifics of proposed strike-slip episodes are
mired in uncertainty and controversy. Key questions involve the location of
strike-slip boundaries, and the amount, sense, and timing of displacement along
them. These uncertainties must be resolved before any reliable paleogeographic
and paleotectonic reconstructions of the pre-Cenozoic Cordillera can be
generated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focusing on the western Nevada
shear zone system (WNS), a recently identified major tectonic boundary in
southeast Oregon and northwest Nevada. Data obtained so far along the WNS
suggest that it accommodated several 100 km dextral displacement of outboard
terranes in the late Mesozoic, and that it likely connects up with two other
important late Mesozoic tectonic boundaries, the Salmon River suture of western
Idaho and the Mojave-Snow Lake fault of the central and southern Sierra Nevada
in California. This project is testing these conclusions more rigorously and
extensively by a variety of new studies. If initial hypotheses concerning the
boundary are correct, it will have far-reaching implications for paleogeographic
and paleotectonic reconstructions and interpretations of the North American
Cordillera.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research being done in this project is
as follows. (1) Detailed mapping, structural, and geochronologic studies of the
WNS are being extended south into the Gerlach area of western Nevada, which will
expand knowledge of the boundary to a strike distance of over 200 km. (2)
Distribution, origin, and significance of microterranes along the WNS are being
determined from the Gerlach area to southeast Oregon. These stratigraphically
and structurally distinct lithotectonic assemblages may be fault slices dragged
northward along anastomosing strands of the WNS strike-slip system. (3) Proposed
terranes linkages across the strike-slip system are being tested to determine
whether the inferred sense and amount of displacement is valid, and whether the
inferred continuity between the WNS, Mojave-Snow Lake fault, and Salmon River
suture can be more rigorously supported. (4) Timing of strike-slip displacement
and deformation along the WNS are being determined by a variety of
geochronologic studies.