* 0229260
* Rheology of Mantle Minerals at High Pressure
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Donald Weidner, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2007
* USD 510,000.00

EAR-0229260&lt;br/&gt;Weidner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Earth is a dynamic body,
constantly evolving, changing the shapes of oceans, building mountains. Our
understanding of these phenomena includes a recognition of the plastic behavior
of minerals at high temperature. Plate tectonics asserts that stable surface
plates are mechanically isolated from the deep Earth. Thermal evolutionary
models transport heat by vertical flow of minerals. The rebound from glaciers is
testimony to the viscous flow beneath. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is
a proposal to study the effects of pressure on the plastic character of the
major minerals of the Earth's mantle. While we have vastly improved our
understanding of the flow properties of minerals over the past several years,
the effects of pressure are still poorly constrained. Estimates of activation
volume for olivine flow in the power law creep regime give rise to an
uncertainty in viscosity at the base of the lithosphere of 1000 fold. This
uncertainty is greater that the total effect of water content or partial
melting. Furthermore, the flow characteristics of the high-pressure forms of
olivine, the phases that control flow in the deep Earth, are virtually
unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators have been developing
new tools capable of attacking this problem. Using synchrotron x-ray sources, it
is possible to measure both diffraction spectra and direct images of samples in
a multi-anvil press while the sample is at high pressure and temperature. They
can now determine the stress field from the x-ray diffraction signal and strain
from shadow-graph images. One complete data collection cycle takes about three
minutes. Thus, time resolution of 200 seconds is possible and time derivatives
of these parameters can be obtained. Stress accuracy is a few tens of MPa, and
strain rates of 10-7 s-1 can be resolved. The investigators have demonstrated
that they can create a stress field in the sample during each of several
heating/compression cycles. Thus, texture and defect structures can equilibrate
during the experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the
researchers will investigate the flow properties of olivine, wadsleyite,
ringwoodite, garnet, and perovskite at high pressure. They will synthesize the
samples in the high-pressure laboratory at Stony Brook, and will use the
synchrotrons at Brookhaven National Labs and at Argonne National Labs for the
rheology study. Results will be interpreted in terms of their implications on
deep focus earthquakes and mantle viscosity structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-- &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;