* 0229846
* A Stochastic Differential Equation Approach to Studying Landslide Failure and Size Distributions
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2006
* Colin Stark, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2006
* USD 214,205.00

A major unsolved problem in geomorphology is this: when a slope begins to fail,
how big will the ensuing landslide be? The span of possible landslide sizes is
enormous, with potential failures ranging in scale from meters to kilometers -
so it's unfortunate, particularly for hazard assessment, that we remain unable
to predict such sizes. This inability persists despite the fact that we now have
rather good constraints on the size-frequency distribution of landslides at a
regional scale. This project takes a new theoretical tack, one that involves the
use of stochastic differential equations, to address in concert the issues of
individual landslide propagation and ensemble landslide size distribution. We
have found that a simple, stochastic calculus model for slope failure can
explain the full size-frequency distribution of landslides, including the mean
landslide size and both the power-law scaling and non-scaling components of the
distribution. We are developing this theory in order to address the following
key questions: (1) how does the mean landslide size in an ensemble distribution
relate to reality? - if it is not an artifact of mapping resolution, does it
relate to physical properties such as soil depth, cohesion, and lithology, or is
it simply a function of mean hillslope scale? (2) are the physical assumptions
of the stochastic theory borne out by field observations? (3) can we be more
precise in our data analysis and modeling of different slope failure mechanisms?
(4) do rockfalls occur by an entirely different stochastic process with an
altogether different size-frequency distribution? The outcome of our efforts
will be a deeper understanding of the stochastic behavior of hillslope failure
and landslide hazard.

