* 0229573
* A Science Management Office for the U. S. Component of the International Trans Antarctic Expedition (US ITASE SMO)Ã»A Collaborative Pgrm of Research from S. Pole to N. Victoria Land
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Paul Mayewski, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Julie Palais
* 02/28/2006
* USD 206,116.00

This award supports a science management office for a pilot ice-core drilling
and analysis program to test the feasibility of obtaining well-dated, high-
resolution isotope and chemistry records from East Antarctica. Shallow ice cores
will be obtained from two locations: 1) ~100 km from South Pole towards the Pole
of Inaccessibility, as an extension of the Byrd Station-to-South Pole ITASE
traverse [International Trans Antarctic Scientific Expedition]; 2) at Taylor
Dome, near the original deep coring site, and (3) possibly at AGO 3 and AGO 4 as
part of a logistics traverse to these sites. All of the cores collected will be
sampled at very high resolution (~1/2 cm) and analyzed for major ions. Results
from this calibration work, along with those from another project that is
analyzing stable isotopes will be used to help plan a program of larger scope,
with the objective of mapping the spatial expression of climate variability in
East Antarctica. Funds are also provided to organize a community workshop for
coordination of the second phase of US ITASE and for one workshop per year for
two years dedicated to writing and preparation of scientific papers from phase
one of US ITASE. In addition, route selection activities for the follow-on
traverse activities in East Antarctica will be conducted using satellite image
mapping. A summary document will be produced and made available to the community
to help with planning of related field programs (e.g. deep ice radar, firn radar
profiling, atmospheric chemistry, ice coring, snow surface properties for
satellite observations, ice surface elevation and mass balance).

