* 0229565
* Sedimentary Basin Development &amp; Deformation Adjacent to the Mojave-Sonora Megashear, Sonora, Mexico: Evaluation of the Mid-Mesozoic Tectonics of the Southwestern Cordilleran Ma
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Timothy Lawton, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2006
* USD 204,862.00

The identification of ancient continental transform margins has proven
difficult&lt;br/&gt;for a variety of reasons. Transform faults are commonly
reactivated subsequent to their&lt;br/&gt;active transcurrent displacement
histories by younger tectonic processes. In addition,&lt;br/&gt;piercing points
that permit assessment of offset are commonly equivocal and subject
to&lt;br/&gt;multiple interpretations. However, analysis of sedimentary basins
developed adjacent to&lt;br/&gt;transform faults, particularly faults that
transect marginal continental lithosphere,&lt;br/&gt;provides a powerful tool
for evaluation of ancient transform margins. Evaluation of the&lt;br/&gt;timing
of deposition and deformation is especially critical, because the two
processes&lt;br/&gt;should be partly coeval in strike-slip basins. In northern
Sonora, the postulated Mesozoic&lt;br/&gt;type example of a continental
transform, the Mojave-Sonora megashear, juxtaposes a&lt;br/&gt;continental
crustal fragment, the Caborca block, against cratonal North America
along&lt;br/&gt;what is now a complex structural zone. A narrow, deformed
sedimentary basin of Late&lt;br/&gt;Jurassic-Early Cretaceous age lies along
this structural boundary for a distance of more&lt;br/&gt;than 300 km. The
subsidence history of the basin largely coincided with the
posited&lt;br/&gt;displacement history of the megashear and so provides a unique
opportunity to evaluate&lt;br/&gt;the megashear hypothesis and understand the
processes that constructed the Late&lt;br/&gt;Jurassic-Early Cretaceous
Cordilleran continental margin.&lt;br/&gt;A two-year field- and laboratory-based
study proposed here will determine the&lt;br/&gt;depositional and structural
evolution of the sedimentary basin adjacent to the megashear&lt;br/&gt;and the
uplift history of the Caborca block, which forms the present southern edge of
the&lt;br/&gt;basin. The objectives of the research fall into three major
categories:&lt;br/&gt;1. Basin origin and its Mesozoic proximity to the Caborca
block.&lt;br/&gt;Lithostratigraphic, biostratigraphic, and geochronologic
analysis will determine the&lt;br/&gt;lifespan and geometry of the basin, while
provenance studies will determine if the&lt;br/&gt;Caborca block was a sediment
source for the basin. Fossils in the strata and
interbedded&lt;br/&gt;volcaniclastic rocks make this objective
practicable.&lt;br/&gt;2. Deformation kinematics and chronology of the basin.
Strata in the basin are&lt;br/&gt;locally tightly folded, cleaved, and
metamorphosed. However, deformation intensity is&lt;br/&gt;greater in older
rocks than in younger ones, a variation which may be either temporal
or&lt;br/&gt;related to burial depth of strata during deformation. Mesoscale and
microscale structural&lt;br/&gt;analysis will evaluate kinematics and
variability of deformation both stratigraphically and&lt;br/&gt;geographically
with respect to the megashear. 40 Ar/ 39 Ar geochronology
on&lt;br/&gt;metamorphosed pelites will determine the age of the deformation in
the basin.&lt;br/&gt;3. Time of uplift of Caborca block. The age of uplift of
the basin margin will be&lt;br/&gt;determined from stratigraphic relations and
40 Ar/ 39 Ar thermochronology in order to&lt;br/&gt;establish time of uplift of
the outboard block relative to deformation of the basin. The&lt;br/&gt;uplift
analysis will also permit evaluation of provenance results.&lt;br/&gt;This
integrated sedimentologic, structural and geochronologic study will
evaluate&lt;br/&gt;the transform processes that are inferred to have created the
southwestern Cordilleran&lt;br/&gt;margin beginning in the Late Jurassic. If the
megashear hypothesis remains tenable, this&lt;br/&gt;study should serve as a
template for other analyses of ancient continental transform&lt;br/&gt;margins.
If the megashear hypothesis is refuted, the study will force re-evaluation of
the&lt;br/&gt;Mesozoic tectonics of the southwestern Cordilleran margin and the
kinematics of&lt;br/&gt;Pangean supercontinent break up in Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;