* 0229513
* Collaborative Research: Testing and Constitutive Modeling of Fine-Grained Tills Deposited by the Laurentide Ice Sheet
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* John Jenson, University of Guam
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2006
* USD 64,706.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: TESTING & CONSTITUTIVE MODELING OF FINE-GRAINED TILLS
DEPOSITED BY THE LAURENTIDE ICE SHEET J.W. Jenson, P.U. Clark, C.S. Desai & D.N.
Contractor

EAR-0229907, -0229513, -0229889

This project will provide a more complete empirical basis for constraining and
testing hypotheses regarding the role of sediment deformation, sliding, and
ploughing in influencing ice-sheet behavior over soft sediment beds. An accurate
and complete description of the deformational behavior of subglacial tills is
required for understanding ice sheet dynamics and their linkages to the Earth's
climate system. In conjunction with climate models, such ice sheet models may be
used to investigate the stability of ice sheets-both Pleistocene and modern-and
their interaction with global climate.

This collaborative project by specialists in glacial geology, soil mechanics and
materials engineering, and geophysical modeling will address this important
issue by obtaining a comprehensive evaluation of the mechanical properties of
two representative fine-grained tills deposited by the Laurentide Ice Sheet.
Specifically, the PIs proposed laboratory program will apply an inclusive
general model that will enable us to comprehensively evaluate behavior through
the entire deformation history of these sediments, from the onset of strain to
late-stage behavior. For each till, fifteen mechanical parameters will be
quantified in terms of the highly general constitutive model that has been
successfully applied elsewhere in a variety of geotechnical and other materials
engineering applications. The experiments will encompass 80 or more tests over
about 30 months utilizing proven equipment and methodologies, as well as some
innovative techniques recently developed by one of the members of the research
team. To help validate the experimentally determined parameters, the project
includes development of a non-linear back-prediction model, which will be used
to verify the consistency of the experimentally determined values with predicted
values, given the physical conditions and responses observed during the
experiments.