* 0229791
* Experimental Studies of Convection in the Earth's Core
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Jonathan Aurnou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2006
* USD 400,359.00

Aurnou EAR-0229791

This proposal requests funding for work in a new experimental fluid mechanics
laboratory at UCLA. The lab will utilize two, new powerful diagnostic techniques
to provide high-resolution, quantitative velocity measurements of simulated
convection in the Earth's outer core. The results will test long-held theories
regarding the properties of convective flows in core fluids and will provide a
detailed characterization of flow dynamics at nearly planetary parameter values.
The first project will use the recently developed technique of acoustic Doppler
velocimetry to study convecting liquid metals, which have physical properties
similar to that of the molten outer core. The results will test the linear
stability theory of rotating magnetoconvection, the foundation of modern dynamo
theory. Established by Chandrasekhar in the 1950's, this stability theory has
only undergone a single prior experimental investigation that reached the
asymptotic regime. The second project will utilize the optical technique of
particle image velocimetry (PIV), applying it to a rotating spherical shell of
convecting water, a set-up that mimics the dynamics and the geometry of the
outer core. PIV will provide, for the first time, quantitative measurements of
the flow fields (velocity, vorticity and helicity) that are believed to be
essential components of the geodynamo, but have never been measured adequately
by experimental means. Furthermore, the experimental design will enable PIV to
measure convection in the polar regions, which have not been studied extensively
but now appear to be significant. Together, these state-of-the-art acoustic and
optical velocimetry techniques will provide benchmarks for numerical and
theoretical studies of core convection and the geodynamo. They will also
generate the highest resolution experimental convection data to date for
interpreting geomagnetic and seismic observations of the deep Earth.