* 0229642
* STI:  Starlight: Strategic Technologies for Internet Discovery and Development
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Jason Leigh, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2006
* USD 1,512,000.00

The Intellectual Merit of StarLight: StarLight is a research support facility
planned by researchers for researchers that follows the mode of Research and
Operations now established by the "STARTAP" project. These researchers are
networking engineers, electrical engineers, computer engineers, computer
scientists, e-Scientists and application programmers. StarLight will anchor
future wavelength-rich LambdaGrids, with switching and routing at the highest
experimental levels, laying the foundation for fully optical switching in three
years. Following the tradition of the earlier "STARTAP" project, this project
will enable the next cycle of network operations growth with
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical networking technology is rapidly
migrating from ultra-expensive long-haul carrier implementations to affordable
regional- and metro-area community networks. The next step is to expand,
integrate and tune these resources with specific large-scale scientific
applications. The commercial trend is to provide a general infrastructure with a
wide range of common services for a very broad client base. However, optical
networking technologies provide networking researchers with an opportunity to
move far beyond general requirements, and support large-scale e-Science
applications that exploit very advanced networking to tackle complex problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until recently, STAR TAP, an NSF-funded project providing
interoperability and interconnectivity of advanced networks, adequately served
the ATM connections in Chicago among the US Federal Networks (Fednets),
Internet2.s Abilene, Chicago's Metropolitan Research and Education Network, and
several international networks. &lt;br/&gt;However, several months ago, as
domestic and foreign networks began to request 1-to-10Gb switched connections in
Chicago, STAR TAP quickly migrated its focus and connections to StarLight, a new
colocation facility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Nation needs a persistent
facility, staffed and equipped, to serve researchers using IP-over-lambda
networks, addressing restoration issues, building LambdaGrids, optimizing DNS
services, and testing novel protocols for long, fat connections. StarLight will
be a persistent meeting point as a node on various LambdaGrids and will support
advanced applications and middleware research, and aggressive advanced services.
StarLight will grow into a: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Multi-vendor, multi-lambda
1Gb, 2.5Gb, 10Gb (and perhaps higher) experimental exchange and LambdaGrid nodal
point that provides the "other end" or switching point for National and
international experiments; Starlight has 3-year plans to make available 60
fully-powered and fiber-optic-connected racks to researchers. &lt;br/&gt;(2)
Facility to support 3D protocol stack development (for optical management,
control and data planes). &lt;br/&gt;(3) Middleware research environment, in
which application-oriented middleware, like Globus, and data transport protocols
are implemented and tested by the middleware community with major experimental
e-Science drivers. &lt;br/&gt;(4) Host for national and global research
activities in application-centric network measurement and monitoring.
&lt;br/&gt;(5) Inter-domain security testbed to research and deploy encryption
at lambda speeds and to test getting data out to crisis management personnel
involved in natural or human-caused disasters. &lt;br/&gt;(6) Laboratory for
developing/testing means for high-performance application provisioning on
optical networks. &lt;br/&gt;(7) Facilitator of broad outreach efforts to
communities, using a cultural heritage project to bring in under-represented
communities as content developers, providers and users of data and visualization
LambdaGrids. &lt;br/&gt;(8) Metro-scale laboratory for CISE students' access to
the interdependent worlds of computing and networking.