* 0229717
* Collaborative Research: Fusion of Tomography Tests for DNAPL Source Zone Characterization: Technology Development and Validation
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Tian-Chyi  Jim Yeh, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 04/30/2006
* USD 140,000.00

0229717&lt;br/&gt;Yeh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dense Nonaqueous Phase Liquids
(DNAPLs) are prevalent at a large number of &lt;br/&gt;sites throughout the
world. The variable release history and geologic &lt;br/&gt;heterogeneity make
the distribution of DNAPLs in the source zone complex. &lt;br/&gt;These source
zones can contribute to long-term groundwater contamination &lt;br/&gt;for
decades to centuries. Therefore, the spatial distribution, mass, and
&lt;br/&gt;composition of DNAPLs present in the source zone need to be
characterized &lt;br/&gt;in great detail so that efficient remediation schemes
can be designed. &lt;br/&gt;During the last few years, many tracer techniques
have been introduced to &lt;br/&gt;enhance the characterization of DNAPL source
zones. While these tracer &lt;br/&gt;techniques allow for the in situ estimation
of volume-averaged values of &lt;br/&gt;DNAPL saturation, there is an urgent
need for the development of a &lt;br/&gt;cost-effective technology to
characterize the spatial distribution of &lt;br/&gt;DNAPLs at high
resolutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this proposed study are: 1)
to develop a &lt;br/&gt;software/hardware package that fuses different types of
information using a &lt;br/&gt;stochastic approach to provide a cost-effective
characterization, &lt;br/&gt;monitoring, and predictive tool for the DNAPL
source zone, 2) to conduct &lt;br/&gt;laboratory experiments to test and verify
this proposed technology, and 3) &lt;br/&gt;to distribute the results of the
research to assist scientists, engineers, &lt;br/&gt;and managers to solve DNAPL
contamination problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit: The proposed
new data processing &lt;br/&gt;technique, stochastic information fusion,
combines different types of &lt;br/&gt;measurements taken at different locations
over different scales in an &lt;br/&gt;iterative manner to provide the best
estimate of the DNAPL residual &lt;br/&gt;distribution and its uncertainty.
Specifically, it analyzes the &lt;br/&gt;information derived from hydraulic
tomography to identify hydraulic &lt;br/&gt;heterogeneity first in three-
dimensions. It then improves the estimate of &lt;br/&gt;the heterogeneity by
incorporating new information acquired from the &lt;br/&gt;conservative tracer
tomography. Afterward, the improved estimate of &lt;br/&gt;hydraulic
heterogeneity is used to simulate the hydraulic tomography such &lt;br/&gt;that
more detailed information about the response of the subsurface becomes
&lt;br/&gt;available. This new information again is fed back to the technique to
&lt;br/&gt;update the estimate of hydraulic heterogeneity. The iterative process
&lt;br/&gt;continues until all available information and measurements are fully
&lt;br/&gt;utilized in identifying the processes and variables that control the
&lt;br/&gt;spatial distribution of DNAPLs. Upon completion, the newly derived
&lt;br/&gt;knowledge of the processes and variables are then combined with data
&lt;br/&gt;derived from the partitioning tracer tomography to effectively
delineate &lt;br/&gt;the spatial distribution of DNAPL residual saturation in
the source &lt;br/&gt;zone. The proposed tomography technique and the stochastic
fusion of &lt;br/&gt;information algorithm are to be tested and validated in a
sandbox. Success &lt;br/&gt;of the proposed research advances not only
estimation theory in general but &lt;br/&gt;also our technologies for
characterizing and monitoring the subsurface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The proposed stochastic fusion technology can be &lt;br/&gt;integrated
with different characterization techniques in diverse geological
&lt;br/&gt;conditions. It is also amenable to all stages of DNAPL source zone
&lt;br/&gt;characterization including initial screening, site characterization,
&lt;br/&gt;remediation, and long-term monitoring. A web-based virtual
&lt;br/&gt;hydraulic/tracer tomography laboratory will be created and be
available to &lt;br/&gt;any student, educator, practitioner, and researcher
around the world. We &lt;br/&gt;believe this virtual laboratory will stimulate
creativity to revolutionize &lt;br/&gt;not only classical subsurface hydrology
but also other disciplines of &lt;br/&gt;hydrologic sciences. For example, using
our stochastic information fusion &lt;br/&gt;technology, one may be able to
assimilate meteorological information such &lt;br/&gt;as lighting and
precipitation as alternative excitation sources for &lt;br/&gt;tomographic
surveys of the subsurface environment at large scalesseeing &lt;br/&gt;into the
earth.&lt;br/&gt;