* 0229585
* Frictional Constitutive Behavior of Natural Fault Gouge Materials: Effects of Mineralogy
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Susan Swapp, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2004
* USD 83,434.00

Saffer EAR-0229585&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Defining physical and mechanical
properties of fault gouge and their &lt;br/&gt;relationship to fault behavior
remains a fundamental step toward &lt;br/&gt;understanding earthquakes and
faulting. Frictional velocity &lt;br/&gt;dependence is considered the most
likely mechanism to explain &lt;br/&gt;differences between stable sliding
(aseismic) and unstable stick-slip &lt;br/&gt;(seismogenic) behavior. Materials
that exhibit velocity-strengthening &lt;br/&gt;behavior produce only inherently
stable frictional slip, whereas &lt;br/&gt;those that exhibit velocity-weakening
are capable of hosting unstable &lt;br/&gt;rupture. This work will define the
frictional properties of a suite &lt;br/&gt;of natural and synthetic mixed-
mineralogy gouges, as a function of &lt;br/&gt;composition. The experimental
plan will focus on testing (1) natural &lt;br/&gt;samples of subduction zone
materials that have undergone progressive &lt;br/&gt;alteration at temperatures
up to ~250 degrees C, and (2) a suite of &lt;br/&gt;synthetic mixtures of
montmorillonite, illite, and quartz, and &lt;br/&gt;developing the appropriate
constitutive equations to describe their &lt;br/&gt;behavior. This work will
include: (1) quantitative x-ray diffraction &lt;br/&gt;(XRD) to determine the
composition of natural gouges, (2) a series of &lt;br/&gt;shearing experiments
for each material, over a wide range of &lt;br/&gt;experimental conditions, and
(3) petrographic and SEM &lt;br/&gt;characterization of microstructures in
experimentally deformed gouges &lt;br/&gt;and comparison with natural
microstructures observed in the sample &lt;br/&gt;localities. The work will
provide high-quality measurements of &lt;br/&gt;frictional constitutive
properties for realistic natural fault gouge &lt;br/&gt;materials relevant to
seismic faulting, and define variations in &lt;br/&gt;these properties with
gouge composition. This work will constitute an &lt;br/&gt;important step toward
a better understanding of fault behavior and &lt;br/&gt;its potential
variability with depth and along-strike. In addition, &lt;br/&gt;detailed
characterization of fabric development in experimentally &lt;br/&gt;deformed
gouges will provide important insights into application of &lt;br/&gt;laboratory
measurements to natural faults.&lt;br/&gt;