* 0229832
* Massive Relocation of Earthquakes Recorded at Regional and Teleseismic Distances Using a Double-Difference Algorithm, with Application to Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Felix Waldhauser, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 02/28/2005
* USD 143,833.00

EAR-0229832&lt;br/&gt;Felix Waldhauser&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-resolution
hypocenter locations are most crucial in estimating seismic&lt;br/&gt;hazard,
inferring Earth structure, studying tectonics, and to the
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the occurrence and physics of
earthquakes. Several recent&lt;br/&gt;studies, of which this is a continuation,
have demonstrated the substantial&lt;br/&gt;improvement in earthquake locations
by applying a recently developed&lt;br/&gt;double-difference (DD) earthquake
relocation algorithm to thousands of shallow&lt;br/&gt;earthquakes recorded at
local distances. This project focuses on &lt;br/&gt;adapting the DD method to
relocate, on a massive scale (several tens of thousands of &lt;br/&gt;events)
and over large distances (thousands of km), earthquakes recorded at regional
and&lt;br/&gt;teleseismic distances. The investigators will test and evaluate
the &lt;br/&gt;performance of the new tools using globally recorded events for
which ground truth is known, and&lt;br/&gt;compare the results with results
derived from commonly used location
&lt;br/&gt;techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They will also apply the DD method
to the 'groomed' ISC bulletin to &lt;br/&gt;relocate large numbers of
earthquakes in subduction zones with the aim to image the
internal&lt;br/&gt;structure of seismicity associated with descending slabs. The
focus will&lt;br/&gt;initially be on the Andean subduction zone with the aim to
define in detail the&lt;br/&gt;morphology of the slab and its correlation with
patterns of microseismicity and&lt;br/&gt;the rupture areas of damaging
earthquakes. they will also relocate other areas&lt;br/&gt;with dense seismicity
to search for characteristic seismicity patterns in time&lt;br/&gt;and space
which may provide new insights into the occurrence and physics
of&lt;br/&gt;Wadati Benioff earthquakes.