* 0229868
* Collaborative Research: Interpreting High Resolution Geodetic Data With Viscoelastic Models
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2006
* Mark Simons, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 11/30/2006
* USD 201,118.00

Simons/Kenner&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0229868/0229793&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative
Research: Interpreting High Resolution Geodetic Data with Viscoelastic
Models&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
collaborative effort bridging the gap between modern datasets and modern
modeling techniques, in an effort to improve our ability to elucidate
rheological structure within active tectonic zones. In particular, we will
characterize the sensitivity of our estimates of lithospheric rheology to the
spatial and temporal scale of available datasets. We emphasize the role of model
cycle-up/spin-up, variable earthquake repeat times, and realistic variations in
rheology. This effort will allow for the more effective use InSAR and GPS data,
to constrain geologically reasonable models. We will apply the lessons we learn
through theoretical studies to specific, well-constrained study areas, including
postseismic deformation following the Landers and Hector Mine earthquakes and
post-rifting deformation in the Northern Volcanic Zone, Iceland. The results and
procedures developed during the course of this proposal will 1) help to minimize
uncertainties associated with improper and/or geologically implausible modeling
techniques, 2) allow quantitative comparison of rheological structures inferred
by independent investigators, and 3) ultimately lead to more accurate estimates
of rheological properties at depth, including associated uncertainties. These
inferences can then be used in subsequent secondary analyses, particularly those
that would benefit from an explicit assessment of model and data induced
uncertainties, such as studies of fault interaction, estimation of fault slip-
rates from geodetic data for seismic hazard purposes, and time-dependent
probabilistic seismic hazard assessments.&lt;br/&gt;