* 0229609
* Collaborative Research:  Digital Optical Imaging of Ice Cores for Curation and Scientific Applications
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Richard Alley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2007
* USD 142,039.00

This award supports the development of novel methods for digital image analysis
of glacial ice cores that are stored at the National Ice Core Laboratory (NICL)
in Denver, Colorado. Ice cores are a critical source of information on how Earth
has changed over time, since indicators of local climate (snow accumulation,
temperature), regional characteristics (wind-blown materials such as sea salt,
dust and pollen), global processes (e.g., CO2, methane), and even
extraterrestrial influences (cosmogenic isotopes) are stored in the ice on a
common time scale. This project will develop a high-resolution optical scanning
system for laboratory curation of ice core images, internet-based search and
retrieval capabilities, a digital image analysis system specifically for ice
core studies, and methods to integrate ice core image analysis with other dating
methods. These tools will be developed and tested in conjunction with scientific
investigations of NICL holdings. Optical scanning and analysis tools will
improve understanding of the historical development of the ice collected from a
particular location and will help to resolve challenges such as ice that has
lost stratigraphic order through flow processes. &lt;br/&gt;By providing
permanent online digital archives of ice core images, this project will greatly
improve the documentation and availability of ice core data while reducing time
and costs for subsequent scientific investigations. Using the internet, ice core
scientists will be able to determine the appropriateness of specific NICL
holdings for various scientific studies. By optically scanning ice cores as they
are processed at NICL, any researcher will be able to examine an ice core in
similar detail to the few investigators who were fortunate enough to observe it
before modifications from sampling and storage. Re-examination of cores could be
done decades later by anyone at any location, which is not possible now because
only the interpretation of the original observer is recorded. Integration of
digital image data into ice core analysis will speed discovery, allow
collaborative interpretation, and enhance consistency of analysis to improve ice
core dating, identification of melt layers, location of flow disturbances, and
more. The equipment will be housed at NICL and will be available to the broad
community, improving scientific infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;This work will also
have numerous broader impacts. Ice core science addresses fundamental questions
of human interest related to global warming, abrupt climate change,
biogeochemical cycling, and more. The principal investigators broadly
disseminate their scientific findings through numerous outlets, ranging from
meeting with government officials, chairing and serving on NRC panels, writing
popular books and articles, publishing in scientific literature, teaching
classes, talking to civic groups, and appearing on radio and television. The
results from ice core analyses have directly informed policymakers and will
continue to do so. Thus, by improving ice core science, this projectl will
benefit society. &lt;br/&gt;