* 0229147
* EPSCoR:  Investigating NAPL Source Removal From Low Permeable Silt Layers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Nancy Hayden, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Clark C. K. Liu
* 05/31/2007
* USD 263,006.00

0229147 Hayden The overall focus of this research is to investigate the
behavior, and enhanced removal of a nonaqueous phase liquid (NAPL) contamination
from low permeable silt layers under unsaturated conditions. Low temperature
heating will also be employed in the silt layer and the effect of this on
contaminant removal will be determined. A comprehensive approach to
investigating this problem including laboratory experiments, field data and
mathematical modeling will be used. A unique large-scale (10'x14'x 8') state-of-
the-art physical groundwater will be used for pilot-scale experiments. Column
experiments will be used for measuring thermal conductivity as a function of
moisture content. Existing temperature data from our doctoral student's field
site will be modeled and used to size the power requirements for the large-scale
tank experiments. Finally, mathematical modeling of heat and mass transfer will
be performed and applied to the laboratory data in order to better understand
the processes involved. NAPL contamination in low permeable porous media is
still a significant long-term source of groundwater contamination that continues
to defy current remediation strategies. In the unsaturated zone, soil vapor
extraction (SVE) is a common in-situ remediation technique, but it is energy
intensive, expensive and less effective for sites where the NAPL contamination
is residing in low permeable layers. Passive SVE is a relatively new, innovative
remediation technology that utilizes changes in barometric pressure to pump gas
from the soil and does not rely on electricity. This low cost technique is
useful at sites where rates of mass transfer are low, such as in low permeable
media, and where health and environmental risk are not imminent. Low temperature
heating using renewable technologies offers a low cost, and more sustainable
solution to the idea of heating the subsurface than other heating technologies.
The idea is to heat the subsurface such that mass transfer from the low
permeable layers to more permeable layers is enhanced. In combination with
another low cost method, such as passive SVE, this technique could greatly
enhance the removal of the contaminants. Low temperature heating could also
greatly enhance the biological activity in the heated layer thereby enhancing
the degradation of the contaminants. Heating using renewable energy sources
provides intermittent heating, which may be advantageous in that it will result
in less drying of the soil. Drying the soil may defeat the purpose if enhancing
biological degradation is the aim. The intellectual merit of the experimental
and modeling research proposed is that it will lead to a better understanding of
NAPL source removal and NAPL mass transfer from silt layers. In addition, heat
transfer through silt media at different water saturations will also be
determined.&lt;br/&gt;The application of renewable technologies to site
remediation is an intriguing possibility that needs to be explored
further.&lt;br/&gt;