* 0229991
* Victoria Land Latitudinal Gradient Project:  Benthic Marine Habitat Characterization
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Rikk Kvitek, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 12/31/2004
* USD 95,279.00

This award is part of a multi-national and multidisciplinary program in
Antarctica, the Victoria Land Latitudinal Gradient Project (VLLGP), that
includes scientists from both the Italian Antarctic Research Program (PNRA) and
the Antarctica New Zealand research program (ANZ). The overall goal of the VLLGP
is to take a latitudinal gradient approach to ecosystem studies in Victoria
Land, Antarctica. Personnel from the California State University Monterey Bay
Seafloor Mapping Lab (SFML) will participate in a 20-day PNRA cruise on the R/V
Italica during January 2004. The specific goals of the Italian/U.S.
collaboration are to: 1) identify the environmental gradients linked to latitude
and to relate community transitions along the Victoria Land Coast to climatic,
geomorphologic and oceanographic features;. 2) identify biochemical,
physiological and other adaptive responses of representative organisms;. 3)
quantify biodiversity patterns and test the hypothesis of "progressive
emergence" of marine assemblages with latitude; and 4) use biotic changes
associated with steep environmental gradients to predict potential effects of
climate change. The role of the SFML will be to use high-resolution acoustic
remote sensing (multibeam and sidescan sonar) and spatial data modeling tools in
the identification and characterization of benthic habitats and species/habitat
associations along the gradient from 0-200 m water depth. Accurate mapping and
classification of habitat types within each study area will be critical to the
selection of comparable sampling sites if valid community comparisons are to be
made along the latitudinal gradient. Since the Ross Sea coast extends across one
of the longest latitudinal gradients in the Antarctic (15 degrees), this study
offers a unique opportunity for predicting and establishing a baseline to detect
environmental and community responses to global change and anthropogenic
disturbance. The broader impacts of this work include not only efforts to foster
research, logistic and data management collaborations among scientists from
different disciplines and national programs; but will also provide the
opportunity for undergraduate students to participate in the research.