* 0229019
* Collaborative Research:  Field and Experimental Iron Isotope Investigation of Sedimentary Pyrite Dissolution in Appalachian Coal Mine Drainage
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Rosemary Capo, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/2005
* USD 100,978.00

0229019 &lt;br/&gt;Capo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acid mine drainage (AMD) from
abandoned underground mines is and has long been the most serious water quality
and watershed degradation problem in the mining regions of the U.S. As a result
of underground coal and metal mining operations, pyrite (FeS2) becomes exposed
to water, resulting in its dissolution and release of iron and sulfuric acid to
solution, as well as metals and other constituents from acid-induced dissolution
of additional minerals. Moreover, a significant fraction of the global fluvial
sulfate flux arises from pyrite dissolution, and the contribution is increasing
due to mining activities. While pyrite dissolution is of great importance in
sulfur cycling and in AMD formation, our understanding of this process and our
ability to model it are very limited. &lt;br/&gt; This project will exploit
recent advances in iron isotope measurement techniques to study pyrite
dissolution in a novel manner in the laboratory and in the field. An important
objective will be to test and demonstrate the power of using iron isotopes to
quantify and source-track the dissolution of pyrite in abandoned coal mine
outflows. It is hypothesized that the 56Fe/54Fe isotopic ratio will be distinct
for sedimentary pyrites formed under different conditions, and that the process
of pyrite dissolution itself could lead to measurable isotopic fractionation. To
test this, the 56Fe/54Fe isotopic ratio in sedimentary pyrite from different
depositional environments of the Appalachian basin will be determined. The rates
of dissolution of some of these samples, and resulting aqueous phase isotopic
fractionation, will be investigated in the laboratory using a batch reactor
developed specifically for quantifying pyrite dissolution under tightly
controlled redox and aqueous phase conditions. The laboratory and field data
will allow us to evaluate our ability to use 56Fe/54Fe as a tracer for the
primary source of Fe in AMD outflows. Results obtained will provide the basis
for moving forward with additional studies of more complex systems, especially
systems with bacteria present that can mediate the pyrite dissolution
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;