* 0229305
* Mount Erebus Volcano Observatory and Laboratory (MEVOL)
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2009
* Philip Kyle, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 04/30/2009
* USD 532,758.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports continuation and expansion of the volcano
monitoring program on Mount Erebus, Antarctica. Mount Erebus, Antarctica 's most
active volcano, is a rare example of a persistently active magmatic system. The
volcano has a history of low-level eruptive activity associated with a highly
accessible summit vent complex, and features one of Earth 's few long-lived lava
lakes. This project will develop an interdisciplinary geophysics/geochemistry
laboratory on Mount Erebus, for the purpose of pursuing basic research on the
eruption physics and associated magmatic recharge of active volcanoes. Erebus is
especially appropriate for this goal because of its persistent open-conduit
magmatic system, frequent eruptions, logistical ease of access (by Antarctic
standards), established scientific and logistical infrastructure, including
real-time data links, and relative safety. Key integrated data gathering
components for this work include video surveillance, seismic, infrasound,
Doppler radar, infrared, volcanic gas, and geodetic studies. This project is a
renewal of the NSF-supported "Mount Erebus Volcano Observatory" (MEVO) and
benefits significantly from an underway instrumentation development award (Major
Research Instrumentation award MRI-0116577, "Development of Integrated Seismic,
Geodetic, and Volcanic Gas Surveillance Instrumentation for Volcanic Research ",
to develop and deploy integrated low-power, low cost, real-time-telemetered
volcano monitoring stations at Erebus and on other active
volcanoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this activity includes
developing quantitative models of the magmatic system of an active volcano
constrained by interdisciplinary methods, including the fundamental issues of
eruptive energy balance (gravity, explosive gas decompression, thermal, seismic,
acoustic, and kinetic components), and magma recharge (volcanic tremor,
convection, residence time, gas emissions, deformation). This project will bring
the aforementioned host of data collection activities to bear on these processes
using a combination of core MEVOLab-supported personnel and their students (with
specialties in seismology, gas studies, and general volcanology) and partially
independently supported and internationally recognized volcano researchers (with
specialties in infrared, Doppler radar, gas studies, and
infrasound).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader scientific impact of this research
is to contribute substantially to fundamental knowledge of the basic processes
of diverse active volcanoes worldwide. MEVOLab, in association with the
aforementioned MRI project, would also contribute to the modernization,
diversi?cation, and novel application of modern instrumentation on volcanoes
worldwide (many volcanoes, particularly in the developing world, have little or
no modern instrumentation), and in the development of low-power, low cost
interdisciplinary geophysical observatories within the larger seismology,
geodesy and other geophysical communities. Further broad impacts include the
education of graduate and undergraduate students in volcanology and geophysics,
the dissemination of information to high-school audiences in association with
the Teachers Experiencing Antarctica program, and providing timely year-round
monitoring information to NSF and to McMurdo operations. Finally, this work
would continue public outreach through lectures, media interaction, and in
responding to inquiries from the general public to convey the excitement,
science, and societal relevance of volcanology and general Earth
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;