* 0229897
* Collaborative Research: Examining Origination, Extinction, and Recovery in Terebratulide Brachiopods:  The Integration of Phylogeny, Morphometrics, and Biogeography
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Sandra Carlson, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/29/2008
* USD 204,966.00

Mass extinctions, or episodes of dramatically increased species mortality, have
repeatedly perturbed the standing diversity of life on Earth. Although there is
a good idea of the general effect such perturbations have had on taxonomic
diversity, there are relatively poor ideas of several other dimensions of these
perturbations, such as the genealogical relationships and the range of variation
in size and shape among taxa going extinct and those surviving, as well as taxon
distribution in space (paleobiogeographic) and time (stratigraphic). PIs propose
to investigate in detail one clade (organisms sharing a single common ancestor)
of marine invertebrates, the brachiopod order Terebratulida, over a period of
roughly 200 million years during which the clade experiences and rebounds from
four distinct mass extinction episodes: end-Emsian, end-Frasnian, end-Visean,
and end-Permian. PIs research will reconstruct three components of terebratulide
evolutionary history, and interpret them in relation to extinction or survival
at mass-extinction events. Phylogenetic relationships among early terebratulide
genera (Lower Devonian through Triassic periods) will be reconstructed using
primarily parsimony-based methods of phylogenetic inference. Quantitative
morphometric characteristics of terebratulides before and after these mass-
extinction events will be calculated and evaluated using geometric-coordinate
and outline-based methods. Global paleobiogeographic patterns that accompany
these changes in morphology, phylogeny, and taxonomy through time will be
studied after compiling distributional data from the primary literature.
Integrating the results of PIs three-part study has the potential to test the
intriguing but relatively untested hypothesis that mass extinctions act as
agents of macroevolution - can selection for extinction survival operate at the
level of species or clades, rather than simply on individuals or populations?