* 0229308
* A Grant Proposal for a Contextually Relevant Mathematics and Science Evaluation Training Institute for Mid-Level Experienced Evaluators
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Vinetta Jones, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 09/30/2006
* USD 1,099,089.00

&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project would provide for completing the development and
the implementation of a two-week summer training institute for practicing
evaluators at Howard University, Washington, D.C. beginning in Summer 2003. The
goal of the Institute would be to provide intensive professional development for
mid-level evaluators focusing on the impact of contextually relevant factors
(ethnic group, language, culture, etc.) on the entire evaluation process, from
design to data analysis to dissemination of results. The Institute would enhance
participant knowledge of critical relevant issues in science and mathematics and
their relationship to contextual factors in the learning process. Further the
Institute would provide participants with the skills and methodology to conduct
an evaluation within a cultural context. The goal is to create a new model of
evaluator training based on the influence of contextual factors, which would
increase participant awareness of and competency in educational evaluation,
particularly in math and science programs. The goals would be accomplished
through: (a) a series of instructional activities that include the analysis of
on-going and completed evaluation projects, (b) discussions with nationally
known practicing evaluators who utilize a contextually relevant approach in
their work and, (c) the implementation of a real-time project using appropriate
methodology by each participant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the planning
grant an administrative team, instructional faculty and an external advisory
committee have defined the participant group, are finalizing the curriculum and
completing logistical arrangements (obtaining housing, course credit, etc.). The
project evaluator is completing the development of the evaluation
plan.&lt;br/&gt;