* 0229939
* Crustal Structure of Strike-slip Fault Systems from a down-plunge section in the eastern Chugach Mountains, Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Terry Pavlis, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 02/28/2007
* USD 205,800.00

Near-surface fault patterns of strike-slip systems are now reasonably well
understood, in large part because of extensive societal interest (seismic
hazard) and a wealth of subsurface information obtained from petroleum
exploration. What happens to these faults at depth, however, is poorly
understood. One approach to resolve these questions is geophysical imaging, but
these studies are expensive and typically ambiguous because of imaging problems
of structures ranging from low to high angle in crystalline rocks that often
lack sufficient variation in physical properties for clear imaging. A much
higher resolution technique to resolve these issues is to examine well-exposed
down-plunge sections of strike-slip shear zones. Such a structure exists in
eastern Chugach Mountains of southern Alaska, and this project proposes to
examine this structure in detail to investigate the three-dimensional
architecture of strike-slip systems at mid to lower crustal depths. Previous NSF
funded research by the PI and V.B. Sisson has documented the structural geometry
of the lower and upper portions of the system, but a mid-crustal portion of the
system has not been examined in detail. In light of recent theoretical
developments (e.g. Teyssier et al., in press) the PI's initial conclusions
require re-evaluation because the classic hypothesis of steep shear zones
penetrating through the crustal column predicts a different geometry than a
crustal column in which the upper and lower crust are detached along a broad
zone of distributed flow. This project will test these alternative predictions
through a combination of field structural studies, kinematic analyses (finite
and incremental strain, shear-sense determination, and strain path information
through growth fibers and development of quartz LPO's).