* 0229862
* A Field and Textural Study of Failure Modes in Granular Rock and Their Distribution In Space and Time
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Atilla Aydin, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 09/30/2005
* USD 199,939.00

Failure modes of sand and sandstone play an important role in construction of
engineering structures, optimization of water resources and related contaminant
remediation, production of oil and gas, well bore stability analyses, and
earthquake hazard mitigations. Two distinct failure modes are recognized in
terms of their geometry and micromechanics: sharp planar discontinuities and
tabular zones of localized deformation. The tabular zones of localized
deformation include shear, compaction, and dilation bands and are the focus of
this study. Tabular failure structures in unconsolidated sand and sandstone from
a variety of depositional, burial, and regional tectonic settings are mapped and
sampled. These samples are studied using thin-section petrography, scanning-
electron microscopy, and X-ray computerized tomography to characterize the
failure modes and the associated grain fracture and porosity variation. The
relationships between grain size, porosity, cementation, loading conditions,
burial depth and deformation history on the failure processes are then
established. This study is designed to constrain the effect of the environmental
and mechanical conditions on the natural failure modes of unconsolidated sand
and sandstone by comparing them with those of experimentally derived
constitutive laws and those predicted by mathematical and numerical models. The
ultimate objective of this study is to provide a predictive tool for the failure
behavior of granular rock in various environments, which is so relevant to many
societal issues.