* 0229290
* Experimental and Textural Constraints on the Eruptive Behavior of Basic Magmas in Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,11/30/2003
* Jessica Larsen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 11/30/2003
* USD 181,863.00

Gardner&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0229290&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eruptions of basaltic and
basaltic andesitic (basic) magma in subduction zones can vary in style between
strombolian to intense sub-Plinian (and rarely Plinian). Why can subduction-zone
basic magmas erupt in such dramatically different styles, as compared to
Hawaiian eruptions? Is it because subduction-related magmas contain greater
amounts of gas, or are their ascent paths or ascent rates more conducive to
explosive eruptions? This study seeks to answer those questions by investigating
the influences that gas content, storage, ascent, and degassing have on the
eruptive style of basic magma in subduction zones. The investigators' study
focuses on three key eruptions of basic magma from the Aleutian volcanic arc:
Shishaldin volcano in 1999, Okmok volcano in 1997, and Westdahl volcano in
1991-92. Those eruptions are ideal for this study because they varied greatly in
eruptive style (strombolian, fire fountain, and sub-Plinian), including during
each eruption. In addition, all three eruptions were monitored with seismic and
geodetic measurements, which place important constraints on magma motion and
eruptive character. The investigators propose to examine influences on eruptive
style in three related tasks. Task 1 will define textural differences (both
crystals and vesicles) between the three eruptions and between different phases
of the eruptions. Task 2 will define pre-eruptive gas contents and pre-eruptive
storage conditions of the three magmas, with a combination of glass inclusion
measurements and experimental petrologic work. Task 3 will define the
relationship between decompression (ascent) rate and textural differences in the
resulting products, through a series of experimental petrologic work. Results
from the three tasks, combined with the existing geophysical constraints on the
eruptions, will allow the investigation of the gas contents, storage, ascent,
degassing, and eruption of basic magma in the Aleutians. Experiments will be
performed in the Experimental Petrology Laboratory at the University of Alaska
Fairbanks, and all products will be analyzed in the Advanced Instrumentation
Laboratory at the University of Alaska Fairbanks.&lt;br/&gt;