* 0229293
* Chemical, Rheological, and Physical Exploration of Gel-Like Behavior in Conditioning and Dewatering Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Steven Dentel, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 06/30/2006
* USD 209,935.00

0229293 Dentel With over seven million dry tons of wastewater solids generated
annually in the U.S., the costs of conditioning, dewatering, and disposal or
reuse of these materials may cost in excess of $1 billion per year. Improvements
in the conditioning and dewatering processes would reduce these costs and
increase the number of feasible options for reuse. The physical and chemical
origins of biosolids properties are not well understood, however, and thus it is
not possible to clearly define the mechanisms through which chemicals may
improve biological sludge dewaterability. The most common model of material
properties invoked, for example, is that of rigid spherical particles bound by
chains of linear polymers, but this model fails to describe some crucial aspects
of biosolids behavior. Consequently, the selection of chemical types and doses
for conditioning are by trial and error, and dewatering processes are
empirically designed, selected, and operated. It is unlikely that we come close
to optimum use of these processes, and the consequences are economically and
environmentally costly. Recently, a quite different paradigm has been shown to
be fruitful in describing some aspects of sludge conditioning and dewatering.
Where sludges have typically been described as concentrated suspensions of rigid
particles that are flocculated much as in water treatment coagulation, recent
reports suggest the description of sludges as gels. Behavior of such systems has
been accomplished in other fields such as polymer chemistry, and thus
fundamental approaches are available. In particular, colligative properties of
gels have been shown to explain certain aspects of sludge behavior in important
respects like filtration and drying. An advantage of using these concepts is
that they are grounded in molecular and thermodynamic principles, and thus may
be linked to fundamental principles when describing chemical conditioning
processes.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal presents four hypotheses that test the extent
to which a gel model may assist in understanding sludge behavior. The hypotheses
are based on measurable consequences of suspension behavior that will depend on
whether colligative properties govern the material's response, or whether more
structurally based properties must be invoked. Perhaps the most important
shortcoming of a gel analogy is in the role of shear stress during filtration,
which is essential in successful dewatering by belt filter presses and
centrifuges. There is no obvious means by which a colligative model may account
for this (although the effects of polymer breakage as an indirect factor will be
assessed). However, even the newest analytical models of slurry filtration do
not consider shear effects as a quantitative influence on a sludge's response to
normal stresses. Beyond testing the efficacy of a gel or colligative model for
describing sludges, it is also proposed to experimentally characterize shear
effects during filtration, using rheometric and dynamic filtration devices. The
experiments will not only delimit the gel-like aspects of sludge behavior, but
extend the structural models into realms that are important in dewatering
process applications. The experimental approach proposed is to combine methods
classically used for sludge description (e.g. solids, electrophoresis, particle
size analysis, filtration tests) with others that will describe gel behavior
(e.g. rheometry, conductivity, swelling, charge density/titration) and use them
on both synthetic and sampled sludges. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research should
improve our understanding of the nature of sludge and the specific reasons that
it retains water so tenaciously. Through a consideration and possible synthesis
of gel vs. particulate/structural descriptions of biological sludges, improved
and quantitative descriptions of sludge flow, thickening, filtration, and even
drying are likely to emerge. Ultimately, this will lead to sounder application
of these practices in wastewater treatment facilities.&lt;br/&gt;