* 0229973
* Winter Precipitation, Sublimation, and Snow-Depth in the Pan-Arctic: Critical Processes and a Half Century of Change
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Roger Pielke, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2008
* USD 1,556,546.00

This project will investigate winter sublimation processes in order to improve
and develop models and methods, which will accurately and reliably estimate
sublimation rates. This study is as a five-year field campaign using eddy
correlation tower to measure surface fluxes of hat, moisture and momentum. Eddy
correlation observations will provide the total moisture flux from the snow
surface, which can be attributed to sublimation in cold conditions. The
measurements will be made along a transect extending from Fairbanks in the
boreal forest, across the tundra of the Arctic Alaska and on tom the sea-ice in
Prudhoe Bay. The field measurement program is designed to cover the key
environments found throughout the Arctic and will be conducted during a wide
range of temperature, humidity and win conditions as well as landscapes covered
by continuous and discontinuous snow covers containing forests, tundra, shrubs
lakes and ice. This sampling process will determine sublimation processes
applicable throughout the Arctic. This will further guide formulation of new
physical models of sublimation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Arctic, the winter
surface moisture budget is a function of precipitation and sublimation. An
improved knowledge of sublimation from the field and modeling components coupled
with snow-depth information will allow for the determination of precipitation in
areas where precipitation is either not reported or inaccurate. Using past data
records, a long-term pan-Arctic reanalysis data set of precipitation,
sublimation and snow-water equivalent on the ground will be generated. These
data will allow trend analysis and relate changes to climatic conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;