* 0229498
* Physical Interpretation of Hysteresis Measurements through Numerical Simulation
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2005
* Lisa Tauxe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 11/30/2005
* USD 239,328.00

Tauxe&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0229498&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hysteresis measurements have
become an important part of characterizing magnetic behavior of rocks in
paleomagnetic studies. Theoretical interpretation is often difficult owing to
the complexity of mineral magnetism and published data sets demonstrate
remanence and coercivity behavior that is currently unexplained. In the last
decade numerical micromagnetic modelling has been used to simulate
magnetic&lt;br/&gt;particles. Such simulations reveal the existence of non-
uniform remanent states between single and multi-domain, known as the "flower''
and "vortex'' configurations. These suggest plausible explanations for many
hysteresis measurements yet fall short of explaining high saturation remanence,
high coercivity data such as those commonly observed in fine grained submarine
basalts. Micromagnetic modelling promises to provide plausible explanations for
a wide range of hysteresis behavior. The investigators propose to extend their
numerical simulations to a greater variety of shapes and sizes, including random
assemblages of particles and shapes more complex than simple rods and cubes.
They also will explore the parameter space of important magnetic materials other
than room temperature magnetite. Finally, they will incorporate thermal
fluctuations into their numerical code and expand the scope of modelling efforts
to include this very important effect.