* 0229321
* Physics of On-State Breakdown in InAIAs/InGaAs High Electron Mobility Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Mark Somerville, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 08/31/2004
* USD 86,562.00

9906552&lt;br/&gt;Somerville&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is
to illuminate experimentally the physics of burnout and on-state breakdown in
InAlAs/InGaAs high electron mobility transistors (HEMTs). These devices are
extremely attractive for a growing number of high frequency applications,
including collision avoidance radar systems, wireless LANS, and ultra high speed
switching networks. Many of the applications require high breakdown voltage; as
a result, great effort has been devoted to understanding and improving off-state
breakdown in InAlAs/InGaAs HEMTs. However, as off-state breakdown has improved,
it has become clear that the bottleneck is the problem of on-state breakdown and
associated burnout. Relatively little work has been done in this area. It is
thought that impact ionization is involved, but the details of the mechanism are
unknown, as are the impact of various device design parameters. By investigating
the physics of on-state breakdown and burnout, the proposed research program
will identify promising design directions for InAlAs/InGaAs HEMTs to help
alleviate the problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program
involves development of a customized measurement system to allow visible and NIR
spectroscopy of on-state breakdown in InAlAs/InGaAs HEMTs under a variety of
thermal and bias conditions; the use of the system for extensive measurements on
a large sample set of state-of-the-art devices; and extensive data reduction and
model development. The project is designed with student participation in mind;
much of the work will be done by undergraduate researchers under the supervision
of the PI. Thus, in addition to enhancing understanding of the problem of on-
state breakdown, the proposed research program will introduce undergraduate
students to modern research techniques and instrumentation in the area of device
physics, and will afford these students the opportunity to do real research on a
critical
technology.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;