* 0229490
* Investigation of the Glacial History of the Siple Coast Using Radar-Detected Internal Layers and the Ice Core from Siple Dome
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Howard Conway, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 04/30/2007
* USD 272,833.00

This award supports a project to improve understanding of post-glacial retreat
and thinning of the Siple Coast region. Research has shown how age-depth
relationships from ice cores can be extrapolated over wide areas by tracking
continuous radar layers. By comparing radar-derived timescales with one from a
model of ice- flow, glacial conditions over regional scales were inferred. High-
resolution radar profiles have been collected across most of the inter-stream
ridges in the Siple Coast region, and an age- depth relationship has been
established from the Siple Dome ice core. Application of the techniques used by
others is problematic because the ice streams that surround Siple Dome have
disrupted the continuity of the internal layers. A specific goal of this project
is to search for other less direct ways to match radar layers between
unconnected profiles. The correspondence between radar reflections and
measurements of electrical conductivity and volcanic sulfates along the Siple
Dome core will be investigated. The strategy is to search for distinctive
patterns in the echoes that will facilitate layer matching. Preliminary results
are encouraging: at least four distinct echoes at Siple Dome can be matched to
spikes in the conductivity profile and the signature of one (at 210m depth,
which is ~1,800 yrs BP) closely resembles that of a layer at ~200m on Ridge BC.
Matching layers (and hence timescales) across the ice streams will allow
reconstruction of spatial patterns of past flow, thinning and accumulation rate
in the Siple Coast region, which is needed to predict future possible changes of
the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. Data necessary for the proposed work are already
available; additional fieldwork in Antarctica is not required. The project will
take two years to complete and will provide core education for a doctoral
student in Earth and Space Sciences, with an emphasis on
radioglaciology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;