* 0229267
* Chemically Reactive Fluid Flow During Regional Metamorphism
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* John Ferry, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2006
* USD 284,381.00

Ferry&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0229267&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI and his
graduate students will conduct field and laboratory studies on the origin and
the mineralogical, isotopic, and chemical evolution of metamorphic rocks.
Infiltration of rocks deep in the Earth's crust during episodes of mountain
building by chemically reactive H2O-CO2 fluids is now recognized as an essential
driving force of mineral reactions during metamorphism. Much progress has been
made over the last decade in understanding the sources, amounts, geometry, and
geological controls on reactive fluid transport in contact aureoles. Details of
the physical and chemical behavior of reactive fluids during regional
metamorphism, however, have remained more obscure and are the subject of
research supported by this grant. A fundamental characteristic of regional
metamorphic terrains is the common occurrence in siliceous carbonate rocks of
mineral reactants and products in proportions that vary widely on scales ranging
from several mm to several 100 m. The specific, pivotal question that will be
addressed is whether these occurrences result from flow of variable amounts of
reactive fluid within different, chemically isolated layers or whether they
result from variations in initial amounts and compositions of minerals prior to
reaction in different layers that maintain perfect or almost perfect chemical
communication by diffusion. The answer to the question, in turn, will lead to an
understanding of the mechanism (diffusion vs. flow) and geometry of reactive
fluid transport during regional metamorphism, the source(s) of reactive fluid,
the driving force for reaction, and the amount of fluid involved. In order to
draw general conclusions, investigations will be made of carbonate rocks in
medium-pressure terrains in eastern Vermont and the southern Swiss Alps and in a
low-pressure terrain in south-central Maine. Research will involve mapping and
sample collection in the field, chemical analysis of minerals with an electron
microprobe, chemical analysis of whole-rock samples by X-ray fluorescence, O and
C stable isotope analysis of carbonates and silicates by mass spectrometry, and
calculations based on geochemical thermodynamics and transport theory. The
project will support the training of three women Ph.D. students at Johns Hopkins
University.&lt;br/&gt;