* 0229556
* Kinetics of the Formation and Transformation of Iron Oxides in Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Hiroshi Ohmoto, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2007
* USD 307,997.00

Most of the world's Fe supply comes from: (a) Precambrian banded iron formations
(BIFs), which were composed of a variety of iron-bearing minerals (hematite,
magnetite, siderite, and pyrite) that accumulated in submarine hydrothermal
environments; and (b) hematite-rich secondary iron ores that were transformed
from the magnetite, hematite, siderite, and pyrite of BIFs. The goals of the
proposed research are three-fold: (i) to understand the systematics of the
geochemical environments and processes involved in the formation and
transformation of iron oxides (and other major Fe-bearing minerals) in submarine
hydrothermal systems (e.g., BIFs and VMS -volcanogenic massive sulfide
deposits); (ii) to develop mineralogical and geochemical methods to identify the
depositional environments of Fe-bearing minerals; and (iii) to develop a new
exploration model for iron ore deposits. These goals will be achieved through
two series of laboratory investigations, exploring: (I) the kinetics of the
formation of iron-bearing minerals and silica during the mixing of Fe2+- and
silica-bearing hydrothermal fluids with seawater of various compositions, and
(II) the kinetics of the non-redox transformation of hematite magnetite at
temperatures below 250 C. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Some of the important
hypotheses will be tested in this research, including: (1) the concentrations of
dissolved O2 and HCO3- in the local seawater played major roles in determining
the iron mineralogy of BIFs and other hydrothermal ore deposits formed on the
ocean floor; (2) hematite-rich BIFs are good evidence for the oxygenated oceans
and atmosphere during the Archean era; (3) siderite-rich BIFs suggest they
formed in anoxic basins; (4) the transformation of hematite to magnetite, or
magnetite to hematite, which in many types of ore deposits was not caused by
redox reactions, but caused by simple additions of Fe2+ to hematite, or leaching
of Fe2+ from magnetite: Fe2O3 (hm) + Fe2+ + H2O = Fe3O4 (mt) + 2H+; (4)
hematite-rich iron ores formed in deep crust as well as on the land surface.
&lt;br/&gt;