* 0229666
* Experimental Studies of the Mechanism of Diamond Crystallization From COH Supercritical Fluid in SiO2-Rich Media
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2005
* Harry Green, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 11/30/2005
* USD 221,225.00

Dobrzhinetskaya&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0229666&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recognition of
microdiamonds within ultra-high pressure metamorphic rocks a decade ago
initiated a revolution in the understanding of continental collision terranes.
Two concepts are known to explain the origin of such diamonds: (1)
crystallization from a supercritical COH fluid; (2) crystallization from fluid-
bearing alkaline-carbonate melt. Traditionally, experimental attempts to
replicate natural diamond formation have been based on synthesis in metal-carbon
systems in a highly reduced environment. Only recently has experimental modeling
of natural diamonds at high P and T conditions been extended to the alkaline-
carbonate-carbon system in the presence of H2O. We have established
experimentally that H2O is an active catalyst promoting diamond crystallization
from graphite at high pressure and high temperature and that incubation time is
dependent on metal ions in solution. In particular, we find that Mg facilitates
nucleation and Si does not. This work will extend our work in diamond synthesis
with a focus on diamond nucleation in the COH-SiO2 system at varying parameters
such as pressure, temperature, time and oxygen fugacity to constrain the
mechanism of diamond growth in quartzofeldspathic gneisses and quartzites from
ultra-high pressure metamorphic terranes. Experimental investigations related to
diamond synthesis from supercritical COH fluid in the diamond stability field is
a new but fast-growing research field of great importance for understanding of
the mechanism of diamond crystallization within subducted rocks of continental
affinity and may bring interesting application for industrial diamond
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;