* 0229522
* Time and Mechanism(s) of Accretion of the Laurentia-Derived Argentine Precordillera to Western Gondwana: the Record in the Foreland
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* William Thomas, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 02/28/2007
* USD 101,500.00

The Precordillera in northwestern Argentina is an exotic Laurentian (North
American) terrane that collided with and was accreted to western Gondwana (South
America). General consensus holds that the Precordillera was rifted from the
Ouachita embayment of southern Laurentia, and the Precordillera arguably has the
best-constrained original location of any known exotic continental terrane. For
that reason, the Precordillera provides a place to address fundamental questions
of mechanisms and rates of transfer of a continental terrane from one continent
to another. In addition, the Precordillera may serve as model for processes and
responses that characterize the collision of a microcontinent (small plate) with
a continent. Finally, the history of the transfer of the Precordillera from
Laurentia to Gondwana is an important constraint on global paleogeographic
reconstructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even with the consensus both for the
original location of the Argentine Precordillera in the Ouachita embayment and
for collision of the Precordillera with western Gondwana, interpretations of the
time of collision differ from Middle-Late Ordovician to Silurian-Devonian.
Middle-Late Ordovician events are recognized in each of the interpretations, but
those events are considered to represent collision with Gondwana in some
interpretations and to represent rifting from Laurentia in others. New data
gathered in this research help to constrain both the timing and mechanism(s) of
collision of the Precordillera with Gondwana. This research integrates the
history of subsidence and sedimentary filling of the Precordillera foreland
basin in the context of temporal and mechanical links to the Famatina volcanic
arc and a continental suture zone between the rocks of western Gondwana and the
eastern Precordillera. Specifically, the research is examining the subsidence
history of the basin, role of high-relief fault blocks as sources of carbonate
olistoliths, significance of possible fault blocks for extension or
transpression/transtension, provenance of igneous and metamorphic clasts,
patterns of clastic sediment dispersal on Precordillera platform, relation of
Famatina arch and suture zone to basin subsidence and sediment progradation on
platform, and relation of succession to southern Laurentia.