* 0230616
* Planning Grant for Department-Level Reform of Undergraduate Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Andrew Douglas, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230616&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Abts,
Leigh&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Johns Hopkins University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Planning Grant for Department-Level Reform of Undergraduate Engineering
Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Johns Hopkins
University's (JHU) Whiting School of Engineering (WSE) plans to more effectively
blend the content and pedagogy of the research process into the undergraduate
engineering curriculum. This new model would structure courses, laboratory
experiences, and optional summer programs to enhance and augment the standard
departmental engineering curricula offered .The planning process would include
the evaluation of courses, faculty, and facility resource requirements to more
extensively integrate research into the engineering
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mainly graduate students participate in the
more complete research pedagogy to become more advanced critical thinkers
(scholars), and through the collaborative learning process grow as role models
(advisors). Even for graduate students the research process is taught on a one
to one basis, with little, if any, formal course work that transforms the
content of research as a process to teach creative thinking, experimental design
and interpretation, grant writing, reporting and mentoring into the context of
the engineering curriculum. Properly taught, research should engage the teaching
and research faculty to apply collaborative, active learning techniques to teach
a student how to select a research topic, to generate a hypothesis to test, to
procure funding, to collaboratively design and implement an experiment, to
analyze the data, and to justify to their peers the results.&lt;br/&gt;