* 0230265
* Collaborative Research:    An Integrated Interior Infill System for Mass Customized Housing
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Kent Larson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* lawrence bank
* 12/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

Collaborative Research: An Integrated Interior Infill System for Mass Customized
Housing Abstract In the future, homes will contain the most complex activities
of any building type. With the aging of the baby boomers, homes must become
centers for proactive healthcare, distributed energy production, work, commerce,
learning, etc. Homes must become agile environments that accommodate rapidly
changing needs, activities, and technologies. They must respond to demands of
sophisticated, affluent baby boomer generation who want choice and tailored
solutions that closely reflect their values and needs. But places of living are
poorly prepared for this future. Most new apartments are generic, low-grade,
low-tech, inflexible, disruptive to upgrade, high maintenance, and ill-designed.
Architects and engineers play no significant role in the creation of places of
living, except at the very high end of the market. Most housing research is
focused on cost reduction - not on preparing places of living to meet new
requirements in the future. The objective of this research project is to
conceptualize and assess the viability of a new approach that that may result in
high-value, customized, reconfigurable, adaptable, multifamily housing. The
three coordinated thrusts are as follows. 1) The development of design concepts
for the use of prefabricated, volumetric module ioshellslc of a dimension that
can be efficiently and affordable shipped to the jobsite, combined with the
application of a mass customized cabinetry-like integrated interior infill (I 3
) system for apartment fit-out. Modular construction is the fastest growing
segment of the housing market, but its potential is limited by a narrow range of
design possibilities, its failure to take advantage of modern manufacturing
technologies, and the labor intensive operations required to connect modules at
the site. This research will employ modular construction for what it is most
suited for - structural shells with building services that can be rapidly
assembled. 2) The development of concepts for automated, web-based, consumer
design tools based on parametrically defined I 3 components. This effort will
take advantage of prior work developed at MIT and in industry for user
customization of apartment design and cabinetry. 3) The development and testing
of an I 3 production methodology. The following issues will be investigated: Can
an I 3 system allow mass-customized components to be manufactured efficiently
and with the same quality as identical mass-produced units? Can the controlled
and precise fabrication of integrated components allow new materials such as
advanced polymers, composites, and special- purpose metals to find their way
into the home? Can delicate electronics and devices be more easily integrated
into I 3 components than with conventional construction? Can parallel
manufacturing of the modular shell and interior components reduce production
cycle time? In summary, this research will give the homebuilding supply chain,
suppliers, factory producers, and builders a vision of the future - and an
approach to the design tools and lean production systems that can make that
vision a reality. The research will attempt to leap beyond incremental
improvements in the conventional process, to an agile and adaptable system of
mass-customization using technologies processes that could be put into effect in
the near term. The research will also have important academic impacts. It will
provide two Masters thesis topics and multi-disciplinary research experiences
for two undergraduate research assistants. The class project in EIN 3314 Work
Measurement and Design, involving lean manufacturing in local industry, will
provide valuable, team-based, real world learning experiences for about 30
undergraduate engineering students.

