* 0230631
* The Future Role of Ecological Engineering Science in Undergraduate Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Julie Ann Williams, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230631&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Nies,
Loring&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Purdue University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: The Future
Role of Ecological Engineering Science in Undergraduate Engineering
Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of human
engineering on ecosystems is undeniable and globally evident. Ecological
Engineering is an emerging discipline that is defined as the design of
ecosystems for the mutual benefit of humans and nature. Human engineering and
natural systems must act in harmony if we are to sustain ecosystem biodiversity
and improve human existence to a globally equitable and acceptable level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop an inclusive undergraduate degree
program in Ecological Engineering Science that will integrate faculty, courses,
and resources across current disciplinary boundaries. Future graduates of
Ecological Engineering Science will work in interdisciplinary teams to ensure
that engineering practices are ecologically sustainable. We call our program
Ecological Engineering Science to acknowledge the natural and social science
foundation of the program. Although the initiation of this new degree program
will be from within the Schools of Engineering, strong interdisciplinary
linkages will be established with the Schools of Agriculture, Sciences, Liberal
Arts, and Education during the planning process. Our interdisciplinary team from
the Schools of Engineering and the Center for Instructional Excellence at Purdue
University is well suited to establish linkages across campus and to lead the
curriculum planning process. What sets Ecological Engineering Science apart from
traditional environmental disciplines such as Environmental Engineering is the
scale and complexity of the problems, the consideration of human institutions
(social, political and economic), and the inclusion of sustainability issues in
problem formulations. There is a strong justification for the development of an
Ecological Engineering Science degree program. Over the next decade more than
35,000 new Environmental and Sustainable Systems jobs will become available in
the US. The National Research Council recommended increasing interdisciplinary
education and they identified eight .Grand Environmental Challenges. that spans
the spectrum of Ecological Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;