* 0230786
* STI:  Flexible Wireless Systems for Rapid Network Evolution
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Gary Minden, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2005
* USD 832,500.00

Ultra-wideband (UWB) systems portend to offer multiple communications
advantages.&lt;br/&gt;However, the conventional approach to UWB systems is to
emit a short, possibly shaped, pulse at determined intervals. The effect is not
unlike your car engine firing a spark plug at determined intervals. Advocates
contend that by shaping the pulse and adjusting the interval between pulses, a
robust, short-ranged communications system can be achieved. However, traditional
UWB systems have only two degrees of freedom, pulse shape and pulse interval.
This limits their ability to avoid interfering with critical (e.g. GPS) channels
and comply with laws regarding spectrum management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project investigates solutions to these issues by developing, implementing, and
demonstrating an ultra-wideband communications system based on hundreds to
thousands of individual carrier channels. Called Hyper-Orthogonal Frequency
Division Multiplexing, or HOFDM, such systems will allow the rapid deployment of
new wireless Internet services by providing a platform that is flexible with
respect to the ambient spectrum regulations and conditions. H-OFDM permits the
mining of the existing spectrum to obtain bandwidth to support new networking
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The H-OFDM system has the following
attributes:&lt;br/&gt;1. The radio frequency (RF) environment can be sensed and
the system can adapt to the local environment.&lt;br/&gt;2. The H-OFDM system
can adjust to local (foreign) regulations regarding RF emissions.&lt;br/&gt;3.
The H-OFDM system can adjust to propagation conditions, using lower frequencies
to penetrate foliage and/or reach longer distances or use higher frequencies to
limit range and support covert operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Generation of a
H-OFDM signal is the combination of hundreds of individual carriers at
frequencies compatible with the requirements of the propagation environment, the
degree of stealth, and the limitations of the applicable government. OFDM is
selected because one can move carriers with relative ease, one can move carriers
very close to existing channels, and one can easily control the modulation and
bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system proposal is based on three
components:&lt;br/&gt;1. Ultra-wideband radio frequency transmitters and
receivers.&lt;br/&gt;2. Ultra-wideband antennas, power amplifiers, and low-noise
receivers to support the H OFDM system.&lt;br/&gt;3. High-performance digital
signal processing (DSP) algorithms and components to generate and detect H-OFDM
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When successful, this project will provide a
technology for providing wireless Internet services with greater bandwidth.