* 0230652
* Reengineering The Undergraduate IEMS Program
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Lesia Crumpton-Young, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2004
* USD 99,962.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230652&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Crumpton-Young,
Lesia&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: University of Central Florida&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Reengineering The Undergraduate IEMS
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reengineering the
Undergraduate IEMS Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this grant is to
assess, strategize, and generate plans for enhancing the undergraduate program
in the Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Systems at The
University of Central Florida. Enhancement of the Undergraduate program should
yield the following: an increased attraction by students to pursue degrees in
IE, better retention of students in IE majors, and better preparation of IE
graduates to meet the future workforce needs of engineers employed in a high-
tech society. Additionally, planning efforts undertaken in this proposed
planning grant will help to establish a framework that can be used by Industrial
Engineering departments interested in improving their courses, curriculum,
methods of delivery, instructional strategies, and overall preparation of their
graduates. Planning activities undertaken in this proposed grant will initially
be disseminated through the following venues: American Society of Engineering
Education Conferences, Institute of Industrial Engineering National Conference,
IIE Council of Academic Department Heads, ASEE Journal of Engineering Education,
ASEE Prism Magazine, and the UCF WWW. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
objectives to be pursued during this planning grant to ensure that the
&lt;br/&gt;overall goals of this project are met include: 1) developing plans
for introducing &lt;br/&gt;emerging topics into the IE curriculum; 2) developing
plans for increasing student &lt;br/&gt;holistic problem solving capabilities;
3) developing plans for including more &lt;br/&gt;experiential/active learning
exercises; 4) developing plans for incorporating more &lt;br/&gt;technology into
classrooms; 5) developing plans for improving instructional strategies
&lt;br/&gt;and faculty professional development; 6) developing plans for
enhancing professional &lt;br/&gt;development and leadership capabilities of
students; and 7) developing plans for &lt;br/&gt;exploiting partnerships to
increase the number of talented students in IE disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;