* 0230642
* Engineering Connections in Grades 11-13 Science and Math Courses
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Thomas Gilbert, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,938.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230642&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Gilbert,
Thomas&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Northeastern University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Engineering Connections in Grades 11-13 Science and Math
Courses&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
describes a year-long planning process to develop a model of teaching
&lt;br/&gt;that reflects current cognitive learning theory and that will create
a common pedagogical framework for science and math courses taken by juniors and
seniors in high school and college freshmen. The overarching goal of this
project is to recruit and retain a large and diverse population of young people
to programs of study leading to careers as: 1) engineering professions in which
they are master problem solvers and developers of new solutions to engineering
challenges; and 2) high school math and science teachers who understand and are
critical consumers of technology, and who can extrapolate fundamental concepts
to engineering applications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The planning team consists
of Northeastern University (NU) faculty from engineering, &lt;br/&gt;biology,
chemistry, mathematics and physics and Boston Public School (BPS) math and
science teachers. They will form a community of reflective teaching
practitioners spanning across disciplines and the high school-university divide.
These communities will meet to assess and enhance their own teaching practices
and will collaboratively design: 1) a 3-week Urban Engineering Summer Camp for
juniors from the John D. O'Bryant School of Mathematics and Science in Boston;
2) engineering activity modules for G11 and 12 math and science courses; 3) math
and science courses taken by first-year engineering majors that are based on
solving a series of engineering problems; 4) math and science courses taken by
undergraduates in NU's School of Education that emphasize the connections
between these courses and issues from engineering and technology; and 5)
comprehensive, conceptual tests to assess student understanding of the
principles of math and science and their abilities to apply these principles.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;