* 0230506
* NSF/USDOT:    In-Vehicle Energy and Emissions Information System (EEIS)
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Nagui Rouphail, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 12/31/2008
* USD 336,928.00

Current mobile emissions estimation systems are typically aimed at predicted
average emissions for a fleet of vehicles and for a large geographic area.
However, on-road, measured vehicle emissions are highly episodic, with short-
term events of a few seconds in duration producing high emission rates and
substantially contributing to total trip emissions. Emissions are influenced by
prevailing traffic control measures (TCMs), transportation infrastructure (e.g.,
roadway design), vehicle characteristics, driver behavior, traffic flow, and
ambient conditions. Therefore, there is a critical need to develop a rigorous
technical basis for predicting emissions for individual vehicles taking into
account all these key factors.

The goals of this project are to: (1) evaluate the feasibility of developing
micro-scale energy and emissions models for individual vehicles, including
validation of the model under conditions not used in model construction; (2)
test a prototype IVEEIS that accepts inputs from the vehicle, transportation
infrastructure (e.g., road grade), and other external sources (e.g., ambient
conditions) to produce microscale energy and emissions predictions for that
particular vehicle; and (3) define a path for large-scale implementation of
IVEEIS for designing and evaluating the effectiveness of various transportation
design and control measures and for future policy development. The approach that
will be used in this project includes the following tasks: (1) design of on-road
field experiments; (2) field data collection, for extended periods (e.g., 70
hours of second-by-second data) and for several vehicles covering the full range
of expected variability in energy and emissions; (3) IVEEIS model development
using engineering and statistical methods; (4) IVEEIS validation and
application; and (5) specification of IVEEIS application paths to improve
transportation design, control, and policy, including improved emission
predictions in current microscopic traffic simulation models.

The broader impact of this research is to enable a deeper and more robust
understanding of the factors affecting high emissions and energy use episodes in
the real world, which in turn will provide a strong scientific basis for
addressing pressing societal issues such as seeking effective air quality and
energy use management strategies at the driver, network and regional levels.