* 0230567
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intraregional Interaction and Long-Distance Exchange: Examining the Social Contexts of Chupadero Black-on-white Pottery Production and Distribution
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Margaret Nelson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

The organization of regional economic and political systems has long been a
major theme of archaeological study in the prehistoric American Southwest.
Anthropologists have often relied upon ceramic production and exchange data to
explore economic and social relations in precapitalist societies. Much of this
work has traditionally focused on understanding the organization of a single
component (production or exchange) of a regional economic system. A number of
researchers have argued, however, that the analysis of these components must be
integrated in order to more fully explore the social dimensions of economies.
They maintain that it is through the examination of the connection between
production and exchange that broader economic and social issues can be
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tiffany Clark's dissertation research will
explore the relationship between ceramic production and exchange in two regions
of central New Mexico during the early Pueblo IV period (AD 1200/1250-1450).
This study will focus on Chupadero Black-on-white pottery, one of the most
widely distributed ceramic types in the prehistoric American Southwest.
Chupadero ceramics are found throughout central and southern New Mexico and in
adjacent parts of Texas, Arizona, and northern Mexico. This integrative research
will evaluate the organization of production systems across different scales of
long-distance trade. Chupadero is particularly well suited for this type of
comparative analysis as it was produced by pottery specialists in only two areas
of central New Mexico - the Salinas and Sierra Blanca regions. In addition,
substantial differences exist in the scale of Chupadero production,
distribution, and consumption between the two producing regions. The existence
of these different economic systems provides a unique opportunity to evaluate
different types of specialized production and exchange systems using a single
ceramic commodity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To explore the relationship between
production and exchange in early Pueblo IV regional economy, Ms. Clark will
undertake a series of interrelated and complementary analyses. Using data from
chemical and geological analyses, the location and intensity of Chupadero
pottery production will be assessed for the Salinas and Sierra Blanca regions.
In addition, chemical data will be used to examine the movement of pottery to
consumers, as well as to evaluate the strength of local and long-distance trade
relations. Conclusions regarding production and exchange patterns will then be
used in conjunction with information from a study of ceramic designs to explore
the networks of social relations that were present in prehistoric central New
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study constitutes a detailed
examination of the regional economic systems in which Chupadero Black-on-white
pottery was produced and exchanged. The significance of this project lies in its
holistic approach to economy, rigorous methodology incorporating two powerful
analytical techniques, and use of an ideal archaeological case study. As such,
the results of this study will add to a growing body of anthropological
literature focusing on the organization of regional economic and social systems
in the prehistoric American Southwest. Furthermore, this project will also
contribute to our general understanding of the roles that production and
exchange play in the development and maintenance of the economic and social
relations in precapitalist societies. &lt;br/&gt;