* 0230267
* Textural Analyses of Naturally Deformed Peridotite and Gabbro: Implications for the Interpretation of Geophysical Data and the Rheology of the Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2006
* J. Gregory Hirth, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2006
* USD 309,039.00

EAR-0230267&lt;br/&gt;Hirth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use
their newly acquired electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) system to measure
lattice preferred orientations (LPO) and analyze microstructures in naturally
deformed peridotites and gabbros. The increased efficiency in the measurement of
crystal orientations made possible by the EBSD technique, particularly for
minerals with low symmetry such as plagioclase and clinopyroxene, makes it a
powerful tool to investigate rheological processes in both experimentally and
naturally deformed rocks. The investigators will concentrate on the analysis of
microstructures preserved in naturally deformed rocks with well-constrained
deformation histories. This research will improve our understanding of the
processes that control the rheology of both the lower crust and upper mantle.
Specific projects include: (1) Determining the evolution of LPO with increasing
strain in peridotite, concentrating on the influence of dynamic
recrystallization, the effect of pyroxene content and the role of melt. The
results of this project will provide constraints on the interpretation of
seismic anisotropy in the mantle. (2) Using LPOs and grain size analyses to
investigate conditions where a transition from dislocation creep to diffusion
creep occurs under geologic conditions, and the possible role this process has
in strain localization. The results of this part of the project will provide
constraints on the mechanisms responsible for weakening lithospheric-scale fault
zones at plate boundaries (3) Combining measurement of LPO with microstructural
studies on oceanic gabbros to constrain the viscosity of lower crustal rocks
under geologic conditions.