* 0230381
* An Observational Array for High Resolution, Year-round Measurements of Volume, Freshwater, and Ice Flux Variability in Davis Strait
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2008
* Ken Drinkwater, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 03/31/2008
* USD 3,537,470.00

This study will use an integrated observing system that will provide year-round
measurements of volume, liquid freshwater and ice fluxes across Davis Strait.
Fluxes through the Strait represent the net integrated Canadian Archipelago
through flow, modified by terrestrial inputs and oceanic processes during its
southward transit through Baffin Bay. This study will be part of a coordinated
international effort to quantify (and eventually monitor) the variability of
fluxes connecting the Arctic and Atlantic Oceans and to understand the role
played by the Arctic and sub-Arctic in steering decadal scale climate
variability, The system will employ complementary techniques, combining mature
technologies with recent developments in autonomous gliders (presently
undertaking their first extended science missions) to address all aspects of
flow through Davis Strait, including some measurements that have not previously
been technologically feasible. The components of the proposed system include: A
sparse array of subsurface moorings, each instrumented with an upward looking
sonar, an Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP) and a single conductivity-
temperature (CT) sensor. These will provide a time series of upper ocean
currents, ice velocity and ice thickness. These measurements will then be used
to estimate the ice component of freshwater flux, provide an absolute velocity
reference for geostrophic shears calculated from Seaglider hydrographic
sections, and derive error estimates for lower-frequency flux calculations.
Trawl and iceberg resistant bottom landers, instrumented with ADCPs and CT
sensors, will be deployed across the Baffin and Greenland shelves to quantify
variability associated with strong, narrow coastal flows. Acoustically navigated
Seagliders will provide year-round, repeated, high-resolution hydrographic
sections across the Strait. The combination of emerging and existing
technologies implemented in the observing system may serve as a prototype for
accurate long-term monitoring of freshwater and ice fluxes in high latitude
environments subject to seasonal or permanent ice cover. Acoustically navigated
autonomous gliders capable of extended missions in ice covered environments will
provide a significant new observational tool, opening important regions of high
latitude oceans to intensive measurement programs.