* 0230082
* Shelf-Edge Circulation on the West Antarctic Peninsula:  An Analysis Utilizing Existing Data and Regional Model Output
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Dana Savidge, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 03/31/2004
* USD 75,718.00

The primary goal of this project is to determine the exchange of water masses
between the open ocean and the continental shelf along the western side of the
Antarctic Peninsula. The proposed analyses will make use of existing acoustic
doppler current profile (ADCP) data collected on board antarctic oceanographic
research vessels in the context of the Southern Ocean experiment of the Global
Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics Study. The data will be examined for consistency with
other analyzed velocity fields, and will be complemented by an analysis of the
output from a regional model of shelf-edge velocities and density fields (the
Rutgers/UCLA Regional Ocean Modeling System (ROMS)). The high horizontal
resolution of ADCP velocity fields, combined with recent advances in regional
oceanic modeling provides new opportunities to: (1) determine the mean outer
shelf and shelf-edge circulation at horizontal scales that were previously
unresolved; (2) investigate variability of circulation with wind, buoyancy, and
boundary current forcing, and with alongshelf bathymetric variability; (3)
examine across-slope transport mechanisms and pathways; and (4) analyze the
dynamics of dominant processes at the shelf-edge.&lt;br/&gt;Recent research has
indicated that the open ocean may act as a significant source of nutrients,
heat, and salt for antarctic continental shelves. Therefore, processes at the
shelf-edge can significantly affect water mass modification, sea ice cycling,
and cross-shelf exchanges of&lt;br/&gt;nutrients and other biogenic material on
the shelf.&lt;br/&gt;