* 0230000
* Project 2020
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Tim Brady, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 01/31/2004
* USD 99,967.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230000 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Brady, Tim INSTITUTION NAME:
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University TITLE: Project 2020

Abstract

Project 2020, an Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University (ERAU) engineering
curriculum initiative, is a nine-month planning grant the primary goal of which
is to create a curriculum development demonstrator inspired by the Electronic
Performance Support System (EPSS) methodology used in the aerospace industry
(Boeing), and adapted to the university environment. A team composed of members
from education and industry will collaborate to achieve the goals.

This grant is the first step in achieving a larger vision defined by these
sequential goals: (1) create a curriculum development methodology inspired by
the Electronic Performance System used in the aerospace industry (Boeing), and
adapted to the university environment, the objective of this planning grant; (2)
bring together appropriate cross- discipline faculty to use the EPSS methodology
for development of a curriculum component such as a course or a semester of
courses as a demonstration project; (3) use the same faculty to conduct a one-
semester demonstration project with university engineering and technology
students; (4) measure, assess, and compare the student achievement and
satisfaction of the demonstration group at various intervals to that of a
control group of students engaged in the traditional curriculum using outcomes-
based methodologies; (5) measure, assess, and compare faculty performance,
workload and satisfaction in both groups at various intervals; (6) evaluate the
results of the demonstration project and prepare a report; (7) share the results
through workshops and other media with other universities to encourage and
support demonstration and collaborative projects at those universities; and (8)
implement the curriculum concepts on a large scale across the university and
between campuses within the university.