* 0230170
* Experimental Study of the Role of Pore Fluid Pressure in Earthquake Nucleation
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Terry Tullis, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2008
* USD 216,872.00

EAR-0230170&lt;br/&gt;Terry E. Tullis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;
We will conduct a systematic study to understand the relationship between stress
change and pore pressure change in experimental fault zones. It is important to
understand the mechanical contributions of pore fluid pressure change during
earthquake nucleation and how pore fluid pressure change may trigger seismicity.
The geophysical purpose of this research is determine to what degree changing
pore fluid pressure plays a mechanical role in earthquake occurrence and under
what conditions. Geologic observations show that seismic faulting occurs in the
presence of crustal fluids. However rarely is fluid behavior accounted for in
models of seismicity, earthquake nucleation and triggered seismicity.&lt;br/&gt;
It is most often assumed that shear induced dilatancy during seismic slip will
decrease the pore pressure, tend to stabilize the slip, and discourage
earthquake occurrence. However, recent laboratory observations suggest that for
slip localized within thick fault zones, elastic dilation or compaction of the
fault zone with stress change is of the opposite sense and greatly exceeds shear
induced dilatancy. Thus, common assumptions about the role of pore fluid
pressure in earthquake source mechanics require renewed scrutiny. No laboratory
experiments where stick-slip sliding occurs have been conducted in the presence
of pore fluids, no laboratory measurements of the poroelastic properties of
fault zones have been made, and no poroelastic measurements have been made on
unfaulted (country) rock at the significant differential stresses appropriate
for seismic faulting. Therefore we will conduct two series of experiments; the
first designed to measure the poroelastic properties of fault zones near the
failure stress, the second to determine and compare the magnitudes of shear
induced dilatancy (inelastic strain) and elastic strain during stick-slip in
thick gouge layers. We will develop constitutive equations for seismic fault
slip based on the experimental observations and extrapolate the results to
crustal conditions. &lt;br/&gt;