* 0230403
* Geologic Versus Geodetic Rates of Convergence in the Southwestern Tien Shan, China
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Douglas Burbank, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* David Fountain
* 02/28/2009
* USD 272,212.00

Research in the southern Tien Shan is defining geologic strain gradients, actual
patterns and rates of long-term deformation at time scales ranging from 10,000
-10,000,000 yr, and changes in those rates through time. The research area is
characterized by two contrasting styles of structural deformation within an
existing geodetic network. In the northern Tarim basin, north-vergent detachment
folds presently deform the >9 km of Cenozoic basin fill. In a more proximal
position farther north, south-vergent thrust faults cut purported Quaternary
conglomerates and have carried their bedrock hangingwalls >15 km southward along
very low-angle (perhaps at the surface) detachments. Field data being gathered
in this region permit tests of the following hypotheses:

1. Geodetic strain rates in the southern Tien Shan are matched by Quaternary
rates of shortening in the southernmost detachment folds (northern Tarim basin).
2. Despite striking changes in both style and vergence of Late Cenozoic deform-
ation across the Tien Shan margin, rates of shortening since approximately 5 My
have remained steady. 3. Even though the detachment folds are north-vergent, the
more northerly ones formed earliest.

If the first hypothesis is true, it suggests that geodetic shortening may be
accommodated by large (approximately magnitude 8) earthquakes on low-angle
detachments analogous to those in the Lesser Himalaya. Structural and
chronologic data are being collected using four primary approaches: geologic
mapping across the southern margin of the Tien Shan, chronologies of syn- and
pre-tectonic, Upper Cenozoic strata via magnetostratigraphy, surveying and
dating of deformed Late Quaternary fluvial terraces, and analysis of reflection
seismic profiles. The end product will provide: a test of geologic versus
geodetic rates in a contractional fold-and-thrust belt; a reconstruction of the
pattern, style, and rates of deformation across the SW Tien Shan; insights into
why contrasting deformation patterns developed here; a new model for propagating
deformation during intracontinental mountain building; and an estimate of
earthquake hazards.