* 0230630
* Bridging Engineering and Education in Central Florida (BEEF)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Lucy Morse, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 06/30/2005
* USD 130,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230630&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Morse,
Lucy&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: University of Central Florida&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Bridging Engineering and Education in Central Florida
(BEEF)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose
of this proposed project is to establish and institutionalize a Bridging
&lt;br/&gt;Engineering and Education in Central Florida (BEEF) Committee to
develop a comprehensive strategic plan. The strategic plan will be designed to
increase the numbers and diversity of students entering as STEM majors and
enhance the learning and the academic success of these students. Collaborators
in the development of this strategic plan will include: the UCF Colleges of
Engineering and Education, the 11 area schools districts, the Florida Virtual
School, and the six area community colleges. Central Florida has over 485,000
K-12 students, over 73,000 community college students and over 35,000 state
university students (approximately 8,600 UCF students are engineering and
education majors). This project will have a powerful impact on bridging
engineering and education to many of the diverse students in the Central Florida
area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goal: Enhance and institutionalize collaboration
among the College of Education, College of Engineering, the six area community
colleges, the Florida Virtual School, and 11 area school districts by
establishing a joint BEEF Committee co-chaired by the Deans of each College.
&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1: Discussion and evaluation of university curriculum
issues including course &lt;br/&gt;revisions in the introductory engineering
courses and teacher preparation education &lt;br/&gt;courses, program changes,
and accreditation issues. &lt;br/&gt;Objective 2: Renew and expand existing
outreach programs with pubic schools and &lt;br/&gt;educational agencies by
creating joint partnerships involving both Colleges. &lt;br/&gt;Objective 3:
Articulation with community colleges concerning the two introductory
&lt;br/&gt;engineering courses, EGN 1006 and EGN 1007.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although this project is specifically designed to serve
the Florida population, the courses, and strategies may be used anywhere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;