* 0230312
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Mesoscopics of Elastic and Seismic Waves
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Richard Weaver, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2007
* USD 13,920.00

0230312&lt;br/&gt;Weaver&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for US-
France cooperative research involves researchers and students at the University
of Illinois and University of Grenoble. Richard L. Weaver in the US and Bart A.
Van Tiggelen in France lead this cooperative project on the mesoscopics of
elastic and seismic waves. They will investigate diffuse elastic waves in
randomly disordered open structures. The objective is to explore the
applicability of modern concepts in mesoscopic wave phenomena to seismic waves
in the earth's crust. The project involves laboratory and/or field and/or
theoretical aspects. Students will be trained in ultrasonic techniques and
seismic measurements. The US investigator brings to this collaboration expertise
in mesoscopic issues, work on diffusion and incoherent transport of ultrasound.
This is complemented by French expertise in optical waves, and waves in random
media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of parallel
proposals to the NSF, and the French National Center for Scientific Research
(CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigator
and graduate students. CNRS will support visits by French investigators and
graduate students to the United States. &lt;br/&gt;