* 0230737
* Engineering for Teachers
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Neda Fabris, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 113,500.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230737&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Fabris,
Neda&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: California State L A University Auxiliary
Services Inc.&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Engineering for Teachers&lt;br/&gt;NSF RECEIVED
DATE: 06/04/2002&lt;br/&gt; -&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty
from the College of Engineering, Computer Science and Technology and the Charter
College of&lt;br/&gt;Education at California State University, Los Angeles (Cal
State L.A.) are joining efforts in the&lt;br/&gt;ihEngineering For Teachers
(ETP)lr program with the goal of educating teachers to include
engineering&lt;br/&gt;concepts in the science education in K-12 classes and
encourage more high school graduates to
study&lt;br/&gt;engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a, Hispanic-Serving
Institution, Cal State L.A. has inherently more opportunities to attract
students from underrepresented groups into the engineering profession than the
majority of other fellow universities. According to the 2000 census, there are
more underrepresented minorities in California than other groups, which means
the Charter College of Education at Cal State L.A. not only trains more students
from underrepresented groups to become teachers, but their graduates are
preparing more students from underrepresented groups to attend college. The
Charter College of Education at Cal State L.A. graduates approximately 300 pre-
service teachers a year with a full credential. Due to the shortage of teachers
in California, currently 1,716 students are enrolled in Cal State L.A. who teach
via an emergency credential in local elementary, middle and high schools.
Revising the science content of their study to include engineering will
hopefully encourage them to do the same in their classes multiplying the effect
of this grant greatly.&lt;br/&gt;-&lt;br/&gt;In order to achieve these goals the
following activates will be designed and conducted:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
Provide education faculty with the theory and practice needed to incorporate
engineering design&lt;br/&gt;and process methodology in their
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Provide engineering faculty with knowledge
of learning theories to improve their
teaching&lt;br/&gt;pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Redesign science-method
courses for pre-service teachers to include engineering concepts and
to&lt;br/&gt;connect science and math with the real world. Also, provide K-12
teachers with information on&lt;br/&gt;requirements needed for their students to
become engineers.&lt;br/&gt;