* 0230053
* "Collaborative Research:  Milankovitch-Scale Time Resolution in Growth Strata to Determine Rates and Kinematics of Folding"
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Kenneth Kodama, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2006
* USD 143,450.00

Using sedimentary cycles generated from orbitally forced climatic
changes&lt;br/&gt;(~20,000-400,000 year duration Milankovitch rhythms), the PI's
seek to elucidate the&lt;br/&gt;complex kinematics of decollement folds, refine
methodological approaches for&lt;br/&gt;evaluating growth structures, and
determine high-resolution deformation chronologies&lt;br/&gt;with a
multidisciplinary structural, stratigraphic, and magnetic study. Decollement
folds&lt;br/&gt;are an important structural style in most orogenic belts and
dominate where strong&lt;br/&gt;competency contrasts and thick, weak layers
characterize deformed stratigraphic&lt;br/&gt;sequences. The interpretation,
evaluation, and reconstruction of tectonic structures&lt;br/&gt;requires an
understanding of kinematics and geometry alone cannot constrain
the&lt;br/&gt;distribution of deformation, fold kinematics, or fold mechanics.
Growth structures&lt;br/&gt;provide a unique opportunity to deconvolute the
deformational and depositional&lt;br/&gt;processes of orogenic landscapes. The
PI's propose to evaluate spatial variations in deformation patterns as a
function of structural geometry, lithology, and stratigraphic position
throughout two well-exposed anticlinoria; one at Sierra del Fraile, northeastern
Mexico and another in the central External Sierra, north central Spain. Both
field areas contain large-scale, evaporite-cored, synsedimentary decollement
folds. Prolonged fold growth occurred in varying water depths and depositional
environments at each site and were recorded by a variety of unconformity
geometries and changes in growth strata thickness. These relationships will
allow comparison of the complex interaction between deformational topography and
depositional processes and a means to evaluate kinematic controls on growth
strata geometries. The PI's will map and sample rocks for magnetic
susceptibility, anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility (AMS), and calcite
twinning measurements. AMS measurements in pregrowth strata will be used as a
proxy for deformation fabric and will be augmented by twinning studies to
constrain fold kinematics. Growth strata geometry will be used to distinguish
between fixed and migrating axial surfaces as a fully independent means of
assessing fold kinematics. Milankovitch-scale correlation of magnetic
susceptibility variations and absolute ages will be used to establish a
chronostratigraphy allowing for ~20,000 year temporal control on depositional
and deformational rates within both the Sierra del Fraile and External Sierra
growth strata. Reconnaissance investigations in both field areas provided pilot
data confirming unparalleled opportunities to generate high-resolution spatial
and temporal analysis of fold kinematics. The combination of excellent exposures
of climatically controlled cyclic stratigraphy and synsedimentary deformation in
the two field areas provide an exceptional opportunity to determine the
kinematics of large-scale decollement folding, an important structural style in
most orogenic belts. &lt;br/&gt;