* 0230230
* Self-reversal in Titanomaghemite: Implications for the Magnetization of Oceanic Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2005
* John Tarduno, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 11/30/2005
* USD 129,549.00

Tarduno&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0230230&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-reversal of natural
remanent magnetization, the remarkable &lt;br/&gt;ability of some rocks to
acquire a magnetization in a direction &lt;br/&gt;antiparallel to that of the
Earth's geomagnetic field, is thought to &lt;br/&gt;be rare; it has been
established only in a few igneous rocks bearing &lt;br/&gt;hemoilmenite. The
investigators have have found two pervasive, nearly
&lt;br/&gt;antipodal&lt;br/&gt;components of magnetization (revealed through
detailed &lt;br/&gt;demagnetization studies) from pillow basalts in which
hemoilmenite is &lt;br/&gt;absent. Laboratory thermoremanent magnetization
experiments suggest &lt;br/&gt;that the component&lt;br/&gt;isolated at lower
temperatures represents a partial self-reversal of &lt;br/&gt;the primary
magnetization. This self-reversed magnetization is &lt;br/&gt;carried by
titanomaghemite formed by low temperature oxidation. &lt;br/&gt;Because
maghemitization of ocean crust is ubiquitous, partial &lt;br/&gt;self-reversals
may play an important role in controlling changes in &lt;br/&gt;marine magnetic
anomaly amplitudes with age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;the investigators propose to
investigate the extent and mechanism of &lt;br/&gt;self-reversal carried by
titanomaghemite in oceanic basalt recovered &lt;br/&gt;by the Deep Sea Drilling
Project and the Ocean Drilling Program. &lt;br/&gt;Through a&lt;br/&gt;study of
sites having ages ranging from recent to 170 Ma, they hope &lt;br/&gt;to
constrain the time scales of acquisition of self-reversed
&lt;br/&gt;magnetizations. Techniques to be applied will include paleomagnetism,
&lt;br/&gt;rock magnetism, x-ray diffraction, microprobe, scanning electron
&lt;br/&gt;microscopy and transmitted electron microscopy. The work proposed
&lt;br/&gt;will support a Ph.D. thesis and the studies of several undergraduate
&lt;br/&gt;students at theUniversity of Rochester.&lt;br/&gt;-- &lt;br/&gt;