* 0230812
* Multi-Device Rendezvous Architecture (MuDRA):    An Architecture for Mobile and Heterogeneous Multi-Device Information Access
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2006
* Aura Ganz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 11/30/2006
* USD 318,500.00

A casual observer of the current trend in computing devices today will see an
increasing tendency towards more mobile and compact computing devices, even in
not so obvious places such as the family car. Unlike in the past, these devices
tend to perform specialized tasks and are limited in functionality, but posses a
great deal of potential if used together as a single unit. The starting premise
of this proposal is that future communication environments will be characterized
by multi-device, deeply networked physical spaces, and that users want access
anywhere, anytime.

The objective of this proposal is to develop a platform where different
technologies may be integrated and bridged across to add value to services
provided to users. The goal is to develop a network-based middleware MuDRA
(Multi Device Rendezvous Architecture) which will empower the network
infrastructure to enable multi-device, multi-modal communication for mobile
users. The approach is to adopt a multi-device user scenario, where multiple
devices may be used simultaneously for content delivery and communication. The
solution will work with open standards, making the work interoperable with other
third party services and approaches as they are developed. The proposal is an
evolutionary development of existing technologies.

The results of the work will have a broad impact on a number of fields including
Ubiquitous Computing, Wearable Computers, Computer Aided Collaborative Work, and
so forth. The results of the work will also be available for use in other
application scenarios such as distance education and delivery of content to
people with disabilities.