* 0230086
* Collaborative Research:     Permian-Triassic Mass Extinction in Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Gregory Retallack, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 04/30/2005
* USD 144,129.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports an interdisciplinary study of fluvial
sediments in Antarctica for evidence of what caused the greatest of all mass
extinctions in the history of life at the Permian-Triassic boundary. This
boundary was, until recently, difficult to locate and thought to be
unequivocally disconformable in Antarctica. New studies, particularly of carbon
isotopic chemostratigraphy and of paleosols and root traces as paleoecosystem
indicators, together with improved fossil plant, reptile and pollen
biostratigraphy, now suggest that the precise location of the boundary might be
identified and have led to local discovery of iridium anomalies, shocked quartz,
and fullerenes with extraterrestrial noble gases. These anomalies are associated
with a distinctive claystone breccia bed, similar to strata known in South
Africa and Australia, and taken as evidence of deforestation. There is already
much evidence from Antarctica and elsewhere that the mass extinction on land was
abrupt and synchronous with extinction in the ocean. The problem now is what led
to such death and destruction. Carbon isotopic values are so low in these and
other Permian-Triassic boundary sections that there was likely to have been some
role for catastrophic destabilization of methane clathrates. Getting the modeled
amount of methane out of likely reservoirs would require such catastrophic
events as bolide impact, flood-basalt eruption or continental-shelf collapse,
which have all independently been implicated in the mass extinction and for
which there is independent evidence. Teasing apart these various hypotheses
requires careful re-examination of beds that appear to represent the Permian-
Triassic boundary, and search for more informative sequences, as was the case
for the Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary. This collaborative research on
geochemistry and petrography of boundary beds and paleosols (by Retallack), on
carbon isotopic variation through the boundary interval (by Jahren), and on
fullerenes, iridium and helium (by Becker) is designed to test these ideas about
the Permian-Triassic boundary in Antarctica and to shed light on processes which
contributed to this largest of mass extinctions on Earth. Fieldwork for this
research will be conducted in the central Transantarctic Mountains and in
Southern Victoria Land with an initial objective of examining the stratigraphic
sequences for continuity across the boundary. Stratigraphic continuity is a
critical element that must exist for the work to be successful. If fieldwork
indicates sufficiently continuous sections, the full analytical program will
follow fieldwork.

