* 0230628
* A Multidisciplinary Integrated Capstone Design Curriculum for Electrical and Computer Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2004
* Neil Goldsman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 11/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230628&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Goldsman,
Neil&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: University of Maryland College
Park&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: A Multidisciplinary Integrated Capstone Design Curriculum
for Electrical and Computer
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) at the University&lt;br/&gt;of
Maryland at College Park (UMCP) is in the process of planning a major
curriculum&lt;br/&gt;revision for its undergraduate program. This planning grant
will address the Capstone design&lt;br/&gt;program, which will be greatly
revised to provide a multidisciplinary design experience&lt;br/&gt;for senior
students and to integrate juniors and sophomores into the Capstone
experience.&lt;br/&gt;The team will assess the outcomes of the Capstone
experience to generate data to guide the revision of our curriculum in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major objective of the Capstone design courses
is for the students to work on a&lt;br/&gt;design project at a professional
level. The project makes use of most of the knowledge&lt;br/&gt;that students
have acquired in the previous two to three years of the ECE
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, the outcome of the Capstone design experience
should be an excellent&lt;br/&gt;indicator of the how well the education process
in the ECE Department is preparing&lt;br/&gt;students for their professional
career. A year-to-year assessment of the outcomes of the&lt;br/&gt;Capstone
design courses will enable us to make continuous improvements in
the&lt;br/&gt;sophomore, junior, and also the senior year curricula. This being
the case, the revision of&lt;br/&gt;the Capstone program will serve as the
engine to drive curriculum revision for the entire&lt;br/&gt;ECE
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;