* 0230927
* STI/ MAST: A Mobile Agent-based Security Tool for Administration and Training
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Niranjan Suri, University of West Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2005
* USD 515,388.00

The growth and globalization of the Internet have made computer and network
security a paramount challenge. In 1988, the Internet Worm caused much havoc and
effectively shutdown the Internet. However, the systems that were affected were
mostly at universities and other research centers. Today, circumstances are very
different from 1988. Many businesses rely on networks of systems connected to
the Internet. Network attacks result in downtime that cost companies significant
time and money due to lost productivity and/or loss of data. Moreover, critical
infrastructural systems are being connected to the Internet thereby raising the
potential for disruption through network-based attacks. Unfortunately, this same
characteristic attracts attackers who wish to make highly-visible statements.
This project, will build a security tool that serves two purposes: (a) Help
system administrators find vulnerabilities and possible attacks on systems and
networks and (b) Teach students and novice administrators about security
concerns. Administrators will be able to use the tool to check for known
vulnerabilities on their systems, to check whether the latest security updates
and patches have been installed, and to monitor their systems for different
forms of attacks or break-ins. The tool can be used in a classroom, laboratory,
or in the field to help students and novice administrators learn about the
security domain, the latest known vulnerabilities, and how to fix them. The
security tool will integrate and build upon two key technologies: mobile
software agents and concept maps. The NOMADS mobile agent system will provide
the agent framework and security kernels while the CMapTools software will be
used as the application to build and maintain the knowledge base. The proposed
security tool will integrate these technologies in an administrator console that
will provide extreme flexibility, monitoring and control of the system through
remote execution of mobile code. The security tool will consist of four
components, the An administrator's console, the security kernel, the knowledge
model and a set of security agents that will be provided and distributed with
the tool. The Concept Map based knowledge model and the flexibility imbued by
the use of mobile agents ensures that the proposed tool will be equally useful
and effective in production, teaching and training environments. The MAST
security tool, proposed in this work will be freely distributed for academic and
non-profit use.