* 0230787
* STI:  Multi-Hop Free Space Optics Last-Mile Networks Using Very Low-Cost Components
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Shivkumar Kalyanaraman, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2006
* USD 515,000.00

The tremendous explosion of bandwidth in the core of the Internet has stopped
short of end-users due to the well-known "last-mile" problem where it has
traditionally been infeasible to get a high bandwidth conduit to the home and
businesses. "Fiberless" or Free Space Optical (FSO) networks can effectively
complement unlicensed-spectrum RF-based WLAN technologies like 802.1 lb/a, and
WMAN technologies like 802.16 for the "last mile" problem. Free space optics
offers tremendous bandwidth and potential for dense spatial reuse of the optical
spectrum. Although optical networking has become popular in the wired networking
world, free space optics (FSO) is still a niche technology used to provide only
selected point-to-point links, and not as a general-purpose metropolitan area
networking technology. Moreover, several fundamental aspects of free space
terrestrial optical communication are yet to be explored. The proposal is to
investigate fundamental limits of very low-cost components, and create
communication systems that tap into the high bandwidth potential of FSO, while
addressing its key limitations (eg: Line-of-Sight (LOS) availability, LOS
discovery, LOS alignment).

An investigation of very low-cost communication systems and multi-hop optical
networks using high-brightness visible spectrum LEDs (HBLEDs) that have more
attractive propagation & spatial reuse characteristics compared to ordinary
brightness infrared LEDs will occur. Moreover the potential size, weight, power
and form-factor aspects of LED-based systems would make it ideal for use in ad-
hoc infrastructures (eg: balloons, treetops, lampposts. poles on chimneys,
moving vehicles etc), and novel applications like high-bandwidth mobile ad-hoc
networks and future sensor networks may be found.

Using trans-receiver pairs that achieve 100 Mbps with 1-10 mW power, the
proposal is to use dense integration of thousands of trans-receivers into
2-dimensional and 3-dimensional spatial structures (eg: 2-d array, 3-d
spherical/honeycomb structure). The 2-d array would provide extremely high
aggregate bandwidth (100 Gbps and more) over 1-2 km. The proposed 3-d spherical
structures (a.k.a. optical antenna) combined with LOS auto-discovery and LOS
auto-tracking techniques to instantly discover and track LOS if it exists. This
structure will allow uninterrupte4,jiltra-high-speed operation even in high
velocity sway (eg: 120 mph, range over 100s of meters) or even mobile
conditions.

The project will build low-cost FSO interconnection systems, complemented with
relatively cheap and programmable electronic components after l0s-l00s of opto-
electronic (OEO) hops. It is also proposed to investigate spatial coding and
redundancy techniques at the electronic hops taking advantage of the particular
spatial structures (eg: 2d array, spherical etc). An examination of fundamental
network capacity limits for FSO-based fixed and ad-hoc configurations, and
fundamental power-per-bit achievable in future sensor networks will be done.
Evaluating the impact of such multi-hop FSO networks on the performance of
TCP/IP, VoIP and multimedia applications. Leveraging a partnership with renowned
Internet entrepreneur, field trials of a mix of our prototype low-cost FSO-based
systems, off-the-shelf 802.1 lx systems, IP routing and 802. ld bridging
protocols will occur.

The proposed inter-disciplinary research will make significant contributions to
LED-based communications, low-cost free space optical networks, and models for
deploying last-mile networks in unlicensed spectra.

NSF recognizes the need to solve the lost mile problem and funds this project
with the hope of a solution immediately emerging from this project, or new
directions to a solution being established.