* 0230476
* Enhancing Engineering Education Using Information Technology Tools:  An Integrated Approach to building a design oriented chemical engineering curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2002,07/31/2004
* John Llewellyn, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2004
* USD 99,017.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230476&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Joseph,
Babu&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: University of South Florida&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Enhancing Engineering Education Using Information Technology Tools: An
Integrated Approach to building a design oriented chemical engineering
curriculum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plan for this engineering
curricula revision is to use IT to enhance the way&lt;br/&gt;we package and
deliver engineering concepts in a practical and relevant way. This proposal
addresses some of the major challenges faced by the academic engineering
community in adapting to the shifting paradigms in presentation and assimilation
of concepts and themes that are relevant to engineering practice today. The
technology, hardware and software that help us make the necessary transition are
now available. However, the major challenge lies in the development of the
appropriate pedagogical structure and paradigms that motivate the student to
think, to explore and to learn through interactive experiences. This is the
central motivation behind the proposed work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
we want to utilize IT to alter the organization, integration and delivery of
core&lt;br/&gt;courses in chemical engineering such as thermodynamics, mass and
energy balances, fluid dynamics, heat transfer and process control. We want to
improve retention while increasing the understanding and the capability of
engineering students to tackle complex problems. Simultaneously, we propose
curriculum revisions that will introduce engineering software early and often in
the curriculum so that the students are at once comfortable with and able to
utilize this evolving technology to the maximum extent in their education. The
specific objectives are to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the focus is on
development of chemical engineering curriculum, at the University of South
Florida of the concepts can also be extended to other engineering disciplines
with similar benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;