* 0230208
* Geochemical and Textural Constraints on Eruptive Behavior of Merapi Volcano, Indonesia
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Tanya Furman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2007
* USD 170,512.00

Furman&lt;br/&gt;EAR- 0230208&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Merapi Volcano in Central
Java, Indonesia, is one of Earth's most active and dangerous volcanoes. This
stratovolcano has been active for over 40,000 years, with nearly continuous
eruptive activity over the past century. Merapi is particularly feared because
of the potentially explosive nature of its activity, and because several hundred
thousand people live in high-risk areas on the volcano flank. This project uses
a combination of tephrostratigraphic, geochemical and CSD techniques to address
the rheological (e.g., thermal state, magma composition, glass chemistry,
crystal nucleation and growth rate) controls on the full spectrum of Merapi's
eruptive behavior. The results of this project will provide fundamental
information on magma reservoir and conduit conditions and processes, as well as
insights on the potential for future larger-scale explosive
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the research derives
from the application of detailed textural analysis of lavas and tephras to the
identification of intensive parameters associated with eruptive activity. That
is, one can relate crystal size distribution patterns of individual eruptive
units to the detailed chemical, barometric and thermal history of Merapi
volcano. Analysis of melt inclusions in olivine crystals also provides insight
into late-stage magmatic processes, including helping to distinguish crystal
growth related to decompression from that resulting from magma mixing or
hybridization. When used in conjunction with our textural analyses, this
technique provides a powerful method for evaluating magma ascent rates and
residence times. This information is critical to the study of explosive volcanic
systems because the eruptive intensity is linked directly to both the residence
time of magma within the chamber and the degree of solidification that occurs
within the reservoir and conduit. In volcanic systems that tend to be highly
crystalline (e.g., Merapi lavas contain up to 50% crystals upon eruption), magma
that is nearly solidified may fill the eruptive vent to substantial depths,
effectively plugging the vent system and leading to infrequent but very
dangerous eruptions. Using chemical and textural data, it becomes possible to
gauge the conditions leading to violent eruptions. By recognizing precursor
signals to major eruptions, the ability to anticipate catastrophic situations
can be improved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader implications of this project
include both human resource development and potential assistance for volcanic
hazard mitigation. This project will fund the doctoral research of one female
graduate student at Penn State and the postdoctoral research of a female
Indonesian volcanologist from the Volcanological Survey of Indonesia. The work
will strengthen an extant relationship between Penn State and the Volcanological
Survey of Indonesia that has focused on monitoring active volcanoes with the
goal of improving disaster preparedness. In recent decades Merapi has had fairly
small eruptive events with a frequency of two to five years. The geologic
record, however, indicates that this recent activity encompasses only a small
portion of the full range of explosivity that has occurred in the past. At least
seven eruptions between 3000-250 years ago were larger and farther-reaching
explosive events than any recorded in the 20th century. Unfortunately, current
hazard assessment and contingency planning is based primarily upon small
eruptive events, while the earlier record of major explosive eruptions suggests
that effective planning needs to consider the full range of Merapi's eruptive
behavior. It is anticipated that this study will enable researchers to identify
precursor events to major eruptions that will prove useful in modern hazard
mitigation efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;