* 0230700
* An Active Learning Environment for Information Technology Across the Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Mary Huba, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230700&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Olafsson,
Sigurdur&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Iowa State University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: An
Active Learning Environment for Information Technology Across the
Curriculum&lt;br/&gt;NSF RECEIVED DATE:
06/04/2002&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Iowa State
Department of Industrial Engineering will reformulate its curriculum using
information technology as the integrating common experience. This project will
perform a proof of concept study in designing and prototyping a learning
environment where students (a) learn to effectively use information technology
solve real world engineering problems, (b) develop their cognitive ability to
structure schemas in industrial engineering knowledge domains, (c) develop their
metacognitive ability to apply discipline-specific knowledge to solve
engineering problems and monitor their problem solving strategies, and (d) fully
appreciate the connection between isolated relevant course content. The key
concept of this proposal is therefore a learning environment based on new and
emerging information technology tools and concepts that will integrate isolated
course content. In addition, this learning environment will reflect current
thinking in learning theory. The environment will thus be learner-centered,
knowledge-centered, and assessment-centered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
approach to achieving the objectives is through a set of active learning modules
in &lt;br/&gt;which students use domain knowledge, data, methods, and software
tools to achieve a pre-defined &lt;br/&gt;goal for a set of simulated industrial
engineering scenarios. These scenarios will not only draw on &lt;br/&gt;the
knowledge base from each course but also explicitly make connections with
material from other courses. For each scenario, students must independently
define goals, formulate problems, and develop solution strategies while
mastering the course material. This environment is thus a fundamental shift from
an emphasis on the traditional lecture format to active learning. The modules
are also an ideal tool to encourage cooperation with other students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;