* 0230648
* Strategic Changes in Chemical Engineering Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Milorad Dudukovic, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 99,771.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230648 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Dudukovic, Milorad INSTITUTION
NAME: Washington University TITLE: Strategic Changes in Chemical Engineering
Curriculum

Abstract

This project will plan major strategic restructuring in the chemical engineering
(ChE) curriculum at Washington University (WU) in St. Louis. The strategic plan
will address key issues such as: how to utilize to maximum potential the unique
strengths of Washington University (WU) in bio-sciences, how to reach the
clientele outside the St. Louis region in an interactive fashion via information
technology, and how to reach out to minorities. The focus of the plan will be;
i)on ways in which advances in biosciences can be incorporated into the
engineering curriculum, ii) on methods by which ChE fundamentals can be applied
to lead to product design that requires multiscale engineering, iii) on the use
of information technology (IT) in creating and disseminating instruction modules
that will contribute to multidisciplinary learning, promote collaborative design
and vertical integration of curriculum and allow user customization, and iv) on
involvement of minorities in the process and increased role of research. The
plan will aim to establish a set of realistic goals, taking advantage of special
opportunities at Washington University, for a modern curriculum based on
biosciences and information technology leading to possible specialization tracts
in product synthesis and design, environmentally benign processing, real time
control and optimization. This planning will involve the entire faculty in the
ChE department, affiliate faculty in the Biomedical Department, as well as
faculty in Computer Science, Systems Science and Mathematics, Biology and in the
School of Medicine, and distinguished outside consultants. The departmental
advisory board, consisting of individuals with distinguished industrial and
academic careers will actively participate in the formulation and evaluation of
this strategic plan. Recent and past graduates, students and distinguished
chemical engineering educators will be invited to workshops to evaluate and
constructively criticize the strategic plan in its various phases of
development.

