* 0230513
* Collaborative Research: Iron and Light Effects on Phaeocystis antarctica Isolates from the Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Giacomo DiTullio, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 06/30/2007
* USD 229,941.00

The colonial prymnesiophyte Phaeocystis antarctica is a major bloom-forming alga
in Antarctic shelf waters; where, alongside diatoms, it is considered a keystone
species in its impact on regional biogeochemical cycling and ecosystem
structure. Iron levels in these waters fall to values as low as ~0.1 nM during
the mid to late summer, concentrations that are likely to limit the growth of
phytoplankton, including P. antarctica. However, in contrast to diatoms, very
little work has been conducted to examined the effects of iron, or the combined
effects of iron and irradiance, on the growth, physiology and biochemical
composition of P. antarctica. In this project, P. antarctica will be collected
from the southern Ross Sea and grown in semi-continuous batch cultures for use
in experiments at the University of Charleston to investigate the effects of
iron availability and irradiance on the growth rate, cellular iron quota,
buoyancy, biogenic sulfur production, pigment content, redox-protein expression,
and photosynthetic efficiency of P. antarctica. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Phaeocystis antarctica is known to have a significant impact on the regional
biogeochemical cycles of carbon, nutrient elements and sulfur in the Ross Sea,
over timescales ranging from seasonal to interannual. This species may have also
played a central role in the inferred basin- scale changes in biogeochemical
cycles linked to glacial-interglacial climatic change. Thus it is important to
develop a mechanistic understanding of the factors that control the growth,
physiology and biochemical composition of P. antarctica, in order to better
understand the biogeochemical ecology of the Ross Sea and the wider Southern
Ocean, and the possible linkages with regional and global climate. Together with
the results of recent and ongoing field and modeling studies, the information
provided by these laboratory experiments will substantially improve our ability
to predict how the Antarctic region will be affected by and modulate future
climate change.