* 0230216
* NSF/USDOT ICSST:   Exploring New Traffic Characteristics and Performance Measures Using Feature Extraction and Texture Characterization of Spatiotemporal Traffic Contour Maps
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Sherif Ishak, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2006
* USD 111,299.00

Information and communication technologies continue to improve transportation
data acquisition and performance monitoring capabilities for surface
transportation systems. Currently, little information has been extracted from
the massive amounts of data being collected in real time by traffic management
centers (TMC) nationwide. Despite tremendous advances in transportation data
collection technologies, no parallel efforts have been made to improve the
existing performance measures by maximizing the utility of information
extraction methods from both archived and real-time transportation data. Current
measures in the form of point estimates of average travel time and delay are
essentially properties derived from first-order statistics and do not adequately
reveal certain local and system-wide properties such as smoothness, coarseness,
regularity, homogeneity, entropy, and others. Such properties can only be
unraveled by advanced procedures and second-order statistics that are capable of
characterizing the quality of traffic operations by exploiting spatiotemporal
dependencies and textural features of constructed spatiotemporal traffic contour
maps, a concept that is similar to texture characterization of digital images.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives to be achieved in this research
are: (1) develop a new class of performance measures by quantifying special
features of spatiotemporal contour maps; (2) study the behavior of traffic
during transient stages using the new performance measures; (3) establish a
procedure for on-line and off-line performance assessment for extended freeway
segments; (4) investigate the correlation between the new measures and accident
frequency and severity; (5) compare textural characteristics of recurrent and
non-recurrent conditions; and (6) develop an implementation module of the new
measures to be executed in real time by TMCs. The project examines
spatiotemporal freeway traffic contour maps to improve the existing freeway
performance measures and to identify precursor conditions for freeway congestion
and crashes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students will be strongly
encouraged to collaborate with graduate students in the various project research
activities, which will introduce them to innovative basic/applied research
techniques and strengthen their computational and programming skills. Graduate
students will have a leading role in the project and will find opportunities to
work on contemporary research topics for their theses and dissertations. The
activities and findings of this project will lead to collaborative research
opportunities with other disciplines at the intersection areas of
transportation, information technology, and computer science/engineering. It is
also envisioned that this research study will potentially spark other ITS
research activities that would extend benefits to both transportation system
users and providers nationwide and within the state of
Louisiana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;