* 0230038
* Enhancing STEM Majors
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Robert Balmer, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 12/31/2005
* USD 99,840.00

This program is an effort to enhance an already strong foundation of education
and support for disadvantaged students by adding 1) supplemental learning (SL),
2) communication skills development, 3) career exploration, 4) internship/shadow
opportunities, 5) alumni mentoring, 6) earlier summer research experiences, and
7) a five-year curriculum for engineering that will enable underprepared
students to strengthen basic skills in mathematics, physics, and communication
in their first year. The SL component is a section attached to "high risk"
courses, the purpose of which is not remediation but the development of learning
and problem-solving skills. Successfully tried in engineering courses at Union,
it will be integrated into introductory courses in Biology, Mathematics,
Chemistry, and Physics. Training of faculty in SL methods is being supported by
the grant.

The program targets retention of students who aspire to STEM majors. It will be
piloted using a small group of students with high attrition rates in STEM
disciplines. The project is motivated in part by the observation that while
similar proportions of students in advantaged and disadvantaged groups express
interest in STEM majors or STEM-related careers when they enter college, a
notable disparity between the groups in the numbers who actually complete a STEM
major is evident. Although the immediate focus of the program is disadvantaged
students, the expectation is that all students will benefit from those elements
that prove to be effective. The ultimate goal is to expand successful components
to include any student who wishes to participate in the program.

