* 0230332
* Ice at the Equator:  The Record and Implications of Alpine Glaciation Within the Ancestral Rocky Mountains of Western Pangea
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Gerilyn Soreghan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2007
* USD 226,482.00

Ice at the Equator: The Record and Implications of Alpine Glaciation within the
Ancestral Rocky Mountains of Western Pangea&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gerilyn
Soreghan and Michael Soreghan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0230332, University of
Oklahoma&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The best-documented
pre-Quaternary "icehouse" occurred during the Pangean supercontinent interval
(300 My ago), when continental glaciers are known to have covered much of the
southern polar region of Earth (Gondwanaland). Owing to key similarities with
our modern icehouse, the Pangean interval has intrigued geoscientists interested
in improving our understanding of Earth's climate system. Critical to improving
both climatic and tectonic models, however, are key geologic constraints-in
particular, on the possible existence and extent of mountains and mountain
glaciers in low-latitude Pangea. To date, evidence for (late Paleozoic) glaciers
beyond the limits of the southern polar region has never been reported, and
tropical mountain elevations for this interval remain unknown. Documentation of
low-latitude ice would contribute to our understanding of both equatorial
climate conditions and mountain elevations for this time interval, thus
impacting both climatic and tectonic issues.&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
investigation of the hypothesis that the Ancestral Rocky Mountains of equatorial
western Pangea (300 My ago) were glaciated. Preliminary evidence for this
hypothesis occurs in the form of preserved sediments and landforms in the
western U.S. (Colorado) that appear to have been shaped by (late Paleozoic)
glacial processes. Research on the depositional attributes, composition, and
distribution of the Permo-Pennsylvanian (ca. 310-280 My old) Cutler Formation
and related rocks will be conducted to test the hypothesis that these sediments
record a glacial influence. The research will also entail analysis of landforms
and Quaternary sediments to assess the origin (fluvial or glacial) and age of
buried topography preserved within highlands of the Ancestral Rocky Mountains.
Confirmation of alpine glaciation within equatorial Pangea would imply more
extensive icehouse conditions and significantly higher elevations than
previously envisaged for this time and region, and would provide needed boundary
conditions for constraining climatic and tectonic models. Accordingly, this
research should provide benefits to geoscientists interested in earth history in
general, as well as general society interested in and impacted by future climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;