* 0230550
* International Cooperative Research Program on High-Pressure, Laser-Induced Fluorescence Studies of Nitric Oxide and Molecular Fuel Tracers
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Ronald Hanson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2004
* USD 9,200.00

0230550&lt;br/&gt;Hanson&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the PI and graduate
students from Stanford University in a collaboration with Juergen Wolfrum of the
Institute for Physics and Chemistry at the University of Heidelberg, Germany.
The combined efforts of the German and US groups will focus on two problems
susceptible to their complementary expertise. One is the development of
quantitative laser-induced fluorescence measurements of nitric oxide at high
pressures where pressure broadening produces interference from molecular oxygen.
The other is to extend to high pressure the characterization of molecular fuel
tracers for imaging of the fuel/air mixing. The German and US groups have chosen
molecular tracers with different chemical structure, and the collaborative
research will facilitate direct comparison of the two different methods. During
the first year and a half of this project, significant work was completed on
both problems. The third year will build on this excellent track record and
bring the work on nitric oxide and the fuel tracers towards
closure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also has an educational objective. The
project will allow the graduate students involved to benefit from performing
research in another country. They will develop a heightened appreciation of the
world around them while also learning important new technical skills.&lt;br/&gt;