* 0230395
* In Answer to A National Challenge: A Pilot Program to Increase Participation in Science, Technology, and Mathematics (STEM) Fields
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Edward Gellenbeck, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2006
* USD 249,987.00

Over the last several years, the critical need to bolster participation in
science at all levels in &lt;br/&gt;the United States has become an issue of
national concern. As the number of people trained in &lt;br/&gt;highly technical
fields in the sciences, mathematics and engineering grows, there is evidence
&lt;br/&gt;to suggest that students who have aptitude and interest in the
sciences and mathematics often &lt;br/&gt;become disillusioned with their
college-level studies and opt for majors in non-science &lt;br/&gt;disciplines.
These students abandon potentially promising careers in science, technology,
&lt;br/&gt;engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields because of inadequate
preparation during their &lt;br/&gt;high school years, feelings that they can
not compete, inadequate and/or poor advising by &lt;br/&gt;college faculty, and
disinterest in university-level general education classes in STEM fields. A
&lt;br/&gt;most harmful part of this trend is that many students make decisions
to leave STEM majors &lt;br/&gt;during their first year of college when they
have not yet had the opportunity to develop strong &lt;br/&gt;ties with STEM
departments. This loss of talent is detrimental not only to the intellectual
&lt;br/&gt;capital that is a source of national pride but also to the nation's
ability to maintain the high &lt;br/&gt;standard of living that is one by-
product of a technologically-advanced economy. The solution &lt;br/&gt;to this
problem lies, in part, in the ability of colleges and universities to
restructure science &lt;br/&gt;and mathematics courses and majors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this problem in which promising students switch
to non-scientific majors early &lt;br/&gt;in their college education, funding is
requested for a three-year initiative that has as its &lt;br/&gt;overarching
goal to recruit and retain promising students in STEM majors. Our approach
&lt;br/&gt;is to develop a pilot project that consists of three parts: (1) a
Summer Science Institute &lt;br/&gt;for high school students; (2) a Freshman
Year Science Seminar Series, and (3) a Sophomore &lt;br/&gt;Year Independent
Research Experience. At the heart of each of these programs are common
&lt;br/&gt;themes, including introducing students to the joys of scientific
discovery and the nature of &lt;br/&gt;team-based interdisciplinary research,
informing students about exciting career choices in &lt;br/&gt;STEM fields,
exposing them to the rich history of scientific thought and discovery, and
&lt;br/&gt;providing them with the tools and support structure they need to
complete a baccalaureate &lt;br/&gt;degree in one or more STEM disciplines. We
integrate practices that have been shown to be &lt;br/&gt;effective in improving
participation, including close mentoring, extracurricular activities,
&lt;br/&gt;development of a cohort, inclusion of parents, and professional
development for faculty. &lt;br/&gt;According to recent studies, the problem of
first-year flight disproportionately impacts &lt;br/&gt;women, minorities, low-
income, and/or first-generation students. For this reason, our
&lt;br/&gt;recruiting efforts are concentrate on these target
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pilot program has been carefully overseen and
assessed by an Advisory Board chaired by &lt;br/&gt;the chief academic officer
of Central Washington University, Provost/Senior Vice President &lt;br/&gt;David
Soltz. Assessment is coordinated by Associate Professor of Science Education
&lt;br/&gt;and Chemistry Martha Kurtz and Vice Provost and Professor of
Curriculum and Supervision &lt;br/&gt;Linda Beath. Twice per year, goals,
assessment strategies and benchmarks are reviewed &lt;br/&gt;in order to improve
the program. Should our approach be successful, full scale implementation
&lt;br/&gt;at CWU would rely on funding from private sources and redirection of
internal resources. &lt;br/&gt;Because our proposed program relies on themes and
resources that are fundamental to most &lt;br/&gt;colleges and universities, we
anticipate that other STEM groups could adopt our program, &lt;br/&gt;thereby
increasing its impact from a local to a national scope. Central Washington
University &lt;br/&gt;is well poised to support a program that stresses outreach
to minority populations, careful &lt;br/&gt;mentoring, and inquiry-based,
interdisciplinary academic programs. CWU emphasizes small &lt;br/&gt;class size,
close professional relationships between faculty and students, and a culture
that &lt;br/&gt;rewards innovative, inquiry-based teaching and learning. The
University has a strong, &lt;br/&gt;well-supported program in undergraduate
research and creative expression, and strengths in &lt;br/&gt;education promote
effective use of assessment strategies. This project reflects a
&lt;br/&gt;collaborative effort among 11 faculty in six College of the Sciences
departments. Co-PIs &lt;br/&gt;include Wendy Bohrson (Geological Sciences),
Michael Braunstein (Physics), Eric Bullock &lt;br/&gt;(Chemistry), Carey Gazis
(Geological Sciences), Lisa Ely (Geological Sciences), Ed &lt;br/&gt;Gellenbeck
(Computer Sciences), Stephen Glasby(Mathematics), Martha Kurtz (Science
&lt;br/&gt;Education and Chemistry), Steven Lundblad (Geological Sciences), Andy
Piacsek (Physics), &lt;br/&gt;and Holly Pinkart (Biological
Sciences).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;