* 0230158
* Partners to Attract and Sustain Adult Learners (PASAL)
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Bonnie Simon, Naugatuck Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/2005
* USD 99,938.00

Through Partners to Attract and Sustain Adult Learners (PASAL), this project is
increasing enrollment at the college in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) degree programs by 3% annually; and increasing the total STEM
graduates or transfers 2% annually. Using multiple strategies necessary for the
very heterogeneous community college population (which includes many who are
underrepresented in STEM careers), PASAL is helping the 1100 current STEM degree
students succeed as well as attracting new students; by motivating and
reinforcing them through direct, visual, and multiple connections with STEM
industry work sites, work experiences, and one-on-one support. In addition to
external populations, PASAL focuses activities to attract students on the large
pools of students in General Studies and Continuing Education programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PASAL planning and pilot project objectives and
methods are:&lt;br/&gt;1. Accelerating an ongoing college effort to expand the
number and support level of Industry Partners (IP's). The ideal IP relationship
is evolving to include involvement in attraction activities; and/or provision of
jobs, scholarships, program financing, tutoring and mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Facilitating prospective and current STEM student exposure to STEM careers, by
embedding in college recruitment, orientation, advising, and instruction a
variety of Web-based links to STEM employers and Web-based virtual tours which
enable visualization of real work sites and tasks.&lt;br/&gt;3. Combining
Industry Partner involvement and Web-based material in a concerted effort to
attract the college's large population of General Studies majors and Continuing
Education students to STEM degree programs.&lt;br/&gt;4. Sustaining STEM student
interest and effort through abstract mathematics study that is particularly
challenging to community college students with relatively less rigorous
preparation, by emphasizing the application of mathematics principles to STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;5. Sustaining STEM pursuit among the many community college
students whose financial, family, and job responsibilities cause even the best
students to be at-risk for attrition; through an Early Alert service which
proactively identifies, supports and refers students showing early signs of
difficulties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PASAL's intellectual merit is that it helps
answer the question of how to increase the supply and success rate of future
STEM personnel, including underrepresented groups, who are coming through the
large nationwide community college pipeline. PASAL findings are expected to shed
light on the extent to which visualization and exposure to STEM careers
positively influences students to engage and persist in STEM degree programs,
and whether early intervention is an important and effective tool to prevent
attrition among community college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PASAL's broader
impact is that the model is specifically designed to be readily replicated by
any community college. Nearly half of U.S. undergraduate student enrollments are
in community colleges, and two-year colleges account for over one-third of all
undergraduate student enrollments in STEM degree programs. PASAL findings help
identify cost-effective strategies that under-resourced colleges can use to
attract and sustain students who tend to have multiple barriers, and effective
ways to convert the substantial pool of Continuing Education and General Studies
students to STEM degree programs.