* 0230443
* Collaborative Research:  Plankton Community Structure and Iron Distribution in the Southern Drake Passage
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Sarah Gille, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 06/30/2006
* USD 736,481.00

The Shackleton Fracture Zone (SFZ) in the Drake Passage defines a boundary
between low and high phytoplankton waters. West of Drake Passage, Southern Ocean
waters south of the Polar Front and north of the Antarctic continent shelf have
very low satellite-derived surface chlorophyll concentrations. Chlorophyll and
mesoscale eddy kinetic energy are higher east of SFZ compared to values west of
the ridge. In situ data from a 10-year survey of the region as part of the
National Marine Fisheries Service's Antarctic Marine Living Resources program
confirm the existence of a strong hydrographic and chlorophyll gradient in the
region. An interdisciplinary team of scientists hypothesizes that bathymetry,
including the 2000 m deep SFZ, influences mesoscale circulation and transport of
iron leading to the observed phytoplankton patterns. To address
this&lt;br/&gt;hypothesis, the team proposes to examine phytoplankton and
bacterial physiological states (including responses to iron enrichment) and
structure of the plankton communities from virus to zooplankton, the
concentration and distribution of Fe, Mn, and Al, and mesoscale flow patterns
near the SFZ. Relationships between iron concentrations and phytoplankton
characteristics will be examined in the context of the mesoscale transport of
trace nutrients to determine how much of the observed variability in
phytoplankton biomass can be attributed to iron supply, and to determine the
most important sources of iron to pelagic waters east of the Drake Passage. The
goal is to better understand how plankton productivity and community structure
in the Southern Ocean are affected by the coupling between bathymetry, mesoscale
circulation, and limiting nutrient distributions.&lt;br/&gt;The research program
includes rapid surface surveys of chemical, plankton, and hydrographic
properties complemented by a mesoscale station grid for vertical profiles, water
sampling, and bottle incubation enrichment experiments. Distributions of
manganese and aluminum will be determined to help distinguish aeolian,
continental shelf and upwelling sources of iron. The physiological state of the
phytoplankton will be monitored by active fluorescence methods sensitive to the
effects of iron limitation. Mass concentrations of pigment, carbon and nitrogen
will be obtained by analysis of filtered samples, cell size distributions by
flow cytometry, and species identification by microscopy. Primary production and
photosynthesis parameters (absorption, quantum yields, variable fluorescence)
will be measured on depth profiles, during surface surveys and on bulk samples
from enrichment experiments. Viruses and bacteria will be examined for
abundances, and bacterial production will be assessed in terms of whether it is
limited by either iron or organic carbon sources. The proposed work will improve
our understanding of processes controlling distributions of iron and the
response of plankton communities in the Southern Ocean. This proposal also
includes an outreach component comprised of Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU), Teachers Experiencing the Antarctic and Arctic (TEA), and
the creation of an educational website and K-12 curricular modules based on the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;