* 0230191
* Design and Integration of a Cylindrical Ion Trap Array for a Micro-Total-Chemical-Analysis System
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Jane Chang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/2003
* USD 99,905.00

Research:

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research is being funded under NSF 02-2: "Next
Generation Chemical and Biological Sensors and Sensing Systems." The objective
of the research is to design, model, fabricate, test, and integrate a miniature
mass analyzer to augment the existing chemical analysis capability of a total
micro-analytical system on a chip. A smaller, faster, cheaper, and more accurate
mass analyzer may also be useful in space applications, chemical warfare and
biological weapons detection, environmental monitoring, and medical diagnostics.
A feasibility analysis has been carried out to assess the functionality of a
cylindrical ion trap array with each trap at micrometer scales. The mass range
can be varied to detect low mass chemicals and large mass biological molecules
by changing the physical dimension of the ion trap and/or the operation
frequency. It has been shown that the resolution and sensitivity can be
maintained in these micro-mass analyzers, making a fieldable and portable device
possible. This miniaturized mass analyzer will be integrated with a miniature
gas-chromatograph column, a micro-thermal conductivity detector, a surface
acoustic wave detector, and an internal calibration unit, for chemical and
biological sensing.

Impact:

The research outcome will be integrated into a new undergraduate laboratory
course on Semiconductor Manufacturing and Micro-Fabrication to give chemical
engineers hands-on experience in fabricating and testing miniature chemical
sensing systems and the opportunity to work with engineering students from other
disciplines. Senior projects, summer internships, and research projects will be
offered to high school students, undergraduate and graduate students, especially
women, based on the planned research to help their long-term career development
in academia and industry.