* 0230858
* DIMACS Workshop on Computational Geometry and Computer-Aided Design and Manufacturing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 07/31/2004
* USD 19,200.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0230858&lt;br/&gt;Fred Roberts&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers U New
Brunswick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DIMACS, the Center for Discrete Mathematics and
Theoretical Computer Science, will&lt;br/&gt;run a workshop entitled
Computational Geometry and Computer-Aided Design and
Manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this workshop is to promote the
interaction between Computational&lt;br/&gt;Geometry and Computer-Aided Design
and Manufacturing by bringing together,&lt;br/&gt;in a single forum, researchers
from both of these .elds to assess the current state of work&lt;br/&gt;at the
interface of the two fields, to identify research needs, and to establish
directions for&lt;br/&gt;collaborative future work. Topics to be addressed
include geometric aspects (modeling and&lt;br/&gt;representation techniques,
data structures, algorithms and analysis, software
development,&lt;br/&gt;implementation and testing, etc.) of: manufacturing
processes, manufacturing and assembly&lt;br/&gt;planning, rapid prototyping
technologies, model acquisition/reconstruction, reverse
engineering,&lt;br/&gt;computational metrology and tolerancing, mechanism
design, constraint systems,&lt;br/&gt;simulation and visualization in design and
manufacturing, solid modeling related to manufacturing,&lt;br/&gt;computer
vision and robotics related to manufacturing, and manufacturing
in&lt;br/&gt;specific applications (e.g., biomedical, textile, automotive,
aerospace engineering etc.).