* 0230237
* Biogeochemistry of Victoria Land Coastal Ponds: Role in Terrestrial Ecosystem Organic Carbon Dynamics and Structure
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Maria Uhle, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 02/28/2007
* USD 295,542.00

Ecosystem structure, processes, and functional linkages in the Antarctic
terrestrial ecosystem have been the focus of the McMurdo Long-Term Ecological
Research (LTER) site in the McMurdo Dry Valleys since 1993. This ecosystem has a
modern component linking the organic carbon dynamics between the soils,
glaciers, streams and ice-covered lakes plus a legacy to ancient glacial events
that deposited paleo-organic carbon within the region. The soil reservoir
contains 72% of the seasonally unfrozen and biologically available organic
carbon within Taylor Valley and a substantial fraction of this carbon may be
recalcitrant carbon derived from ancient climatic events. While one of the
central themes of the LTER is to understand the linkages between ecosystem
elements in terms of the transport of organic carbon and processes affecting
primary production, one potentially large source of labile, and hence
bioavailable, organic carbon that has not been investigated is the abundant
small ponds found in most areas of the McMurdo Dry Valleys, especially near the
coast. These ponds have a relatively large surface area, and they seem to
generate a large amount of stranded microbial mat as they shift position on the
landscape. The transient nature of these ponds renders the organic matter
vulnerable to transport and possibly represents a significant source of modern,
labile carbon to the other components in the McMurdo Dry Valleys ecosystem.
While their exact extent is unknown, a preliminary estimate suggests that the
coastal pond reservoir may constitute at least 11% of the carbon to the Dry
Valleys soil reservoir. Therefore, these ponds may significantly impact the
carbon cycle of the Dry Valleys ecosystem and they must be considered if a
complete carbon budget is to be developed for this polar desert. This project
will (1) determine the extent of the coastal pond reservoir, (2) assess how
productive the reservoir is as a whole and (3) to determine if coastal pond
reservoir is a source or sink within the organic carbon dynamics and overall
structure of the terrestrial ecosystem in the dry valleys region. Much of this
work will focus on understanding the biogeochemistry of these ponds in terms of
the factors affecting organic carbon production and nutrient cycling. The
results of this study will provide a more detailed understanding of the linkages
between modern ecosystem components, provide insights into the biogeochemical
cycling within polar desert ecosystems and possibly identify mechanisms that
help sustain life in extreme environments. This study will also involve
Knoxville city school students from predominantly African-American
neighborhoods. The K-5 students will be involved in question and answer sessions
over the Internet and the older students will design ecological experiments and
become introduced to the scientific method. Data analysis will be used in
science and math classes to help develop analytical skills and to place the
skills in a relevant context for the students.