* 0230024
* Extinction and Recovery in Terrestrial Ecosystems across the Permian-Triassic Boundary in South Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Conrad Labandeira, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2008
* USD 100,000.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT

EXTINCTION AND RECOVERY IN TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS ACROSS THE PERMIAN-TRIASSIC
BOUNDARY IN SOUTH AFRICA

EAR-0230024

PIs: Hallie J. Sims, Marion K. Bamford, and Conrad C. Labandeira

The Permian/Triassic (P/Tr) boundary 252 million years ago is recognized as the
largest mass extinction in the history of marine life. The terrestrial fossil
record indicates that there was widespread and elevated turnover in plants and
insects during this interval, but interpretation of the event has been hindered
by the apparent lack of a continuous terrestrial sequence spanning the boundary.
The Permian and Triassic compression floras in Karoo Basin of South Africa
record a temporal series of snapshots of local vegetation, and thus provide a
model system to assess extinctions and ecological restructuring in plant
communities across the boundary. In addition, the diversity and frequency of
insect herbivory in these communities is preserved as damage on fossil leaves,
wood, seeds, and other reproductive organs and can be used to assess patterns in
plant-insect interactions. PIs project combines examination of specimens in
museum collections and new field work to bulk collect plant macrofossils from 23
Karoo localities spanning the P/Tr boundary. Palynological analysis will allow
them to integrate the sites with current geochronological information, including
new radiometric dates and known vertebrate biozones in the Karoo. The work will
allow PIs to test hypotheses related to changes in the composition and relative
abundance within plant communities. By integrating quantitative data on plants
and their associated insect herbivores, this research will help understand how
terrestrial life responded to the most devastating extinction in the Phanerozoic
by providing the first rigorous assessment of changes in ecosystems across the
P/Tr boundary at multiple trophic levels.

