* 0230261
* Collaborative Research:  High Field Strength Elements and Hf-Nd Isotope Systematics in Aleutian Lavas: Implications for Conservative Element Behavior in Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Jeffrey Vervoort, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2005
* USD 142,426.00

Vervoort&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0230261&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a study of high
field strength element (HFSE; Ti, Ta, Nb, Zr, Hf) and Lu-Hf isotopic systematics
in volcanic rocks of the Aleutian island arc. The main objective of the study is
to constrain the details of HFSE and related rare-earth element behavior in
subduction zones. Specifically, the study will evaluate the conditions under-
which HFSE behave conservatively versus non-conservatively during subduction
magma genesis. High field strength element abundances and Hf-Nd isotopes will be
measured in lavas collected from along the full length of the oceanic Aleutian
arc. The analytical approach will involve (1) dissolution of samples in steel-
jacketed Teflon vessels; (2) spiking of samples with a mixed 94Zr, 176Lu, 180Hf,
180Ta spike; (3) separation of elements of interest with ion-exchange chemistry;
and (4) analysis of samples by isotope dilution on a multi-collector ICP mass
spectrometer. This study will document along-arc and cross-arc changes in
Aleutian HFSE and Hf isotope geochemistry. Well-documented changes in physical
conditions along the arc, in particular the inferred relative temperature of the
subducting plate and mantle wedge in the eastern versus western Aleutians, and
the presence or absence of subducted sediment in the mantle source beneath
different parts of the arc, will provide the geologic context for interpreting
the observed HFSE and Hf isotopic variation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;