* 0230198
* Deglaciation of the Marble Hills, Southern Ellsworth Mountains
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Daniel Mann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 04/30/2005
* USD 55,681.00

This award supports a project to date a series of samples that were collected
during some reconnaissance fieldwork in the Marble Hills, at the southern end of
the Ellsworth Mountains, where the WAIS flows into the head of the Ronne-
Filchner Ice Shelf. These glacial erratic samples cover a range of altitudes up
to 500 m above the present ice surface and are mostly faceted till stones that
were stranded as overriding, glacial-maximum ice retreated from the highest
point in the Marble Hills to its present level. The samples will be dated with
cosmogenic 10 Be, allowing us to obtain a preliminary thinning history for this
largely unconstrained sector of the ice sheet. The results will provide the
first numerical dating control on the history of the WAIS in the Weddell Sea
region since the last glacial maximum. This new data will constrain ice sheet
reconstructions, which up to now have been based heavily on geomorphological
observations lacking age control, in the Ellsworth Mountains. The results will
complement marine geophysical constraints on the expansion of grounded ice into
the Weddell Sea during the glacial maximum, and mapping and dating of ice limits
along the northern coasts of the Weddell Sea. The exposure ages from the Marble
Hills will provide an interesting comparison with reconstructions of the time-
course of Holocene deglaciation in the Ross Sea and in Marie Byrd Land. Because
of differences in climate, bathymetry, and bed characteristics between these
regions, comparison of their deglaciation histories will provide insight into
the dynamics of the ice sheet, and perhaps help to explain the prolonged WAIS
retreat in and around the Ross Sea. The Weddell Sea is also an important site of
Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW) formation, and it may act as an important link
between the WAIS and the global climate system. Because an expanded ice sheet in
the Weddell Sea would have altered the distribution of AABW production, knowing
the timing of deglaciation is important for understanding the establishment of
present-day patterns of ocean circulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;