* 0230439
* Neogene Evolution of the Sonoran Margin:  The Transition from Backarc Extension to Transtensional Rifting
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Phillip Gans, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2007
* USD 360,347.00

The fundamental processes that govern continental rifting and ultimately lead to
rupturing of continental lithosphere and opening of an ocean are still poorly
understood. The transtensional Gulf of California represents a superb natural
laboratory to investigate these processes because it provides both along-strike
and across-strike views of the rifting process, from distributed continental
extension to the final rupturing of the North American lithosphere and the
capture of Baja California by the Pacific Plate. However, models for the
kinematics and dynamics of this rift depend critically on understanding exactly
how extensional and transcurrent strains are distributed in space and time on
the adjacent continental margins - particularly the Sonoran
Margin.&lt;br/&gt;This project, supported by the Tectonics Program and the
International Program, is quantifying the distribution, magnitude, timing, and
style of Neogene deformation and magmatism across the Sonoran rifted margin in
order to evaluate the kinematics of the transition from earlier (pre-12 million
years ago) distributed backarc extension to post-12 million year old
transtensional deformation associated with the cessation of subduction and
transfer of Baja California to the Pacific Plate. This multi-disciplinary study
has brings together scientists and students from the U.S. and Mexico to unravel
the history of extension and strike-slip faulting across the widest and most
completely exposed, but least well understood rifted continental margin adjacent
to the Gulf of California.&lt;br/&gt;New geologic mapping is being carried out
to identify the important fault systems and to work out the details of local
structural, volcanic, and sedimentary histories. Investigators are deciphering
in detail the structural evolution of a 60 by 100 km area in southwestern
Sonora, from the coast near Guaymas to the Sierra Mazatan metamorphic core east
of Hermosillo. In addition, structural and stratigraphic studies are being
carried out on two representative Neogene basins in eastern Sonora to assess
whether significant late Miocene deformation affected areas further inboard.
Approximately 60 new high-precision Ar-Ar age determinations are being obtained
on key pre-, syn-, and post-tectonic volcanic units to document local volcanic
and sedimentation histories and to bracket the timing of structural events.
K-feldspar Ar-Ar multi-domain diffusion, apatite (U-Th)/He, and fission track
analyses are being employed to determine low temperature cooling histories in
the footwalls of large normal fault systems to assess the timing, magnitude, and
rates of extensional slip.