* 0230913
* Development of a Textbook and Companion Websites for Chemistry-Specific Writing Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2009
* Marin Robinson, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Bert Holmes
* 04/30/2009
* USD 498,420.00

In response to the national challenge to improve literacy skills, the
overarching goals of this project are to enhance the chemistry-specific writing
skills of upper-division chemistry majors, promote writing-to-learn-chemistry,
and assist students in becoming better readers of the chemical literature. In
this project, instructional materials are being developed in the form of a
textbook and companion websites that comprise writing modules associated with
genres typical of chemistry. Materials target students of different backgrounds,
including language minority students, and chemistry instructors with minimal
training in teaching writing. Special features of the materials include (a)
"canned" research, making it possible for students without research experience
to complete scientific papers; (b) the use of corpus linguistics to develop
instructional materials based on actual patterns of the language of chemistry;
(c) accessibility to nonnative speakers; and (d) reflection and collaborative-
learning activities. Materials developed from a previous project are being fine-
tuned and tested at our home institution with different instructors and
students; two years of the four-year project are dedicated to piloting materials
in 15-20 institutions, with a cross-section of student populations. Assessment,
linked to student learning and instructor/user objectives, is an integral part
of the project. Formative and summative assessment will be conducted, in part,
with instruments and procedures adapted from Classroom Assessment Techniques
(CATs) developed for SMET instructors, with the assistance of an assessment
coordinator and ten external evaluators.