* 0230554
* Developing a Research-Based Undergraduate Experience Focused on Systems Thinking, Information Technology and Laboratory Applications
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Adel Sadek, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,675.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230554&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Hayden,
Nancy&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: University of Vermont &amp; State Agricultural
College&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Developing a Research-Based Undergraduate Experience
Focused on Systems Thinking, Information Technology and Laboratory
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
planning grant is to develop a comprehensive plan and strategy to reformulate
the undergraduate experience within the Department of Civil &amp; Environmental
Engineering at the University of Vermont to allow its graduates to meet the
engineering and&lt;br/&gt;technological challenges of the future. It is
important to change the way students are educated to better develop their
creativity, promote their critical thinking, enhance their knowledge discovery
skills and promote life-long learning and teaching. The vision for achieving
this presented in this proposal is to develop a research-based educational
experience for students throughout their undergraduate tenure. This experience
will focus on: (1) systems thinking, and an appreciation of the societal and
environmental impacts of engineered systems; (2) Information
Technology&lt;br/&gt;(IT) applications and computational modeling; and (3)
experience in the design, conduct and analysis of hands-on laboratory
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;