* 0230833
* Rapid Prototyping using Distance Collaboration in a Freshman Design Team Experience
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Jamey Jacob, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Vedula
* 12/31/2004
* USD 74,146.00

The project develops and implements a freshman oriented multi-disciplinary team
design experience using distance collaboration between the University of
Kentucky Lexington and Paducah campuses. The project addresses the following
issues pertaining to first-year engineering programs:&lt;br/&gt;a. There are few
meaningful yet quantitative design experiences geared towards engineering
freshmen. &lt;br/&gt;b. There is a need to introduce the concept of "distributed
collaboration" to engineering students. Many engineers find themselves working
as a member of a geographically distributed design team, despite the fact that
they have not participated in such teams during college.&lt;br/&gt;c. There is a
need to increase the number of students entering the engineering field from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teams of introductory engineering
students from two campuses work on designing a mechanism or assembly using
solid-modeling software that can then be prototyped using a 3-D printer. Group
communication is facilitated using dedicated interactive video conferencing
capabilities already in place at both locations, including web-based video and
interactive television, and supplemented by telephone, email, and facsimile.
Students from local high schools participate in full-day workshops to create a
simple solid model, and see it fabricated by the 3-D printer. Each workshop
includes tours of the engineering facilities, and a presentation outlining the
career opportunities available in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;