* 0230502
* Establishing an Integrated Multibeam and Geophysical Database for the Antarctic
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* William Ryan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 01/31/2005
* USD 398,191.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports the construction, population, and operation
of an integrated multibeam and geophysical database for the Southern Ocean and
Antarctica (out to roughly the latitude of 45 S). The focus of our efforts will
be to make multibeam bathymetry data collected aboard the R/V Palmer available
to the community as a resource for science and education. The database will have
strong similarities to the existing NSF supported RIDGE Multibeam database and
will build upon that project's development efforts. A PostgreSQL relational
database server will manage the database. It will be accessible through two web-
based interfaces: pages that present a choice of a simple point, click and text-
field entry in a browser window; and a map-based Java applet interface that
provides the capability to browse and interact with the database.

The main attraction of the database will be access to maps, grids, and edited
raw data files from the R/V Palmer multibeam data. These data have not yet been
brought together in a synthesis and are typically only accessible to the small
group of researchers aboard the expedition during which the data were collected.
Multibeam data are perhaps unique among the geophysical data types: they reveal
in exquisite detail a strange, hidden landscape; they include valuable
information on geological processes occurring at the sea floor; and they are
useful to scientists preparing base-maps for their particular studies and as an
integrating framework for interdisciplinary work. These data are acquired at
considerable cost to the NSF and represent an important part of the legacy of
the Antarctic program as well as a valuable resource for future research
activities. In addition to browsing and downloading multibeam data products,
users will be able to interact dynamically with the data. Capabilities will be
provided for generating bathymetric profiles and contour maps, for digitizing
and downloading points and lines, and for customizing the map display.

In parallel and linked to the multibeam effort, a prototype database will be
developed for sub-bottom profile data populated by recently collected ice-
penetrating radar data from Lake Vostok. Available seismic reflection profiles
from the ANTOSTRAT compilation and from the National Geophysical Data Center
(NGDC) in Colorado will also be included. The map browser will provide access to
all the ship-acquired trackline geophysical holdings at Lamont-Doherty and the
NGDC, for the Antarctic Digital Gravity Synthesis and for other existing basemap
compilations (e.g. BEDMAP) and sample data collections (e.g. ODP borehole data,
RidgePetDB). Access to all these data types will be provided through the same
map browser as the multibeam data, which will allow the user to explore diverse
data sets from a single web site.

The multibeam and geophysical data synthesis that will be developed under this
award is expected to significantly expand the utility of these under-utilized
and often hard to find resources for a broad range of users, both academic and
lay, who are interested in Antarctic science and fundamental earth processes.