* 0230448
* Collaborative Research: Trapped gas composition and the chronology of the Vostok ice core
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2005
* Jeffrey Severinghaus, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 11/30/2005
* USD 39,812.00

High latitude deep ice cores contain fundamental records of polar temperatures,
atmospheric dust loads (and continental aridity), greenhouse gas concentrations,
the status of the biosphere, and other essential properties of past
environments. An accurate chronology for these records is needed if their
significance is to be fully realized. The dating challenge has stimulated
efforts at orbital tuning. In this approach, one varies a timescale, within
allowable limits, to optimize the match between a paleoenvironmental property
and a curve of insolation through time. The ideal property would vary with time
due to direct insolation forcing. It would be unaffected by complex climate
feedbacks and teleconnections, and it would give a clean record with high
signal/noise ratio. It is argued strongly that the O2/N2 ratio of ice core
trapped gases is such a property, and evidence is presented that this property,
whose atmospheric ratio is nearly constant, is tied to local summertime
insolation. This award will support a project to analyze the O2/N2 ratios at 1
kyr intervals from ~ 115-400 ka in the Vostok ice core. Ancillary measurements
will be made of Ar/N2, and Ne/N2 and heavy noble gas ratios, in order to
understand bubble close-off fractionation and its manifestation in the Vostok
trapped gas record. O2/N2 variations will be matched with summertime insolation
at Vostok to achieve a high-accuracy chronology for the Vostok core. The Vostok
and other correlatable climate records will then be reexamined to improve our
understanding of the dynamics of Pleistocene climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;