* 0230646
* Enhancement of the Undergraduate Biomedical Engineering Curriculum at Yale University
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2004
* James Duncan, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 11/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230646&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Saltzman,
William&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Yale University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Enhancement
of the Undergraduate Biomedical Engineering Curriculum at Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
reformulate the biomedical engineering undergraduate curriculum at Yale by
emphasizing a) faculty involvement with students at all levels throughout the 4
year B.S. program; b) integration of presentation of knowledge through
laboratory, lecture, and electronic media; and c) definition of selected areas
of emphasis that represent strengths of the Yale research faculty and areas of
industrial importance. We propose a core curriculum that presents the core
science of BME as well as specialized tracks that provide advanced training in
our areas of emphasis: biomedical imaging, biomechanics, and biomolecular
engineering. We will implement this proposal in two phases. During the 12-month
planning phase, we will offer two new courses (one each at the freshman and
senior-levels) and implement new junior-level laboratory modules that
incorporate concepts from molecular and cellular biology. We will also explore
new concepts and develop a coordinated plan for the second phase, beyond the
12-month planning period, which will include reformulation of the core BME
courses and the addition of new advanced level electives in our areas of
emphasis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;