* 0230424
* Measurements Addressing Quantitative Ozone Loss, Polar Stratospheric Cloud Nucleation, and Large Polar Stratospheric Particles during Austral Winter and Spring
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Terry Deshler, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 08/31/2006
* USD 757,401.00

The proposal seeks the continuation of in situ balloon-borne ozone observations
over Antarctica through 2005. Ozone in the Antarctic stratosphere suffers a much
different seasonal cycle today than it has in the past due to the introduction
of significant amounts of chlorofluorocarbons into the atmosphere. In the past
Antarctic ozone amounts were controlled primarily by global circulation
processes leading to wintertime build up of ozone. Today the presence of
chlorine coupled with cold temperatures, which create stratospheric clouds,
leads to a springtime minimum in ozone due to a catalytic reaction between ozone
and chlorine that has been activated on surfaces of the cloud particles. The
mechanisms leading to this ozone loss has been the subject of much scientific
activity and significant progress has been made; however, open questions remain
which require additional ozone and stratospheric particle profile measurements
from McMurdo Station. The ozone profile measurements, to be completed about
every 3 days during austral spring, will contribute to the observational base
for the period of maximum chlorine loading in the stratosphere. This will
contribute to the measurement base required to observe the first signs of ozone
recovery as stratospheric chlorine declines within the next decade. Measurements
of vertical ozone profiles will be one of the important tools used to observe
the first signs of the altitude dependent recovery following the decline in
stratospheric chlorine. In 2003, it is proposed to collaborate with several
European colleagues in an international Antarctic Match campaign to obtain
detailed, altitude dependent, ozone loss rate measurements for comparisons with
chemical transport models and photochemical box models. In addition, the polar
stratospheric cloud (PSC) observations will be continued to address questions
related to the nucleation of nitric acid hydrates, the existence of large
particles within Antarctic PSCs and their role in denitrification, and the index
of refraction of PSC particles. The instruments on the balloons will provide
high-resolution trajectory measurements, which can be used to assess the
accuracy of air parcel temperature histories. This information, coupled with in
situ aerosol profile measurements and a microphysical model, will be used to
test various PSC nucleation hypotheses, which have direct implications for
chlorine activation and denitrification. The instrument will be developed with
support from a Major Research Infrastructure instrument development award from
NSF.