* 0230495
* Undergraduate Student Education and Instrumentation Training Through Radio Astronomy
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Joseph Salah, Northeast Radio Observatory Corp
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,113,700.00

&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students need challenging research activities in a
discovery-based environment to help integrate their education with research and
prepare them for graduate education in science and engineering or for technical
careers in the national workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To help fulfill this
goal, MIT Haystack Observatory has successfully developed an undergraduate
educational program that applies radio astronomy to student research and
training. The program includes: (a) introduction to radio astronomy techniques
through hands-on use of a small radio telescope (SRT) that can be assembled and
used by students for observations, (b) access to Haystack's 37-m radio telescope
for individual student research and innovative laboratory projects, and (c)
national dissemination of Web-based educational
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project extends and
expand Haystack's program by networking small radio telescopes using Internet
technology to form a radio interferometer that enables high-resolution
observations of the Sun and other objects in the Universe. The interferometer
project exposes students to the challenges of modern networking technology,
precision timing, and sophisticated processing of distributed signals and data,
as well as high-resolution measurements. It also encourages collaboration among
students and faculty at different institutions. MIT Haystack Observatory is
designing, testing, and demonstrating the radio interferometry system, preparing
the necessary educational materials and disseminating them, and providing
support for users. In addition, remote access to Haystack's 37-m radio telescope
nationwide is being extended, and the educational materials to support research
projects enhanced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The project enables
students and faculty from a diverse set of institutions in all areas of the
country, at a variety of educational levels, to participate in an area of
astronomy that is not otherwise feasible, and it has applications in other
science, mathematics, and engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;