* 0230383
* An Apatite/Zircon (U-th)/He Thermochronometric Study of the Rapid Tectonic Denudation of an Oblique Crustal Section-Southern Sierra Nevada, California
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2005
* Jason Saleeby, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 11/30/2005
* USD 268,873.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The PI's propose to produce a series of (U-The)/He
apatite and zircon thermochronologic profiles in the southernmost Sierra Nevada
region as a test of the very rapid tectonic denudation of the Sierran
batholithic rocks by low-angle detachment faulting in latest Cretaceous-early
Paleogene time. This phase of denudation exposed an oblique crustal section
through the southernmost Sierra Nevada batholith to a paleodepth of ~35 km.
Apatite He studies in the greater Sierra Nevada region to the north have
revealed the persistence of a high standing orogenic plateau with long
wavelength-high relief fluvial dominated topography during the same time
interval. In marked contrast the deepest level exposures of the batholith to the
south had subsided to marine conditions by early Eocene time in conjunction with
tectonic denudation. These profound along strike variations in the
paleogeomorphology of the Sierran magmatic arc can be linked to the tectonic
removal of the sub-batholithic mantle lithosphere beneath the southernmost
Sierra-northern Mojave Desert region by a shallow flat-slab segment of the
subducting&lt;br/&gt;oceanic plate, and the related tectonic underplating of
Franciscan trench-affinity&lt;br/&gt;metamorphic assemblages. The PI's have
identified an array of known and apparent high-&lt;br/&gt;level batholithic
detachment sheets along the southernmost Sierra and northern
Mojave&lt;br/&gt;Desert region that appear to represent part of the upper
crustal rocks that were displaced&lt;br/&gt;by the detachment system. They have
also identified modern topographic anomalies and&lt;br/&gt;anomalous structural-
textural overprints in the basement rocks of the southern
Sierra&lt;br/&gt;region which correspond to the onset of steep gradients in
batholith emplacement&lt;br/&gt;barometry and its implicit depth of denudation.
They interpret these areas to represent the&lt;br/&gt;remnants of footwall
complexes proximal to the breakaway zones where the northernmost detachment
sheets calved off the edge of the orogenic plateau. Vertical&lt;br/&gt;apatite
and zircon thermochronologic profiles are proposed across these zones as a test
of&lt;br/&gt;very rapid cooling and tectonic denudation. These profiles will be
extended southward&lt;br/&gt;along constant elevation profiles to the deepest
exposed levels of the batholith in order to&lt;br/&gt;further test for regional
rapid cooling, and to test for a possible southward migration
in&lt;br/&gt;progressively deeper levels of denudation with time. The broader
goals are to relate the&lt;br/&gt;paleogeomorphic evolution of the southern
Sierra region to lithosphere-scale tectonics&lt;br/&gt;and dynamics, and to
relate these findings to the globally important problem of the&lt;br/&gt;upward
migration and surface exposure of deep crystalline basement rock as related
to&lt;br/&gt;uplift, erosion, tectonic denudation, and the evolution of lower
crust and upper mantle.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program runs for a
period of three years and includes a vigorous&lt;br/&gt;program of sample
collecting, mineral separation, geochemical analysis, and
the&lt;br/&gt;synthesis of the new data with existing geological and geochemical
data sets. The project&lt;br/&gt;will entail partial efforts of the joint PI's
and their technical staff, and constitute a major&lt;br/&gt;component of a
Caltech Ph.D. Dissertation.&lt;br/&gt;