* 0230654
* WMU Collaborative Efforts of College of Education and College of Engineering and Applied Science to Enhance Student Learning
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Edmund Tsang, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,793.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230654&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Tsang,
Edmund&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Western Michigan University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
WMU Collaborative Efforts of College of Education and College of Engineering and
Applied Science to Enhance Student
Learning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Western
Michigan University (WMU) through the National Science Foundation Bridges for
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;Education (BEE) program will plan and pilot initiatives
that provide opportunities for increased&lt;br/&gt;interaction among education
and engineering faculty and students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of
the proposed project are: 1) faculty of Colleges of Education and
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;jointly design an introduction to engineering course for
engineering and education Students&lt;br/&gt;; 2) faculty of Colleges of
Education and Engineering jointly hold&lt;br/&gt;seminar and workshop to enhance
collaboration, including visits to and visits from&lt;br/&gt;representatives of
model collaboration programs; and 3) The colleges establish a recognition
program to award excellence in collaboration to improve teaching and learning in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;The needs that will be addressed in the proposal project
are: (1) to enhance technological&lt;br/&gt;literacy of future teachers and to
train pre-service education students in the use of
stimulating&lt;br/&gt;examples of real-world engineering and technology to teach
mathematics and science to K-12&lt;br/&gt;students; (2) to reform first-year
engineering course to improve retention of first-&lt;br/&gt;year engineering
students, and (3) to design practical solutions to overcome barriers to
collaboration&lt;br/&gt;between the colleges of education and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;