* 0230794
* Development of Inquiry-Based Modules in Proteomics
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2005
* Eric Eberhardt, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 03/31/2005
* USD 74,865.00

This project is developing laboratory course modules in the interdisciplinary
area of proteomics. Proteomics is an emerging area at the interface of biology
and chemistry, which affords students the opportunity to explore complex
biological systems with molecular detail. The availability of organized teaching
materials using a proteomics approach at the undergraduate level is limited.
Vassar College and Marist College have formed a partnership to develop prototype
modules in proteomics for introductory undergraduate biochemists. The new
laboratory modules blend biochemistry with disciplines in molecular biology,
analytical chemistry, and computer science. Students gain exposure to a wide
range of biochemical techniques including electrophoresis, MALDI/TOF mass
spectrometry and bioinformatics. The goal of the overall experience is to
introduce beginning undergraduate biochemistry students to the emerging field of
proteomics. During the first phase of the project, prototype laboratory modules
are being developed for the heat and cold shock responses in E. coli. Laboratory
protocols and supplementary materials are being created during this phase.
During the second phase of the project, the modules are being implemented as a
laboratory course at both institutions. These courses serve to establish the
suitability of a proteomics laboratory experience in an undergraduate level
curriculum for a diverse range of students. These pilot trials
of&lt;br/&gt;these modules will allow for a comprehensive evaluation of the
pedagogical effectiveness of these new proteomics laboratories and also assess
the ability of these modules to prepare students to undertake careers in the
life sciences.&lt;br/&gt;