* 0230659
* Planning Grant to Establish the Center for Engineering Learning
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Harry Cheung, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 05/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230659&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Evans,
Edward&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: University of Akron&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Planning
Grant to Establish the Center for Engineering
Learning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant
presents a novel strategy for engaging teams comprised of faculty&lt;br/&gt;and
students from engineering, education, and the sciences in structured
collaborative learning of&lt;br/&gt;engineering and engineering pedagogy.
Through collaboration between faculties of engineering and&lt;br/&gt;education,
team design projects that involve pre-service elementary education students and
engineers at&lt;br/&gt;the freshman through senior levels will be developed.
Using planning grant funds, a working group will&lt;br/&gt;be formed to develop
and pilot-test the multi-disciplinary team design project.. In the long run, the
CEL will participate in developing 1) high quality teachers prepared to include
engineering in the K-12 curriculum, 2)&lt;br/&gt;engineering faculty applying
pedagogy, assessment and learning theory to engineering curriculum, and
3)&lt;br/&gt;a body of scholarship on how students learn engineering at every
developmental level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our approach is that multi-
disciplinary team design projects, when effectively mentored&lt;br/&gt;by
engineering and education faculty and practicing engineers, will increase
students' engineering&lt;br/&gt;competency and improve pedagogy in undergraduate
engineering. The development of the&lt;br/&gt;multidisciplinary team design
project will be driven by the input of in-service teachers and faculty
from&lt;br/&gt;the College of Education. The engineering content of the design
project will come from the expertise and&lt;br/&gt;resources of academic and
industrial engineers. The administrators and industrial advisor on the
working&lt;br/&gt;group will address issues regarding institutional policy and
industrial involvement, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The starting point of
our development will be the Vertically Integrated Team Design
Project&lt;br/&gt;conducted in the Department of Chemical Engineering.
Engineering design will be learned by solving an&lt;br/&gt;authentic engineering
problem with a team of education students and engineers at all levels
(students&lt;br/&gt;(freshman-senior), faculty, and industrial). Each team will
be mentored by faculty members from&lt;br/&gt;education and engineering, a
practicing engineer, and a teacher. In this planning grant activity, four
teams&lt;br/&gt;will include pre-service elementary education teachers as active
engineering members. Formative&lt;br/&gt;assessment of the project will be
discussed and disseminated by all stakeholders within the
working&lt;br/&gt;group. t our efforts will proceed at a rapid pace.&lt;br/&gt;