* 0230425
* Science and Engineering Interactive Learning Communities
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Saroj Biswas, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 573,568.00

This project develops strategies and pilot programs to increase the number of
undergraduate students obtaining degrees in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) fields. The project establishes "On-line Science and
Engineering Interactive Learning Communities (SEILCs)" to improve retention, and
to increase student enrollment. SEILCs feature intelligent tutoring systems and
web-based courses supplemented with on-line live interactions with tutors and
faculty. SEILCs are open to all students in the College of Engineering, and the
College of Science and Technology. Using SEILCs, the project develops and
implements a pilot program with a slow-paced five-year curriculum in Electrical
and Computer Engineering for students who meet admission standards, but may have
inadequate backgrounds in mathematics and basic sciences. The five-year format
makes it possible to deal with their academic needs in a more systematic way.
The project also provides on-line science and engineering interactive learning
communities with intelligent tutoring systems for high school level science and
mathematics courses in coordination with the college of Science and Technology.
These special learning communities serve a dual purpose. Incoming Temple
University students in the STEM fields use interactive tutoring to This project
develops strategies and pilot programs to increase the number of undergraduate
students obtaining degrees in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) fields. The project establishes "On-line Science and Engineering
Interactive Learning Communities (SEILCs)" to improve retention, and to increase
student enrollment. SEILCs feature intelligent tutoring systems and web-based
courses supplemented with on-line live interactions with tutors and faculty.
SEILCs are open to all students in the College of Engineering, and the College
of Science and Technology. Using SEILCs, the project develops and implements a
pilot program with a slow-paced five-year curriculum in Electrical and Computer
Engineering for students who meet admission standards, but may have inadequate
backgrounds in mathematics and basic sciences. The five-year format makes it
possible to deal with their academic needs in a more systematic way. The project
also provides on-line science and engineering interactive learning communities
with intelligent tutoring systems for high school level science and mathematics
courses in coordination with the college of Science and Technology. These
special learning communities serve a dual purpose. Incoming Temple University
students in the STEM fields use interactive tutoring to review basic mathematics
and science concepts. Students from selected high schools use them in their
college preparation as a service to Temple University feeder high schools. The
interactions of the high school students with the monitors and professors of
learning communities increase their interest an awareness of the STEM fields of
study. The project also establishes comprehensive internships to provide
financial support and coordinated industrial experience. basic mathematics and
science concepts. Students from selected high schools use them in their college
preparation as a service to Temple University feeder high schools. The
interactions of the high school students with the monitors and professors of
learning communities increase their interest an awareness of the STEM fields of
study. The project also establishes comprehensive internships to provide
financial support and coordinated industrial experience.