* 0230937
* STI:  A Next Generation Integrated Environment for Collaborative Work Across Advanced Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Harvey Newman, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2006
* USD 750,000.00

The developing, building and deploying of VRVS2, a unique, globally scalable
next-generation system for real-time collaboration by small workgroups, medium
and large teams engaged in research, education and outreach, over an ensemble of
national and international networks is proposed. The collaboration system builds
on the existing limited-scale prototype-production system serving the high
energy and nuclear physics (HENP) community and some other data-intensive
science and engineering sectors. The primary goals of this proposal are to
extend the VRVS technology to provide the software infrastructure and Web-
enabled user interfaces required to meet the research and education needs of
many fields. VRVS2 will be global in scope, covering the full range of existing
and emerging protocols and client devices for daily collaboration, from mobile
devices to desktops to installations in large auditoria. It will be integrated
with the Grid-enabled Analysis Environment (GAE) now under development at
Caltech in partnership with the GriPhyN, iVDGL and PPDG projects in the US, and
the DataGrid, DataTAG, Cross Grid projects in Europe. The current VRVS system
has been chosen by the Internet2 Digital Video (I2-DV) Initiative as a preferred
foundation for the development of advanced video, audio and multimedia
collaborative applications by the Internet2 community of US Research and
Education schools and labs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The VRVS2 project will create
a "testbed video network" and develop the necessary middleware to support a set
of new and essential requirements for rapid data exchange, and a high level of
interactivity in large-scale scientific collaborations including support for
emerging standards. The new design, based on a pure peer-to-peer architecture,
will facilitate the monitoring functions as well as provide a high degree of
reliability and scalability. Each VRVS network server, which handles the real-
time traffic, will be independent, self-managed by internal monitoring agents,
and will interact only with its peer reflector nodes. The architecture will be
fully redundant, with automatic re-routing of packet streams in case one
reflector fails, including automatic bandwidth and QoS monitoring (latency,
packet loss, and jitter) between reflectors, in order to assure the best
possible connectivity for real time communication. A modular and scalable
architecture based on web services to provide advanced monitoring and tracking
tools that support a very large number of conferences and users will be used.
Networking agents that run on the desktop or at the computer center will allow
any videoconferencing client from a protected site with a firewall and/or NAT to
communicate with any other client in a public or private remote location.
Authentication and optional encryption will be added to maintain confidentiality
of inter-personal communications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NSF is funding this in
the belief that the VRVS2 project may have a profound impact on education, as
well as research.