* 0230438
* Background Imaging of Cosmic Extragalactic Polarization (BICEP): An Experimental Probe of Inflation
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Andrew Lange, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 12/31/2008
* USD 2,636,218.00

The Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) provides three strong but circumstantial
pieces of evidence that the visible Universe was created by the superluminal
inflation of a tiny volume of space: the near isotropy of the horizon, the
flatness of space, and the phase-synchronicity of acoustic oscillations in the
early universe. The goal of better understanding the origins of the Universe
requires probing this epoch of Inflation directly. The most promising probe of
Inflation is the unique signature that the GWB imprints on the polarization of
the CMB. The amplitude of this signature depends on the energy-scale of
Inflation. If the energy scale is typical of Grand Unification Theory (GUT)
(10^15 &gt; 3 x 10^16 GeV), the signature may be detectable. The signature of
the GWB-induced polarization is expected to be less than an rms amplitude of
~300 nK of the CMB; more than two orders of magnitude below the amplitude of the
temperature anisotropies that have only recently been resolved. Detection will
require only modest angular resolution (~ 1 deg.), but will require long
integration (~1 year) on a restricted (~3%) and contiguous patch of sky. The
six-month night, the extremely dry and stable weather, and the precise rotation
of the sky about the zenith make South Pole Station the ideal terrestrial site
for this ambitious project. A CMB polarimeter (BICEP) uniquely capable of
detecting the signature of the GWB is now under construction and will be
available for deployment to the South Pole in 2003. The team that is building
BICEP includes four senior experimentalists who have successfully fielded
sophisticated bolometric instrumentation to the Antarctic. BICEP will operate
simultaneously at 100 and 150 GHz in order to both minimize and recognize
confusion from polarized astrophysical foregrounds. At these frequencies, a
modest (and thus relatively easy to deploy and maintain) 20-cm primary aperture
will provide a resolution of 1deg. at 100 GHz and 0.7 deg. at 150 GHz. By
combining a new polarization-sensitive bolometric detector technology developed
for Planck (2007 launch) with four independent levels of signal differencing and
a carefully optimized observing strategy, BICEP will reach the current limit on
CMB polarization in the first hour of integration, reach the sensitivity of
Planck over 1% of the sky in the first week, and precisely measure CMB
polarization on the critical angular scales of 1 deg. to 10 deg. BICEP will
serve the broader community of cosmologists and astrophysicists by
&lt;br/&gt;(i) pioneering an orders-of-magnitude improvement in this exciting
new field, (ii) characterizing the diffuse astrophysical foregrounds that will
ultimately limit measurements of this type (and which are of direct interest to
Galactic astronomers), (iii) demonstrating new technologies and methodologies
that promise to be of broad importance to millimeter-wave polarimetry, and (iv)
providing excellent training for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in
labs which have a very strong track-record in this regard. Observational
cosmology is currently enjoying a renaissance that has captured the public
imagination, and serves as one of the most effective vehicles for stimulating
interest in science in general. Detection of the signature of the GWB in the CMB
would represent a triumph of fundamental physics and cosmology that would
revolutionize our understanding of the origins of the Universe. &lt;br/&gt;