* 0230069
* Long-term Data Collection at Select Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Ron Naveen, Oceanites, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 07/31/2008
* USD 294,732.00

The Antarctic Site Inventory Project has collected biological data and site-
descriptive information in the Antarctic Peninsula region since 1994. This
research effort has provided data on those sites which are visited by tourists
on shipboard expeditions in the region. The aim is to obtain data on the
population status of several key species of Antarctic seabirds, which might be
affected by the cumulative impact resulting from visits to the sites. This
project will continue the effort by focusing on two heavily-visited Antarctic
Peninsula sites: Paulet Island, in the northwestern Weddell Sea and Petermann
Island, in the Lemaire Channel near Anvers Island. These sites were selected
because both rank among the ten most visited sites in Antarctica each year in
terms of numbers of visitors and zodiac landings; both are diverse in species
composition, and both are sensitive to potential environmental disruptions from
visitors. These data collected focus on two important biological parameters for
penguins and blue-eyed shags: (1) breeding population size (number of occupied
nests) and (2) breeding success (number of chicks per occupied nests). A long-
term data program will be supported, with studies at the two sites over a five-
year period. The main focus will be at Petermann Island, selected for intensive
study due to its visitor status and location in the region near Palmer Station.
This will allow for comparative data with the Palmer Long Term Ecological
Research program. Demographic data will be collected in accordance with Standard
Methods established by the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine
Living Resources Ecosystem Monitoring Program and thus will be comparable with
similar data sets being collected by other international Antarctic Treaty nation
research programs. While separating human-induced change from change resulting
from a combination of environmental factors will be difficult, this work will
provide a first step to identify potential impacts. These long-term data sets
will contribute to a better understanding of biological processes in the entire
region and will contribute valuable information to be used by the Antarctic
Treaty Parties as they address issues in environmental stewardship in
Antarctica.