* 0230593
* Engineering Design in Middle and Secondary Math &amp; Science Education
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Satish Nair, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 09/30/2004
* USD 99,189.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230593&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Nair,
Satish&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: University of Missouri-
Columbia&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Engineering Design in Middle and Secondary Math &amp;
Science Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
increasing consensus for the need to incorporate technological literacy into the
curriculum of&lt;br/&gt;future teachers. Innovative collaborations are necessary
to affect such a change. The Colleges of&lt;br/&gt;Engineering and Education at
the University of Missouri-Columbia (MU) will lead a meaningful partnership with
the Columbia school district, one rural school, an inner city school in Kansas
City, a community college, engineering businesses, and the Missouri Department
of Elementary and Secondary Education, to develop a strategy to increase the
engineering content, with particular focus on design content, in the curriculum
of future mathematics and science teachers in the 7-12 th grades, using hands-on
engineering exemplars. &lt;br/&gt;The project will also test the hypothesis that
engineering design is an ideal domain for reaching under served groups because
it utilizes hands-on activities that students find motivating, and it also shows
the connection to jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will help to
develop infrastructure for deeper and sustained partnerships,&lt;br/&gt;centered
on engineering design, among middle and secondary level mathematics and science
educators,&lt;br/&gt;higher education, industry, and the department of
elementary and secondary education of the state. The&lt;br/&gt;prototype
resources developed in the planning grant stage and subsequent larger effort,
will be made&lt;br/&gt;available to middle and secondary mathematics and science
teachers throughout the region, the state, and&lt;br/&gt;the nation, with the
expectation that they will utilize them whenever appropriate. These changes
will, in the long term, lead to improved academic performance in mathematics and
science, with meaningful engineering design experience, and to an increase in
the number of pre-college students who enroll in engineering degree
programs.&lt;br/&gt;