* 0230623
* Engineering Bridges
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Richard Tapia, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,708.00

Rice University engineering faculty, Texas Southern University education
faculty, and Houston&lt;br/&gt;Independent School District teachers and
administrators, propose Engineering Bridges, a&lt;br/&gt;planning project to
develop a comprehensive program to systemically change
science,&lt;br/&gt;technology, mathematics, and engineering instruction and
culture in high-minority high schools&lt;br/&gt;in order to increase the number
of underrepresented minority students excited and well-prepared&lt;br/&gt;to
enter engineering university (STEM) majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For over thirty
years our nation has attempted to increase participation of African
American,&lt;br/&gt;Hispanic, and Native Americans in STEM fields. And even
though there has been some growth&lt;br/&gt;in engineering degrees granted to
those groups over the last twenty years, that growth has not&lt;br/&gt;kept up
with those groups population growth in general. This program brings together a
strong&lt;br/&gt;and varied collaborative to develop a systemic, coherent plan
to tackle this problem in a systemic&lt;br/&gt;way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
develop a plan that will&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prepare underrepresented minority
high school students so they will succeed with&lt;br/&gt;confidence and
enthusiasm in university STEM courses;&lt;br/&gt;Inform, excite, and motivate
underrepresented minority high school students towards&lt;br/&gt;engineering
careers, and&lt;br/&gt;Increase underrepresented minority students admission
into university engineering&lt;br/&gt;majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet these
goals, the planning team will research and design
engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. Curriculum materials with appeal to students
of underrepresented groups;&lt;br/&gt;. Career-driven professional development
for teachers, principals, and counselors;&lt;br/&gt;. Content-driven
professional development for science and mathematics teachers; and a&lt;br/&gt;.
Multi-level (high school through university faculty/industrial worker)
support&lt;br/&gt;community that provides academic support and personal and
professional role models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;