* 0230709
* Development of an IT intensive Manufacturing Engineering Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2002,12/31/2007
* J. Cecil, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230709&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Cecil,
Joe&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: New Mexico State University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Development of an IT intensive Manufacturing Engineering
Curriculum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With the
phenomenal explosion of e-businesses and the continuing adoption of the
&lt;br/&gt;Virtual Enterprise (VE) model in manufacturing, there is a
substantial interest in &lt;br/&gt;American industry in the availability of
engineering students who possesses skills to &lt;br/&gt;succeed in this new
Information Technology (IT) intensive manufacturing work &lt;br/&gt;environment.
In this context, there is a need for our educational institutions to develop
&lt;br/&gt;innovative curriculum, which will enable our students to .hit the
ground running. when &lt;br/&gt;they begin working in their respective
organizations upon graduation. Our manufacturing &lt;br/&gt;industry needs a new
type of engineer, who must not only possess a strong background in
&lt;br/&gt;manufacturing (and manufacturing systems) but also be skilled at
using emerging &lt;br/&gt;technologies such as Virtual Reality, the Internet and
other tools to accomplish a wide &lt;br/&gt;range of activities in the context
of virtual manufacturing enterprises. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop comprehensive plans for the design and development of a new
manufacturing engineering curriculum, which addresses the changing manufacturing
landscape. Such an information technology based manufacturing curriculum will
benefit graduating students and industrial organizations (who hire them) by
providing a workforce, which possesses skills and knowledge that are necessary
to succeed in today's evolving global economy. Other activities proposed include
the incorporation of virtual reality technology to enhance student learning for
under-represented minorities including students with physical challenges. The
project team includes New Mexico State university and other academic and
industry partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;