* 0230967
* STI:  Multi-Gbps TCP: Data Intensive Networks for Science &amp; Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Harvey Newman, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2005
* USD 1,511,967.00

The project will develop and deploy "Multi-Gbps TCP" to enable Terascale data
transfers across shared networks for data intensive science and engineering.
This builds on a foundation of several years of theoretical development and in-
depth simulations at Caltech. The testing, optimization and deployment will be
accomplished using the regional, national and transoceanic research and
production networks available to (and in some cases co-managed and operated by)
the Caltech High Energy Physics (HEP) group together with their partners in
Abilene, DataTAG, the Starlight-CERN-SURFNet "wavelength triangle", TeraGrid,
AMPATH, CANARIE, CalREN and Pacific Light Rail. Work with IETF, ISOC and GGF,
and submission of appropriate RFCs and documents during the course of the
project, will ensure that the new techniques developed are consistent extensions
of existing standards, and available to the worldwide research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop practical
TCP and AQM (Active Queue Management) schemes, with loss recovery tuning, that
maintain stability, high utilization and negligible loss and delay as the
network increases in capacity, size, and load. We aim to validate and deploy
these techniques on HEP networks, the TeraGrid and other US backbones including
Abilene, ESnet, CalREN, and MREN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well-known that the
additive-increase-multiplicative-decrease strategy with which TCP probes
available capacity performs poorly at large window sizes due to serious dynamic
and equilibrium problems. These problems must be solved to scale TCP to the high
bandwidth regime. The proponents have developed a mathematical theory that
provides a fundamental understanding of the current protocols and exposes their
stability problems in high latency, high capacity environments and derived a new
class of TCP / AQM algorithms that solve these problems. The central thrust of
this work is to compensate for delay, capacity, and routing using the correct
scaling. Fortunately, the network structure is such that there is sufficient
information to allow the right scaling to be applied in a distributed and
decentralized manner, while remaining compliant with the current protocol. These
new algorithms, with TCP recovery tuning, will automatically rescale the
parameters so as to maintain stability and optimize performance as capacity,
delay, routing or loads change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In simulation the new
algorithms in ns-2 and have achieved 98% utilization with an equilibrium queue
of less than 100 packets (0.08 ms queuing delay). In this project, we will
implement and demonstrate these algorithms in the global HEP research and
production networks. In addition, work will occur with both with the standards
bodies to help drive emerging standards, and with Grid software developers to
deploy them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage the theoretical work
on TCP/AQM of Low and Doyle, the leadership and experience of Bunn and Newman in
the development and operation of the international network for HEP (and the
broader scientific community) over the last 20 years, and the extensive
infrastructure of HEP networks to make a quick impact. The project's success
will not only benefit directly the HEP community, but will influence research
methods in several fields, by enabling the effective use of Grids, globally
distributed Terascale computing, and distributed Petascale databases for the
first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF recognizes that transfers of data files of
1018 bytes (exabytes) is important. This project addresses the issue of how to
do this in real operations.