* 0230078
* RUI: Direct Determination of Late Pleistocene Periods of Maximum Wetness in the Owens River System: Shoreline Dating in Panamint Valley, California
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Fred Phillips, Hampshire College
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 01/31/2007
* USD 153,384.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We seek to establish the timing of
periods of maximum wetness in the western U.S. Great Basin by dating pluvial
shoreline features in Panamint Valley, the penultimate basin in the Owens River
system. During most of Pleistocene time, the Owens River terminated in Searles
basin (upstream from Panamint), forming a complex network of superimposed
shorelines and tufa deposits. However, during the relatively rare wettest
periods when all the upstream basins (Owens, China, and Searles) overflowed,
pluvial lakes up to 310 meters deep formed in Panamint Valley. Tectonic uplift
has preserved well-defined shorelines, which are marked by carbonate tufa
deposits (which formed in situ in shallow water near shorelines), wave-cut
benches, and near-shore lacustrine deposits. We propose to apply two newly
refined techniques to date the prominent Gale shoreline in Panamint Valley. The
Gale shoreline represents the most recent period of overflow of the Owens Rivers
from Panamint into Death Valley, but it has not been reliably dated. Tufa will
be dated by measuring cosmogenic chlorine-36 ( 36Cl) buildup, a technique that
has proven successful in dating glacial moraines in the Sierra Nevada and
elsewhere, but has not been extensively applied to carbonate tufa deposits. Ages
of fine-grained shallow water lacustrine deposits associated with the shoreline
will be determined by optically- stimulated luminescence dating and a 36Cl depth
profile in alluvial fan materials associated with the shoreline will provide
additional age control. We believe these combined techniques will confidently
identify the ages of the shorelines and therefore periods of maximum wetness in
the Owens River system, which so far have only been indirectly inferred from
sediment core proxies. Clear recognition of the wettest time intervals will
provide a common benchmark to which the existing sediment proxies in Owens,
Searles, and Death Valley cores could be standardized, thus providing a more
coherent regional paleoclimate reconstruction for the Great Basin
region.&lt;br/&gt;Well-defined periods of maximum wetness in the Great Basin can
be compared with ice core and marine sediment records to assess how temperature
and moisture transport in this continental setting responded to global climate
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve undergraduate students
in every phase, helping to prepare future researchers and science educators.
Students from underrepresented groups will be actively recruited from Hampshire
and Mount Holyoke Colleges, and the PI will be recruiting high school students
from schools in New York City for Hampshire College. The PI is principally
involved in undergraduate education and the research results and experiences
from this project will be incorporated into his undergraduate courses for
science majors and non-science majors, as well as into presentations on climate
change for public community audiences. As an active NSF-sponsored researcher,
the PI will be better able to convey the nature of global change research, both
by virtue of developing important new knowledge through the proposed research
activities and also by increasing the visibility and credibility of the
PI.&lt;br/&gt;