* 0230197
* Airborne Geophysical Survey of the Amundsen Sea Embayment, Antarctica (AGASEA)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2003,06/30/2008
* John Holt, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,632,407.00

This award supports a comprehensive aerogeophysical survey of the Amundsen Sea
Embayment (ASE) in West Antarctica. The University of Texas will join forces
with the British Antarctic Survey to use both US and UK aircraft and
instrumentation to achieve this survey. Analyses of the new
aerogeophysical&lt;br/&gt;data will result in the generation of maps of ice
sheet surface, volume and bottom-interface characteristics. These maps will
support the efforts of a community of US and international researchers to assess
the present and predict the future behavior of the ice sheet in the
ASE.&lt;br/&gt;The West Antarctic ice sheet has been the subject of intensive
interdisciplinary study by both the European and U.S. scientific communities
since it was recognized to be a potential source for up to 5 meters of
sea&lt;br/&gt;level rise, possibly on short timescales. In terms of ice
discharge, the ASE is the largest drainage system in West Antarctica. Yet it has
been comparatively unstudied, primarily due to its remoteness from
logistical&lt;br/&gt;centers. The ASE is the only major drainage to exhibit
significant elevation change over the period of available satellite
observations. Present knowledge of the ice thickness and subglacial boundary
conditions in the ASE are insufficient to understand its evolution or its
sensitivity to climatic change.&lt;br/&gt;The results from our surveys are
required to achieve the fundamental research objectives outlined by the US
scientific community in an ASE Science Plan. The surveys and analyses will be
achieved through international collaboration and will involve graduate students,
undergraduates and high school apprentices.&lt;br/&gt;Through its potential for
influencing sea level, the future behavior of the ASE is of primary societal
importance. Given the substantial public and scientific interest that recent
reports of change in West Antarctica have generated, we expect fundamental
research in the Amundsen Sea Embayment, enabled by our surveys, will have
widespread impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;