* 0230354
* Collaborative Research:    Variability and Forcing of Fluxes through Nares Strait and Jones Sound:   A Freshwater Emphasis
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2009
* Kelly Falkner, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,333,008.00

The flux through the Canadian Archipelago is known to be a missing variable in
the freshwater flux calculations for the Arctic Ocean. This effort will be part
of a combined US-Canadian-Japanese research team that will apply a combination
of proven and innovative technologies to do among others; monitor water
properties and currents over a 3.5 year period in Nares Strait, Cardigan St. and
Hell Gate using moorings; measure ice-fluxes through satellite-based and mooring
observations; create a tracer hydrographic time-series, explore bivalve shell
records as a proxy for historical through flow variability; and use Arctic and
global models to parameterize oceanic through flow. Outreach to secondary
education and general public levels via teacher participation in cruises, media
and internet interactions with local communities, i.e. the Nunavut Federation,
undergraduate, graduate and technical training and communication with the
broader scientific community are part of the research
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following are components of the field research
plan:&lt;br/&gt;1) Mooring arrays at Nares Strait and Jones Sound. The array
will be deployed across the Kennedy Channel and will resolve the spatial and
temporal scales required to develop accurate estimate of fluxes, errors and
dynamical responses to remote and local forcing.&lt;br/&gt;2) Use of Advance
Microwave Scanning Radiometer (AMSR) and AVHRR imagery to determine ice
advection. Comparing staelliite data to upward looking sonar measurements will
assess errors in ice motion estimates. These measurements will be used to
estimate ice fluxes across defined sections of Nares Strait, Jones Sound and
Lancaster Sound.&lt;br/&gt;3) Various chemical species will be measured as
hydrographic tracers to decipher water mass origins. Stable carbon and oxygen
isotopic compositions of modern mollusks will be measured to trace seasonal and
interannual variations in hydrographic conditions. &lt;br/&gt;4) Models will be
used to determine wind stress fields in the Strait. A regional and global system
modeling effort will assess ice dynamics and freshwater flow both east and west
o Greenland.&lt;br/&gt;