* 0230789
* STI:  Extending the X-Bone Overlay Deployment Tool for Research and Classroom Use
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Joseph Touch, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 500,001.00

STI-XTend augments the X-Bone automated Internet overlay deployment and
management tool to provide a secure environment for local and distributed
network experiments, to support advanced research and classroom use. The X-Bone
applies a Virtual Internet architecture to support secure, concurrent overlay
networks (VPNs) using existing Unix operating systems, standard Internet
protocols (IPsec, SSL, dynamic routing), and applications. It currently lacks
some advanced facilities requested by a number of network researchers and
faculty. STI-Xtend augments the X-Bone to support revisitation, dynamic topology
control, ports it to additional platforms, and augments its API for integration
with networked applications. The tool will be further packaged with additional
support materials (examples, scripted demonstrations, and instructions) to
enhance its use by the research and educational community. The extensions
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support large-scale network emulation: STI-XTend
allows overlays to revisit network components, allowing a small set of devices
to emulate a large network using real protocols and applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic topology control: STI-XTend allows overlay
topologies to be modified by adding or deleting nodes or links, and to specify
subset of responding nodes used (vs. arbitrary selection). This provides precise
control of the participants and topology, allowing repeatable
deployments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support additional platforms: The X-Bone
supports Unix hosts and host-based routers; STIXTend provides ports for other
platforms (MacOS, Solaris) and adds IPv6, multicast, and a single-board system
for modest installations and control of closed
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Augment user interfaces, API, and components:
STI-XTend augments the X-Bone's GUI and updates its modular components and
capabilities, e.g., dynamic routing (currently using defunct GateD and MRTd).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The X-Bone is based on the abstract Virtual Internet (VI)
architecture, which describes concurrent parallel and hierarchical overlays. The
VI model inspired two-layer encapsulation to uniquely integrate IPsec with
dynamic routing, and is being used to unify web search, DNS lookup, IP
forwarding, and ARP (media-layer address resolution) as instances of a single,
generic service. STI-XTend augments the VI architecture to include revisitation
and dynamic topology control (especially difficult with IPsec, IPv6, and dynamic
routing), as well as ensuring the correctness of the X-Bone
API.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past 3 1/2 years, there have been 4 public
code releases and 18 public demonstrations of the X-Bone software. It is part of
the FreeBSD ports collection and available as a Linux RPM.