* 0230141
* Structural and Seismologic Investigation of Blind-thrust Earthquake Segmentation, San Joaquin Basin, California
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* John Shaw, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2005
* USD 158,795.00

The nature of blind-thrust earthquake segmentation is being examined through
integrated geologic and seismologic analyses of the 1982 New Idria (Mw=5.4),
1983 Coalinga (Mw=6.5), and 1985 Kettleman Hills (Mw=6.1) earthquakes, which
occurred in the western San Joaquin basin of central California. These
earthquakes occurred beneath the New Idria, Coalinga, and Kettleman Hills
anticlines, which form an en echelon system of structures that extend south to
Lost Hills. Patterns of coseismic uplift and subsurface studies have
demonstrated convincingly that these structures are fault-related folds that
develop in response to motions on the underlying blind-thrust system. The limits
of the rupture areas for the three earthquakes are defined by the distinct en
echelon offsets of this fold system, which are thought to overlie geometric
segment boundaries in the underlying blind-thrust fault. The folds have
excellent surface exposures, and the subsurface structure is defined by a wealth
of industry seismic reflection and well log data. Thus, this area presents an
excellent opportunity to study processes of blind-thrust earthquake
segmentation, insights into which can help to assess earthquake hazards in other
regions of active thrusting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geometry and kinematics of
the Lost Hills - Kettleman Hills - Coalinga fold and thrust chain is
characterized utilizing seismic reflection profiles, well control, surface
geology, remote sensing imagery, and precisely relocated seismicity. The
analysis is documenting the occurrence of tear (strike-slip) faults, lateral
ramps, and other types of fault linkages at the earthquake segment boundaries.
Insights into the fault geometries of these boundaries will translate into
helping to develop a better methodology for defining potential segment
boundaries on other blind-thrust systems, which often dictate the locations and
magnitudes of earthquakes, two key parameters in probabilistic seismic hazard
assessment. Moreover, these detailed structural models can provide a well-
documented case study for numerical investigations of dynamic rupture
propagation and aftershock distribution during blind-thrust events.
Additionally, these investigations will provide a seismotectonic model that
addresses the rates and temporal variability of fault activity, which can be
compared to more regional measurements such as space geodesy and to earthquake
activity on adjacent faults systems, including the San Andreas.