* 0230183
* Collaborative Proposal: Molybdenum Isotopes as Paleoredox Proxies
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Ariel Anbar, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 01/31/2005
* USD 149,574.00

&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding for continued development and application
of the molybdenum stable isotope system for the examination of changes in ocean
redox through time. Research into ocean paleoredox is of great importance in
paleoceanographic modeling, and in the coupled modeling of changes in the
biogeochemical cycles through time. At present, the integration of multiple
geochemical redox indicators in organic carbon-rich sediments identifies, with
reasonable certainty, sediments deposited under anoxic-sulfidic (euxinic) bottom
waters. However, beyond the areal distribution of such sediments, there is no
means of estimating how prevalent euxinic bottom water conditions were at any
particular time. &lt;br/&gt;Our initial survey of Mo isotopes in sediments from
the Black Sea, ferromanganese nodules, seawater and continental materials
indicated that the largest fractionation of Mo isotopes in the oceans occurs
during preferential uptake of light Mo isotopes to Mn-oxyhydroxide sediments,
but that Mo isotopes are relatively unfractionated during removal in euxinic
environments (Barling et al., 2001). Therefore, Mo in seawater is isotopically
lighter than Mo in oxic sediments and continent-derived Mo entering the oceans,
but is similar to that of sediments accumulating under euxinic conditions.
Because both oxic and euxinic sediments are important sinks in the ocean Mo
budget, these findings led us to develop the following hypothesis: The Mo
isotope composition of black shales should reflect that of seawater, and should
vary with the extent of global ocean anoxia. Specifically 97Mo/95Mo (and other
Mo isotope ratios) should shif toward isotopically lighter values during
extended periods of expanded euxinic conditions in the oceans.&lt;br/&gt;We have
explored key parts of this hypothesis as part of award EAR 0106712 which
supported one year of further investigation of major reservoirs, and laboratory
experiments designed to test the inference that Mo isotopes are fractionated
during uptake by Mn-oxyhydroxides. This award will soon expire. Results to date
demonstrate that Mo isotopes are fractionated during uptake by Mn-oxyhydroxides
in the laboratory, in the expected direction and to the expected magnitude. In
addition, we have found that the Mo isotopic compositions of euxinic sediments
from the Cariaco Basin are similar to those of Black Sea sediments and seawater,
consistent with the idea that such sediments provide a first order record of
seawater Mo isotopes. Recent findings of other workers (e.g., Siebert et al.,
2001b) also increase confidence in the paleoredox utility of Mo
isotopes&lt;br/&gt;To further test this hypothesis, we now propose to extend our
research to examine the isotopic composition of Mo in the geologic record.
Specifically, we intend to study Mo isotopes and other paleoredox indicators in
three well-constrained black shale stratigraphic sequences from the
Mesoproterozoic (Roper Group, McArthur Basin, N. Australia), the Paleozoic
(Middle Devonian Oatka Creek Formation, northern Appalachian Basin) and the
Mesozoic (Cenomanian-Turonian Boundary core, ODP Site 1138) Eras. These three
sequences are selected because they may represent periods of substantial, but
differing, perturbation of ocean redox conditions for periods of time comparable
to, or longer than, the ocean residence time of Mo. These sequences are also
attractive because they are well characterized by other geochemical techniques
and have good stratigraphic and depositional context. Preliminary data obtained
from the McArthur Basin, a Devonian black shale and the C-T Boundary are
consistent with our hypothesis. We also propose to refine our laboratory
experiments to better understand the mechanisms of Mo isotope fractionation in
nature.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will strengthen ties between groups at
U. Rochester and U. Missouri, which bring complementary approaches to
paleoenvironmental questions of mutual interest. Paleoenvironmental research is
of increasing societal importance as a result of public interest in probable
anthropogenic climate change and its consequences. The complementary resources
and approaches of these two groups will enrich the training of two graduate
students, one at each institution. In addition, the proposed project facilitates
the participation of a member of an underrepresented group (Co-PI
Barling).&lt;br/&gt;