* 0230698
* Integrating Knowledge Capture and Knowledge Reuse in the Engineering Undergraduate Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Mark Ewing, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230698&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Hale,
Richard&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: University of Kansas Center for Research
Inc&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Integrating Knowledge Capture and Knowledge Reuse in the
Engineering Undergraduate
Curriculum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering
problem solving consistently uses models in various forms (mental,
physical,&lt;br/&gt;analytic, computational) and relies on expert inputs from
multiple disciplines (manufacturing, supportability, cost, loads, structural
performance, etc.). Such modeling involves first mapping from the actual
physical system to a suitable abstraction that can be manipulated to yield
results that are then mapped back on the physical system to predict or describe
its behavior. A serious obstacle to productivity in engineering design is the
lack of information technology (IT) to support exchange and reuse of knowledge
at a higher level of abstraction than shared databases. In particular, the
engineering knowledge base includes models and programs for analysis of complex
physical systems, but these models and programs are not sharable. Engineering
disciplines are actively pursuing a standard for knowledge representation that
can be viewed, understood and maintained by humans and which can be interpreted
by computers. As such, there is a need for emerging engineers with skills in
knowledge-based systems and the practice&lt;br/&gt;of capturing knowledge from
disparate "experts." The Aerospace Engineering Department at the University of
Kansas (KUAE) proposes to incorporate state-of-the-art knowledge-based
development tools into the curriculum, and to facilitate shared use of these
tools by providing suitable indexing, retrieval, and visualization mechanisms.
Such tools will formalize the KUAE desire to introduce a system-level design
approach, and will serve to decompartmentalize courses in specific disciplines.
Exercising these tools in design and implementation of an aerospace vehicle will
expose students to a design project more reflective of the commercial world, and
will introduce the importance of knowledge integration across a commercial
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;