* 0230960
* Forensix: Large-scale Tamper-resistant Computer Forensic Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2002,06/30/2005
* David Maier, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2005
* USD 762,311.00

Computer forensic systems are large-scale auditing systems that are
complementary with on-line intrusion and anomaly detection and have been a
relatively understudied field in network security. Whereas intrusion and anomaly
detection systems attempt to do an active on-line analysis of events, forensic
systems seek to log all of the information being processed for subsequent, off-
line analysis. For the most part, computer forensics is still an ad-hoc activity
that is applied to a system that has already been
compromised.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging the advances in computing,
networking, and storage systems and building on the work within the IDS
community, the project will build an experimental computer forensics system that
will allow system administrators, law enforcement officials, and security
experts to quickly and easily track down sources of security incidents after
they have happened. There are a number of unique aspects of proposed approach
including:&lt;br/&gt;(i) Actively tracking changes to the system being monitored
at the operating system kernel level before an attack occurs to capture forensic
data&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Backing the audit information to a locally connected logging
host. This logging host exports only one service: the audit trail information
from the host being monitored. All other access to the logging host is allowed
only through the console. Thus, the logging host is a system that will provide
extremely detailed system information.&lt;br/&gt;(iii) A database system to hold
logging information. With an investigation of techniques for populating a
database to allow advanced queries on the logging information. The goal of this
is to allow complex queries to be performed while monitoring the
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main questions to answer as a result of this
research are:&lt;br/&gt;(i) Can a scalable proactive logging hosts be built to
capture a large number of attacks?&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Can database technologies be
used to actively mine fore malicious activities?&lt;br/&gt;(iii) How can file
systems and database technologies be developed to support scalable
logging?&lt;br/&gt;