* 0230347
* RUI: Paleomagnetic Study of Transitional Fields Recorded Throughout the Cenozoic by Australasian Lavas
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Kenneth Hoffman, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 02/28/2007
* USD 310,000.00

Hoffman&lt;br/&gt;0230347&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most remarkable
feature of Earth's magnetic field is its ability to reverse polarity, and much
of our knowledge of this phenomenon has come from the paleomagnetic record found
in rocks. The goal of this project is to locate, sample and analyze transitional
field behavior recorded in Australasia by hotspot-erupted lavas that comprise
the Great Dividing Range of Eastern Australia and New Zealand's South Island
volcanoes. These volcanics are known to span the past 70 Ma, that is, the entire
Cenozoic period, and thus offer an unprecedented opportunity to investigate
aspects of Earth's reversing geodynamo from a single regional site over
considerable geologic time. In particular, the investigators plan to test the
claim that an inordinate number of transitional virtual geomagnetic poles (VGPs)
associated with several available paleomagnetic reversal records are found near
Australia. This observation has prompted an intriguing possibility, namely, that
a concentration of magnetic flux emanating from Earth's fluid outer core below
Australasia has largely dominated the field structure during many past
reversals, and further, that this flux feature is a consequence of long-standing
physical conditions of the lowermost mantle. Because the volcanics of Australia
and New Zealand are almost directly above the claimed flux concentration, the
project is designed to test this hypothesis. It is anticipated that results from
this project will shed light on whether the lower mantle has had such a
pronounced effect on the transitioning field over much, or all, of the Cenozoic
period, and if so, whether any observable variation, or drift, of the flux
feature has occurred since the end of the Mesozoic. In addition, an attempt will
be made to determine both paleointensity over this span of time as well as
precise radiometric ages of the lava sections. The project will be assisted by
undergraduate physics majors working on their senior projects (a mandatory
requirement for graduation at Cal Poly State University), exposing them to many
aspects of original basic research. Dr Gary Acton of Texas A&amp; M University
and Professor Brad Singer of the University of Wisconsin will collaborate on
this research.&lt;br/&gt;-- &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;