* 0230021
* Collaborative Research:     Refining a 500-kry Climate Record From the Moulton Blue Ice Field in West Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Todd Sowers, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 04/30/2005
* USD 127,540.00

The summit crater of Mt. Moulton, in West Antarctica, contains a 600-m thick
horizontally-exposed section of ice with intercalated tephra layers from nearby
Mt Berlin. Argon-40/Argon-39 dating of the thick, near-source tephra indicates
that the age of the horizontal ice section ranges between 15,000 and 492,000
years. Thus, the Mt Moulton site offers an unparalleled repository of ancient
West Antarctic snow and trapped air that can be used to investigate West
Antarctic climate over much of the past 500,000 years. The planar nature and
consistent dips of the tephra layers suggests that, although the ice section has
thinned, it is otherwise undeformed. The Mt. Moulton site was visited during the
1999/2000 field season, at which time a horizontal ice core representing
approximately 400 meters of ice was collected, ranging in age from 15,000 to
older than 480,000 years. In addition to this horizontal core, samples of ice at
a range of depths were collected in order to test the quality of the climate
record in the ice. Forty tephra layers intercalated in the ice were also
collected in order to provide chronology for the ice section. The results of
this first effort are extremely encouraging. Based on the d?18 O of ice, for
example, there is clearly a useable record of past climate at Mt. Moulton
extending back beyond 140,000 years. There is work to do, however, to realize
the full potential of this horizontal ice core. The elemental and isotopic
composition of trapped gases suggest some contamination with modern air, for
example. As gas cross-dating of ice cores is the current standard by which
climate records are intercompared, we need to understand why and how the gas
record is compromised before adding Moulton to our arsenal of ice core
paleoclimate records. This award supports a collaborative effort between three
institutions with following objectives: 1) to evaluate more thoroughly the
integrity of the climatic record through shallow drilling of the blue ice area,
as well as the snow field upslope from the blue ice; 2) to improve the
radioisotopic dating of specific tephra layers; 3) to obtain baseline
information about modern snowfall deposition, mean annual temperature, and wind
pumping around the summit of Mt. Moulton; and 4) to study how firn densification
differs when surface accumulation changes from net accumulation to net ablation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;