* 0230609
* The Virginia Middle School Engineering Education Initiative:   Teaching Engineering in the Middle Schools
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Randy Bell, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230609&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Richards,
Larry&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: University of Virginia Main
Campus&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: The Virginia Middle School Engineering Education
Initiative: Teaching Engineering in the Middle Schools&lt;br/&gt;NSF RECEIVED
DATE: 06/04/2002&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award
will develop engineering teaching materials which emphasize design for
teachers&lt;br/&gt;in middle schools. This builds upon the first stage of a
long-term multidisciplinary project: the Virginia Middle Schools Engineering
Education Initiative (VMSEEI). This will infuse selected engineering concepts
and procedures into the context of preexisting science and mathematics
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering schools need to develop
ways to attract and retain students. Middle&lt;br/&gt;school is when we start to
lose potential students. In these grades, they make choices
that&lt;br/&gt;either open or close the doors to advanced science and
mathematics. If we start in middle&lt;br/&gt;schools, we can make students aware
of engineering, and motivate them to pursue the&lt;br/&gt;science and
mathematics they need to succeed in engineering
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary faculty team is in place,
as are engineering students, education&lt;br/&gt;graduate students and
exceptional local science teachers. Additional middle school teachers are being
recruited from local (Charlottesville\Albemarle) and regional (Central Virginia)
schools, and teachers-in-training at the Curry School of Education at UVa will
participate in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;