* 0230963
* Ultra-Wideband Based Next-Generation Wireless Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Robert Brodersen, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph B. Evans
* 09/30/2004
* USD 1,499,996.00

The next explosive growth in networks will come from connecting together
billions of low cost, low power sensors, effectors, and smart devices. These
will be communicating primarily through wireless means for reasons of mobility,
ease of deployment, aesthetics, and cost. Even if such networks start out as
special purpose local networks, people anticipate that they will come together
in many ways. They will certainly be interconnected with each other through
gateways to the broader wired Internet. The goal in this proposed project is to
find the right architecture to enable Internet-like gains in the new context of
wireless connectivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order for wireless networks to
support a wide range of applications and be suitable for mass deployment, they
will need to posses the following characteristics: (1) negligible interference
that allows peaceful co-existence with other independent wireless systems
operating over the shared spectrum; (2) managing interference between nodes to
efficiently and fairly share bandwidth; (3) dynamic and energy efficient routing
and packet relaying algorithms that support mobility of network nodes; (4)
scalability to support a large number of heterogeneous devices and links; (5)
precise positioning capabilities to provide location information for the devices
for which this is important; (6) robust and energy efficient network protocols
that tolerate failure of some network nodes; (7) extremely low power wireless
transceivers to ensure longevity for the energy-limited nodes; and (8) small and
low cost wireless transceivers to enable widespread deployment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to study the above in the context of
ultra-wideband (UWB) wireless signaling and multi-hop routing. Research is
intended to achieve multiple objectives, Develop &lt;br/&gt;(1) Efficient
algorithms to determine the fundamental tradeoffs involved in tracking the
positions of devices within a network of heterogeneous nodes; &lt;br/&gt;(2)
Robust and efficient protocols for routing digital communications within such
networks and explore the fundamental capacity limits of such systems;
&lt;br/&gt;(3) Distributed signal processing algorithms that are network-energy
and position aware to take advantage of correlations at the application layer to
reduce resource consumption throughout the network hierarchy; &lt;br/&gt;(4)
Extremely low power, highly integrated single-chip CMOS architecture to UWB
transceivers, and (5) An integrated test environment by combining an in-house
FPGA-based testbed (as the digital back-end) with UWB analog front-end from
AetherWire Inc. This will ultimately have approximately 30 UWB nodes from Aether
Wire Inc. to test and therefore further discover issues involved with such
networks.