* 0230046
* Collaborative Research:  Antarctic Tropospheric Chemistry Investigation (ANTCI)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Detlev Helmig, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Falkner
* 07/31/2007
* USD 56,371.00

The proposed work is one component of a collaborative four-year study of the
sulfur chemistry in the antarctic atmosphere, including two antarctic summer
field seasons in 2003-04 and 2005-06. The overall project, (ANTCI; Antarctic
Tropospheric Chemistry Investigation), involves thirteen principal and senior
investigators at seven institutions. &lt;br/&gt;The broad based goal of this
program will be to enhance our understanding of the processes that control
tropospheric levels of reactive hydrogen radicals, reactive nitrogen, sulfur,
and other trace species over the Antarctic continent for the further purpose of
improving the climatic interpretation of sulfur-based signals in antarctic ice
core records. The results will provide a far more comprehensive understanding of
Antarctic atmospheric chemistry as well as lead directly to further insights
about the atmospheric factors that influence the levels and distributions of
climate proxy species in Antarctic ice cores. It is based on and has evolved
from a number of other sulfur studies during the last decade, including earlier
studies by this group of investigators in the antarctic interior and at a
coastal site. This component is concerned with measuring the atmospheric
profiles of temperature, moisture, wind, and ozone, using tethered balloons.
&lt;br/&gt;Major science objectives of the overall project will include: 1)
evaluating the detailed dynamical and chemical processes that control spring and
summertime levels of reactive radicals in the atmospheric surface layer at South
Pole; 2) Assess the representativeness of the previously obtained South Pole and
coastal measurements in the larger context of polar plateau processes; and 3)
investigating the relative importance of the oxidative processes involved in the
coast-to-plateau transport of reduced sulfur and determining the principal
regions of chemical transition. Secondary objectives will include investigating
snow/firn chemical species that undergo extensive exchange with the atmosphere,
and assessing the different chemical forms of the trace elements and their
relationships to the levels of ozone and other oxidants.&lt;br/&gt; Atmospheric
sulfur chemistry is an important component in climate change issues because both
naturally and anthropogenically emitted sulfur compounds form minute particles
in the atmosphere (so-called aerosols) that reflect solar radiation, produce
atmospheric haze and acid rain, and affect ozone depletion. Sulfate particles in
the atmosphere may also act as condensation nuclei for water vapor and enhance
global cloudiness. The primary natural sources of sulfur are volcanic emissions
and DMS production by oceanic phytoplankton. On the millennial time scale the
variability and natural background level of atmospheric aerosols can be
reconstructed from the preserved paleorecords in ice cores. It is however
necessary to understand how the physical and chemical environment of the
oxidation process affects the relative concentrations of the oxidation products
that become buried in the ice.&lt;br/&gt;