* 0230969
* Integrating Assistive Technology into an Undergraduate Computer Science Curriculum from an HCI Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2005
* Blaise Liffick, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 11/30/2005
* USD 74,898.00

This proof-of-concept project develops a full course as well as independent
topic modules to introduce assistive technology design and evaluation into an
undergraduate computer science curriculum from a human-computer interaction
perspective, (topic modules could be used within the content of a traditional
HCI course.) including a model laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This course
provides CS students with an introduction to disabilities issues, computerized
aids to compensate for physical disabilities and for providing accessibility to
computer technology and electronic information (e.g., through the Internet).
Curriculum materials include lecture notes on specific topics (e.g. devices for
the visually impaired), descriptions of hardware and software related to the
topics, and suggestions for assignments and projects. These modules are being
used in the senior-level course CSCI 425 - Human-Computer Interaction, and then
within a new course devoted to assistive technology topics. Students are
strongly encouraged to participate in service learning projects and in
collaborative projects with students in other courses such as Nursing 424 -
Health Promotion and Rehabilitation Nursing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An outcome of
the inclusion of assistive technology within a computer
science&lt;br/&gt;curriculum is the attraction of more women to the field by
providing an application area that is more socially oriented. In addition,
students with disabilities are encouraged to study computer science by seeing
how the field directly applies to them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
includes issues of faculty development through the use of workshops and the
integration of assistive technology into the education of computer science
majors.&lt;br/&gt;