* 0230587
* Exposing Secondary Teachers to Engineering Design By Developing Virtual Laboratories
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2004
* Charles Nippert, Widener University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 10/31/2004
* USD 99,266.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230587&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Nippert,
Charles&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Widener University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Exposing
Secondary Teachers to Engineering Design By Developing Virtual
Laboratories&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
engineering approach to design is rarely included in high school courses
partially&lt;br/&gt;because teachers lack a thorough understanding of design and
the approach to design. A&lt;br/&gt;goal of this project is to have high school
educators learn and practice the&lt;br/&gt;fundamentals of engineering design
using a subject with which they have some expertise&lt;br/&gt;as a starting
point. These pre-service science teachers will design and construct, with
the&lt;br/&gt;help of an engineering professional, an interactive Internet based
Virtual Laboratory to be&lt;br/&gt;used in a high school physics course. The
resulting software will then be tested and used in a high school setting. This
approach allows the pre-service scholars to share their educational expertise
while dealing with the technical aspects of web-site design and simulation of
scientific&lt;br/&gt;phenomenon. Much research has proven that experts approach
problems differently than&lt;br/&gt;novices. This project will teach pre-service
science students the fundamentals of engineering&lt;br/&gt;design by presenting
them a realistic design problem, and the experience of setting up of a
instructional web- site about it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. &lt;br/&gt;