* 0230547
* Institute for Design Engineering and Applications:  Fostering Creative Synthesis Across the Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Ann McKenna, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 09/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230547&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Colgate, J.
Edward&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Northwestern University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Institute for Design Engineering and Applications: Fostering Creative Synthesis
Across the Curriculum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
McCormick School of Engineering and Applied Science of Northwestern University
plan to build a curriculum centered on engineering design. They will engage
students in a series of meaningful and increasingly sophiscated design
experiences throughout their undergraduate programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
design curriculum draws faculty and students together from a variety of
engineering disciplines, as well as the fine arts and social sciences. To
facilitate this sort of cross-disciplinary effort, and to provide the necessary
infrastructure for a large-scale collaborative design program, they plan to
create a new entity, the Institute for Design Engineering and Applications
(IDEA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IDEA will offer a variety of programs and courses
in engineering design. These will include a Manufacturing Engineering degree
program; large-scale, cross-disciplinary courses in new, more advanced area; and
smaller, more focused offerings, such as courses based on national design
competitions. It will also actively pursue a research agenda focused on product
and process innovation. All research projects will be tied to the
design&lt;br/&gt;curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;