* 0230726
* ASU Engineering and Education:  DET Expansion for K-12 Teachers
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Sarah Hudelson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 06/30/2005
* USD 98,375.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0230726&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Crouch,
Peter&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Arizona State University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: ASU
Engineering and Education: DET Expansion for K-12
Teachers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of this study is to position the College Engineering and
Applied&lt;br/&gt;Sciences and the College of Education at Arizona State
University for successful infusion&lt;br/&gt;of Design/Engineering/Technology
(DET) concepts throughout the complete range of&lt;br/&gt;teacher education
experiences, including pre-service and post-baccalaureate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;The project is led by the College of Engineering but
includes the full participation of the&lt;br/&gt;College of Education. A team of
faculty and administrators from both colleges will&lt;br/&gt;explore ways in
which DET can be infused into all aspects of teacher education
and&lt;br/&gt;ultimately used to anchor instruction in science and math
education. Part of the team will&lt;br/&gt;design and teach a pilot course that
will be used as a tool to conduct research and collect&lt;br/&gt;the data needed
to inform both engineering and education faculty on best ways
of&lt;br/&gt;incorporating DET concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the
project include 1) identifying curricular and pedagogical needs
of&lt;br/&gt;teachers and university faculty for implementing DET, 2) developing
a DET-based pilot&lt;br/&gt;course as a research tool for exploring DET in the
curriculum, 3) crafting a set of&lt;br/&gt;recommendations for a comprehensive
implementation of DET in teacher education, 4)&lt;br/&gt;developing models for
the appropriate points in the professional development sequence&lt;br/&gt;for
DET, 5) determining the effectiveness of the pilot on instructional
practices,&lt;br/&gt;curricular choices and student understanding of DET and
engineering careers, and 5)&lt;br/&gt;developing models that extend DET to pre-
service education through methods classes&lt;br/&gt;and general education
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this planning grant
include a re-conceptualizing part of&lt;br/&gt;the science and mathematics
component of teacher education and bringing technological&lt;br/&gt;design, as
addressed in the standards, to the forefront of k-12 science and
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;instruction. &lt;br/&gt;