* 0230123
* Quantifying the Temporal Evolution of Eocene Lake Gosiute
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Bradley Singer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2007
* USD 268,003.00

ABSTRACT Lacustrine deposits provide some of the best available archives of many
critical Earth surface processes, due to the relatively continuous sedimentation
in lakes compared to other terrestrial environments. In addition to preserving
various paleoclimatic proxies, cyclic sedimentary facies successions may provide
records of periodic forcing of climate. Lacustrine strata also offer a unique
and underutilized window on the complex interactions between climate, landscape
denudation, and rising orogenic topography. The rapid biological speciation that
can occur in large lakes may make them important evolutionary incubators.
However, the remarkable utility of lake deposits to measure rates of change in
all of these processes has been hampered by generally poor chronostratigraphic
control.

The Eocene Green River Formation (GRF) is perhaps the most studied system of
lacustrine deposits in the world. Eocene climate records are of particular
interest because the Early Eocene represents the warmest interval of the
Cenozoic, and as such may shed light on the potential long-term effects of
modern global warming. Recent studies suggest that deposition of the GRF may
have also coincided with unexpectedly rapid uplift of adjacent Laramide mountain
ranges. Numerous tephras interbedded in lacustrine facies have long aided in
correlating these classic deposits, but until recently the best age resolution
was one million years or more. Our intitial NSF-funded project has vastly
improved the geochronologic framework for the GRF in Wyoming by determining
laser fusion 40Ar/ 39Ar ages of sanidine and/or biotite from seven tuffs. Ages
for six of the tuffs are between 50.700.14 and 48.940.12 Ma (2 sigma), thus we
can resolve temporal differences on the order of 100 kyrs over most of the 2.3
myr span of the dated deposits. To accurately place these tuffs within their
broader sedimentologic and stratigraphic context, we have also constructed
basin-scale cross sections of the Wilkins Peak and Laney Members. Our results
have already permitted several significant new conclusions: 1) We have found
that the GRF was deposited 3-4 myr earlier than suggested by previous K-Ar ages,
and therefore coincides with the the latter half of the globally warmest period
in the Cenozoic. 2) The age of the Bridgerian-Wasatchian faunal transition can
now be constrained to 50.55 0.43 Ma. 3) The evaporative facies of the Wilkins
Peak Member accumulated three times more quickly than the deeper lacustrine
facies of the Tipton and Laney Members. 4) The average duration of lake cycles
in the Tipton and Laney Members is consistent with precession, but previously
interpreted "precession" cycles in the Wilkins Peak Member are actually of much
shorter duration (~10 kyr). 5) Although our initial study focused on climatic
issues, we fortuitously discovered a desiccation event that appears to record
catastrophic emplacement of the Heart Mountain Detachment. We have submitted
three papers to top journals to document our prior results. To capitalize and
build upon these achievements, we propose the following new objectives: _
Increase accuracy and temporal resolution via U-Pb and 40Ar/ 39Ar dating. By
conducting U-Pb analysis of volcanic zircon grains we hope to cut our already
small relative dating errors in half, and to reduce fully propagated errors by
an order of magnitude. _ Test the ability of statistical models to delineate
lacustrine cycles. Radioisotopically-measured accumulation rates will be used to
scale bed thickness spectra into time, and to determine permissible cycle
periods for different GRF Members. Also, we will evaluate the effect of varying
stratigraphic "completeness" on such spectra. _ Explore the temporal record of
basin-margin alluvial fans. Coarse-grained alluvial strata that interfinger with
the GRF offer a unique record of the timing of uplift of basin-bounding ranges.
We will correlate these deposits with dated tuffs to provide a high-resolution
record of Laramide fault movements. _ Extend temporal correlations into adjacent
basins. By dating selected tephras from the Uinta, Piceance Creek, Fossil, and
Bighorn basins we will establish a regionally consistent chronostratigraphic
framework that will facilitate the correlation of important tectonic, climatic,
and biologic events.

This project will draw upon cross-disciplinary expertise from the fields of
sedimentology, stratigraphy, and geochronology to address fundamental questions
concerning rates of Earth surface processes. This integrated approach to one of
the worl's best known lacustrine deposits will provide a new benchmark for
reading the terrestrial record of paleoclimate preserved in the deposits of
large lakes.