* 0230740
* Simulation Tools to Monitor Inquiry-Based Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Eric Klopfer, SimBiotic Software
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 10/31/2004
* USD 126,341.00

The emphasis of science education is shifting away from memorizing facts and
moving towards understanding concepts and learning how to do experiments. This
new focus is known as inquiry-based learning, and computer technology has played
a large role in expanding the diversity of fields in which such learning is
possible. In particular, simulation software provides opportunities for students
to conduct experiments that would otherwise be too time-consuming, expensive, or
simply impossible to carry out. Concurrent with the technology boom, assessment
is becoming an increasingly important component of education, both as a way of
deciding whether students have mastered a topic, and as a way of judging the
quality of instructional materials or teaching methods. Yet there are currently
no good technology-based tools for assessing whether simulation software works
for inquiry-based learning. This project is developing a prototype for a
technology-based set of tools for assessing students' abilities to think
critically, understand concepts, and design and conduct experiments. The tools
being developed include: &lt;br/&gt;1) Methods of instructing simulation
software to create on-the-fly random tests that require students to apply what
they have learned to the design and completion of simple
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;2) Tools to follow students' progress through a
laboratory, and modify the trajectory of the laboratory based on the students'
actions.&lt;br/&gt;3) Tools to track and evaluate the steps taken by a student
to solve problems, much as an instructor would ask a student to "show their
work" and assign a grade to that work as well as to their final
answers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together, these tools allow teachers to assess how
well students have learned an area conceptually (as opposed to most currently
used tests which primarily evaluate how many facts a student can recall). They
aim to help teachers utilize simulations in the classroom using a much richer
inquiry-based methodology, as students are provided with detailed feedback that
a single teacher could not possibly give. These tools also allow both
educational software developers and potential users of software to test computer
labs much more rigorously for their effectiveness across a wide range of
students and teaching situations. The tools, or the methods that they pioneer,
should be useful well beyond the scope of this project as both assessment and
computer technology become increasingly important at all levels of education in
the U.S. As a platform for developing assessment tools, this project is
developing a new software program for teaching osmosis, diffusion, and related
topics such as the formation and use of biological electrochemical
gradients.&lt;br/&gt;