* 0231642
* GK-12:  NSF Graduate Teaching Fellows in K-12 Education at the University of Maine
* EHR,DGE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Stephen Norton, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,778,000.00

Project Summary

Eight districts in central Maine that comprise the Penobscot River Educational
Partnership (PREP); four of them, including Maine Indian Education, partners in
a current GK-12 project, have joined with the University of Maine to form
Fellow-teacher teams to introduce K-12 students to experiments, field trips, and
discussions in areas such as chemistry, climate change, marine sciences,
molecular biology, geology, food sciences, and ecology. The program is: a)
helping teachers and students reach the State of Maine's legislatively-mandated
standards for Science & Technology (the Maine Learning Results), b)
strengthening Fellows' communication and teaching skills, c) providing
professional development for Teachers, d) enriching science for K-12 students,
e) providing young male and female role models of SMET professionals to children
in grades 3-11, and f) strengthening contacts between GK-12 science faculty and
K-12 districts. The K-12 students are monitoring water chemistry and species
diversity and abundance in cooperating federal wildlife refuges in areas near
them. These shared monitoring activities link classes throughout the entire
scope of the project. The spatially and temporally distributed data enables the
teams to introduce interesting analyses and discussions across partner classes
interacting through videoconferences. Each Fellow works intensively with two
teachers in PREP and with a teacher from eastern Maine (Washington & Hancock
Counties), western Maine (Madison), or southern Maine (Damariscotta, site of the
University of Maine's marine sciences laboratory). The power of Maine's network
of ATM classrooms, is being used to expand the Fellows' role modeling and
introduce Fellows to a variety of teaching styles. The broader impacts of the
project include strengthened backgrounds in science and attendance at the Maine
summer Science Camp for the cooperating teachers. The K-12 districts' benefits
include the enriched learning of their students and access to the equipment from
microscopes to thermal cyclers that is necessary to meet the goals of the
Learning Results, but which many districts lack. The University of Maine is
benefiting from K-12 students who come to the University better prepared in
science and is fulfilling its mission as a Land Grant/Sea Grant institution to
serve both the state of Maine and the nation as a whole.

Title: "GK-12: The University of Maine's Graduate Teaching Fellows' in K-12
Education" Institution: University of Maine PI/co-PI: Susan H. Brawley (PI),
Barbara J. W. Cole, Susan J. Hunter, Stephen A. Norton, Michael Vayda, Ruey
Yehle. Award: $1,500,000 (total for 3 years) Partner School Districts: Old Town,
Brewer and Bucksport Departments, School Unions #34, #87, #90, #91, #102, School
Districts No. 22, 59, 92 Number of Fellows/Year: 10 graduate and 2 undergraduate
students Target Audience of Project: Grades 3-11 Setting: Urban, Rural NSF-
supported Disciplines Involved: Science & Technology (including Mathematics)

