* 0231120
* Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Frank Creegan, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 12/31/2007
* USD 1,512,860.00

Recent research into the learning process has begun to show how students learn
and what environments are best to facilitate learning. There are many barriers
that have prevented widespread adoption of these new teaching paradigms,
including: the investment of time needed to make a change; lack of tested models
and materials; and support systems to enable and encourage faculty to continue
an innovation. To address these needs, collaborators at Franklin and Marshall
College, SUNY Stony Brook, and Washington College have developed innovative and
effective teaching methods and materials for General, Organic, and Physical
Chemistry instruction. Constructivist and learning cycle principles are combined
with an emphasis on essential learning processes and student-student
interactions to create a new educational model called Process Oriented Guided
Inquiry Learning (POGIL). The practices and materials we have developed are
applicable to large or small classrooms, recitation sections with or without
technology, and laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;The approach and the new materials have
all been nationally tested and are readily available. The project goals include
faculty development, dissemination of new practices, and adoption of innovation
through workshops, consultancies and on-site visits. An Innovation-Adoption
Model is being used to assess the various components of dissemination that lead
to innovation. A major objective of the project is to create an interconnected
network of experts and adopters in order to increase the rate of adoption. A
research team at The Catholic University of America is evaluating the
effectiveness of this project.&lt;br/&gt;