* 0231268
* Quantifying the Effectiveness of an Interactive Physics Problem Library
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2006
* David Pritchard, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

ABSTRACT

Proposal #: DUE-0231268 Title: Quantifying the Effectiveness of an Interactive
Physics Problem Library Institution: Massachusetts Institute of Technology PI:
David E Pritchard

This project builds on previous National Science Foundation funding of a web-
based interactive problem library. The project library has been developed over
the past several years and has amassed a library of nearly 1000 interactive,
pedagogically sound, introductory physics problems. These problems have been
tested in several settings, and recently Addison-Wesley licensed the entire
system under the name "Mastering Physics" for inclusion with several of its
introductory physics texts. Despite these successes, the library has not been
more widely adopted.

This project demonstrates, to a wider audience, the effectiveness of their
interactive tutoring concept. In this project the interactive tutoring system is
being tested at a number of institutions around the country using rigorous
educational research techniques to determine the effective learning gains
enjoyed by users of this system over traditional written homework or other
homework systems. The results of these studies are being prepared for
publication in peer reviewed journals and presentations for physics instructors
as well as the Physics Education Research community. We will publish several
journal articles within the first year of the project demonstrating the results.

