* 0231853
* Graduate Math And Science Teaching Education Reform
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* William Midden, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2007
* USD 1,559,290.00

Teams consisting of a cooperating teacher, a Fellow and a mathematics or natural
sciences faculty member are working to introduce hands on inquiry science
curriculum materials into four school districts that vary widely in the
demographics of their student body and in their environment, ranging from a high
needs urban district with a very high percentage of students on free or
subsidized lunches to rural schools, to schools in affluent suburbs.
Collaborative professional development is being provided during an intense six
week summer session with follow-up during the academic year. GK-12 Fellows and
their cooperating K-12 teachers are learning hands-on inquiry teaching
strategies and how to engage K-12 students in long-term research projects. They
are working together to use these strategies in the classroom. The broad impacts
of these activities include benefits to the students, the teachers and the
institutions involved. The Fellows are developing skills, such as improved
teaching abilities, useful in their role as future faculty. They are gaining an
appreciation of their ability to contribute to improving K-12 math and science
education and the benefits of doing so; establishing patterns of behavior that
will result in their future support of K-12 math and science education
throughout their professional careers. The university is building strong
connections between graduate training in mathematics and the natural sciences
with K-12 and undergraduate math and science education. It is strengthening
existing ties with local school districts. The K-12 students are beginning to
realize their own potential to follow a career in science by working with
graduate student scientists who provide strong role models. Other benefits
include improved K-12 student understanding of mathematics and science and of
scientific methods of inquiry. Part of the support for this project comes from
the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Graduate Math and Science Teaching Education
Reform&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Bowling Green State University&lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI:
William Midden, Lena Ballone, Stephen Van Hook&lt;br/&gt;Partner School
Districts: Springfield Local, Toledo Public, Wood County, Bowling Green
City&lt;br/&gt;Funding: $1,359,290 total for 3 years&lt;br/&gt;# of
Fellows/year: 5 Graduate year 1, 10 Graduate in years 2 &amp;
3&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban, suburban, rural&lt;br/&gt;Grade Band:
K-12&lt;br/&gt;Disciplines Involved: mathematics, biology, physics, psychology,
geology, chemistry&lt;br/&gt;