* 0231400
* EdGCM: A Global Climate Model for the Classroom
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Mark Chandler, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 01/31/2005
* USD 80,620.00

This award funds a pilot project to adapt a Global Climate Model (GCM),
currently run on large mainframe computers, for use as a full-scale,
3-dimensional GCM capable of being run on inexpensive desktop computers common
to most high school and university labs. In addition, the research team will
meet with educators in a series of interactive workshops to discuss how the
climate model exercise can best be integrated with science curricula. The
overall goal is to provide upper level high school students and undergraduate
students with an educational tool to investigate Earth's climate
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 3-dimensional GCMs are one of the primary tools
used in climate change research. Most operational GCMs, however, still reside at
institutions with large-scale computational resources such as national labs with
supercomputers. Thus, few students have exposure to GCMs prior to graduate
school. To some extent, the lack of familiarity with the most basic tools and
concepts for studying climate breeds a distrust of important scientific findings
that employ those methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher has already made
some modifications to adapt the GCM and has worked with educators to determine
how best to serve education. The original GCM was developed at the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and is a fully operational model to
study climates of the past, present, and future. To operate the GCM in a
classroom environment, the researcher has developed a user-friendly interface
that includes a database that allows the teacher manage the model. In addition,
the initial software package permits the teacher to add instructional materials
such as text, charts, graphics, and web links to fit specific lesson
plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has the potential for a
tremendous impact across a wide swath of the general public and the wider
education and research communities by providing easy access to user-friendly
GCMs to study climate. Climate change is likely to remain a topic of great
public concern and scientific scrutiny in the foreseeable future since it
impacts everything from the economy to the environment. Potentially, this award
would expand the understanding of climate and modeling beyond the realm of a
relative small group of specialists. As such, this may encourage others to
develop new insights into the working of Earth's climate.