* 0231313
* Development of Educational Materials that Strengthen Students' Problem-Solving Skills for a Bioengineering Fundamentals Course
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2006
* Larry McIntire, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 04/30/2006
* USD 74,930.00

Proposal Number: 0231313&lt;br/&gt;Institution: William Marsh Rice
University&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ann Saterbak&lt;br/&gt;Title: Development of
Educational Materials that Strengthen Students' Problem-Solving Skills for a
Bioengineering Fundamentals Course&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our team is developing
educational materials that cover the conservation laws with applications in
biological and medical systems. We believe these materials provide a new and
unifying approach for teaching the introductory course in bioengineering
departments across the country. The number of Bioengineering and Biomedical
Engineering Departments in the United States has increased substantially in the
last decade to support the increased demand for diverse engineering graduates
who are knowledgeable in life sciences and are skilled as engineers. Currently,
no textbooks or materials on the fundamentals of engineering are targeted to
students in an introductory bioengineering course. Our educational goals are
being achieved through the completion of some of the first chapters which
involve, Conservation Principles in Bioengineering, that includes the
development of problem-based learning modules, as well as communication skills
enhancement and web-based interactive simulation modules. Our assessment plan
evaluates student knowledge acquisition, problem-solving skills development, and
communication skills development. Prentice Hall, a commercial publisher, is
distributing the completed textbook. A variety of supporting materials are being
made available on the Internet, and dissemination includes journal publications
and conference presentations. Professors at four universities are using our
educational materials in their courses, assess student outcomes, and evaluate
the effectiveness of our educational materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;