* 0231833
* The UNC Charlotte and Phillip O Berry Academy of Technology Cooperative: Graduate Resources for a Technology Academy
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* David Royster, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing grant
* Laura Regassa
* 05/31/2007
* USD 1,568,853.00

The University of North Carolina at Charlotte and the Phillip O. Berry Academy
of Technology, a new high school located within the Charlotte-Mecklenburg
Schools, are jointly creating a series of activities that prepare science,
engineering and computer science, and mathematics graduate students to act as
resource persons in high school classrooms and the teachers in those classrooms
to work effectively with them. UNC Charlotte faculty serve as the instructional
staff for eight-day workshops each summer for the Fellows and cooperating high
school teachers. Participating Berry Academy teachers and selected GK-12 Fellows
serve as workshop leaders each summer for new cohorts of Fellows and teachers.
These workshops focus on policy regulations for working in K-12 schools, school
safety, and pedagogy instruction, and include a curriculum-sequencing guide that
is aligned with the North Carolina Standard Course of Study for the courses
being taught the subsequent fall semester. During the academic year weekly
seminars taught by UNC Charlotte faculty develop specific inquiry-based
activities in science and mathematics for each course according to the
sequencing guide. Each high school mathematics and science course affected is
organized thematically addressing four program strands: the nature of science,
science as inquiry, science and technology, and science in social and personal
perspectives. The Fellows receive special preparation in teaching science as
inquiry, in the use of NSF supported, research-based mathematics materials, and
in the integration of technology in instruction. There are numerous broad
impacts. Over the three years of its action more than 4800 high school students
(approximately 82% minority) and over 25 high school teachers will be directly
or indirectly impacted. In addition the activities encompass more than just
classroom work. A website is being provided as a conduit between university
mathematics and science faculty, project staff and high school mathematics and
science teachers and students. This site acts as a forum for posting questions
and answers, as a source of information concerning scheduled project activities,
and as a resource for database sharing. A broad spectrum of teachers are
benefiting as the cooperating high school teachers are serving as resource
persons for other teachers at Berry Academy of Technology and, along with the
Fellows, are developing and teaching two area-specific day long workshops during
the school year. In addition, a grade-specific activity book is being developed
for distribution to all Berry Academy teachers. Part of the support for this
project comes from the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences.

Project Title: The UNC-Charlotte and Phillip O"Berry Academy of Technology
Cooperative: Graduate Resources for a Technology Academy Institution: The
University of North Carolina at Charlotte (UNC) PI/Co-PI: David Royster, James
Lyons (UNC), David Baldaia, Deborah Ramsey (Berry Academy of Technology) Partner
School Districts: Philip O berry academy of Technology, Charlotte-Mecklenburg
Funding: $1,411,841 total for 3 years Number of fellows/year: 10 graduate
Setting: Urban Target audience: 9-12 NSF supported disciplines involved:
Mathematics, Biology, Chemistry, Engineering, Computer Science

