* 0231086
* LabWrite: A National Web-Based Initiative to Use the Lab Report to Improve the Way Students Write, Visualize, and Understand Science
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/2003,05/31/2007
* James Mickle, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 05/31/2007
* USD 489,159.00

Hundreds of thousands of student and faculty hours are devoted annually in the
U.S. to the undergraduate science lab report, an exercise reflecting and
perpetuating many of the shortcomings in science education identified in such
reports as the NRC's 1999 Transforming Undergraduate Education in SMET. With
comparatively small development and dissemination costs, our project team (from
science communication, scientific visualization, botany, chemistry, and physics)
is attempting to harness this ubiquitous activity to improve the way students
write, visualize, and understand science. Our first goal is to revise and
disseminate for national use our online prototype, developed, piloted, and
assessed through our one-year NSF-CCLI grant in 2000-01. LabWrite, a series of
instructional and faculty development modules, encourages and enhances use of
the lab report so that students and instructors can take advantage of the
opportunities it offers to develop and expand students' scientific literacy. Our
second goal is to build an instructional infrastructure for improving the
teaching and learning experience of the laboratory nationwide. Materials and
faculty workshops are being piloted within physics, chemistry, and biology
courses at NC State and at a small liberal arts women's college, a historically
black university, a community college, and a large, comprehensive university.
Once fully tested and revised, we anticipate publishing LabWrite as a supplement
to science textbooks as well as a comprehensive interactive package for a
variety of lab classes.