* 0231631
* Theoretical Problems in Biophysics and Condensed Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* David Nelson, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2006
* USD 474,000.00

0231631&lt;br/&gt;Nelson&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental theoretical
research and education centered on problems in biophysics, soft condensed matter
and the physics of vortices in Type II superconductors. The PI will study the
architecture of virus shells in an effort to understand why small viruses are
round and large ones are faceted. The faceting may be related to a buckling
transition of the twelve 5-fold disclinations embedded in icosahedral arrays of
protein capsomers. Theoretical advance could allow experimental determinations
of elastic parameters from structural data. The PI will explore localization
effects due to polynucleotide sequence variation on motor protein arrays such as
RNA polymerases translating along a DNA strand. Sequential polymerization of
single strand binding proteins such as Rec A and the maximum pull out force of
DNA hybrids will be studied as well. In addition, problems in soft matter
condensed matter physics will also be attacked, these include determining
crystalline ground states on the torus and for colloids adsorbed onto negatively
curved "plumber's nightmare" phases. Finally, work will continue on vortex
matter in superconductors by exploring the unusual response (related to the
transverse Meissner effect) of an entangled flux liquid with a dilute
concentration of columnar pins to a tilted magnetic field. &lt;br/&gt;Methods
will include analytical approaches to statistical mechanics and dynamics,
numerical diagonalization of evolution operators and computer simulations of
model systems inspired by problems in biology, soft condensed matter and vortex
physics. Investigations of buckling in viral shells will exploit extensive
experience with floating mesh discretizations of the nonlinear elastic equations
which describe thin spherical shells. The PI will seek to benefit from close
contact and vigorous interactions with the experimental community.
&lt;br/&gt;This award supports graduate and higher level training in condensed
matter theory. The work may also impact fields other than condensed matter
physics. Understanding deformations of viral shells could identify weaknesses
(such as ridgelines or grain boundaries) which would allow attack on harmful
infectious agents. Explorations of how sequence randomness affects protein
interactions with DNA and RNA might influence the design of artificial genetic
circuits in bacteria. A comprehensive theory of defect arrays on curved surfaces
could guide the construction of new materials with bicontinuous lipid phases as
templates. Finally, understanding vortex interactions with columnar defects is
useful for applications in high magnetic fields. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports fundamental theoretical research and education at the interface
between condensed matter physics and biology. The research is centered on
problems in biophysics, soft condensed matter and the physics of vortices in
Type II superconductors. The work in the former area includes the study of virus
structures and various problems on motion in a random potential that are
inspired by experiments on the binding and motion of RNA polymerize along a DNA
nucleotide sequence. This award also supports graduate and higher level training
in theoretical condensed matter physics with a bent toward problems at the
interface with biology. The results of this work may have impact in other
fields, notably in molecular and cellular biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;