* 0231649
* NSF/USDOT:    A Non-Continuum Model of the Flow of Traffic Via Aggregation and its Application to Trip-Time Prediction
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Kumbakonam Rajagopal, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 12/31/2006
* USD 198,865.00

There is empirical evidence that information acquisition and utilization at the
vehicular and highway level can be used to enhance the flow of traffic. However,
to realize the potential benefits of equipping vehicles and highways with
information acquiring, processing and broadcasting devices, tools are needed
that can model how information at the vehicular level affects the dynamics of
traffic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop new and innovative
theories on how to model traffic flow as a finite dimensional aggregated dynamic
system. The concept of an aggregated dynamical system is as follows: at any
instant in time, traffic flow parameters can be describes as a set of
aggregation parameters (mean, variance, mode, median, etc.) and that these
parameters can be used as to define representative vehicles in the traffic
stream. This project will develop a spatially discrete model for traffic flow
that will use such physical principles as conservation of vehicles and vehicle
dynamics to model vehicle travel through a section of highway. The project will
also examine the issue of obtaining a Eulerian (macroscopic) description for a
Lagrangian (microscopic) process. The model will be used to examine how the
dynamics of traffic change with the introduction of Intelligent Transportation
Systems such as adaptive cruise control and dynamic message signs, both of which
alter the behavior of some vehicles on the highway. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
success of this research will lead to a better understanding of traffic flow and
driver behavior, and will lead to more accurate predictions of the benefits of
Intelligent Transportation Systems. Results of the project will be integrated
into both undergraduate and graduate course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;