* 0231832
* Yale University Graduate Teaching Fellows in Biodiversity
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Michael Donoghue, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 04/30/2008
* USD 1,005,174.00

These activities build upon an existing collaboration between 1998, Yale
University's Peabody Museum of Natural History and the New Haven Public School
(NHPS) District, the Peabody Teachers Program, a professional development
program. Participating teachers produce inquiry-based science curricula that use
Peabody Museum specimens in the mobile BioAction Lab for hands-on exploration of
biological diversity and its impacts on human affairs. This draws on the
expertise and materials resident in Yale's Peabody Museum, and provides
stimulating subject matter upon which basic science competencies can be
developed. The project proposed here is designed to build upon the already-
existing strengths of the Peabody Teachers Program to enhance the professional
development of middle school teachers and Yale graduate students, as well as to
enrich the science-learning environment for New Haven middle school students.
The Fellows work closely with participating teachers throughout the year to
provide technical assistance as they develop curriculum units, in part to help
ensure the scientific accuracy of the content. Working with the teachers and
with children in their classrooms improves the science communication skills of
the Graduate Fellows. Training and on-site supervision of the Graduate Fellows
is provided by the PIs, by the staff of the program, and by the Yale Teacher
Preparation Program. In addition, Master Peabody Teachers serve as mentors for
pedagogical and classroom management techniques. All curriculum units designed
in connection with this program are being incorporated into the middle school
science curriculum and will also be disseminated broadly via the Peabody
Museum's website. All aspects of the program are overseen by an Advisory Council
and a Working Committee, including evaluations of the efficacy of the program.
The broader impacts of the project affect a spectrum of beneficiaries.
Participating teachers are increasing their scientific knowledge and developing
new content-rich curricula. Their students (90% minority, 50% female, 75% on
subsidized lunch programs) are benefiting from exposure to scientific subject
matter and approaches of relevance to their daily lives, as well as to new role
models. Yale graduate students are directly exposed to educational issues at the
middle school level, and to the challenges of communicating the wonder of nature
and the excitement and importance of science. This initiative strengthens Yale
University's graduate programs and its commitment to providing resources for the
enhancement of science education in the local school system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Yale University Graduate Teaching Fellows in
Biodiversity &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Yale University, Peabody Museum of Natural
History &lt;br/&gt;School Partners: New Haven Public&lt;br/&gt;PI: Michael J.
Donoghue, Leonard E. Munstermann&lt;br/&gt;Fellows/yr: 4 Graduate year 1, 6 in
years 2 and 3, 2 Undergraduate Target: Middle School (grades
4-8)&lt;br/&gt;Setting; Urban &lt;br/&gt;Disciplines: Biological sciences
&lt;br/&gt;