* 0231870
* Studies on the Impact of Sewage-Associated Microorganisms on Indigenous Seal and Bacterial Populations and Drinking Water Quality at McMurdo Station
* GEO,OPP
* 04/30/2002,03/31/2005
* John Lisle, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 03/31/2005
* USD 100,445.00

McMurdo Station, Antarctica, has been releasing macerated, untreated human
sewage into the pristine marine waters off the coast for years. The marine
waters impacted by the sewage plume sometimes extend to the drinking water
intake at Intake Jetty. Additionally, deposit feeding invertebrates located
within the area impacted by the sewage effluents have been show to not only
assimilate the nutrients associated with the sewage but also exhibit increased
mean body and organ sizes. A previous study found preliminary, but inconclusive,
evidence that the sewage-associated bacterium, clostridium perfringens, was
colonizing Weddell seals feeding in the impacted area. It is hypothesized that
(!) Weddell seals are being colonized by sewage -associated bacteria and
viruses, (2) sewage-associated bacteria are exchanging their DNA with indigenous
species, potentially altering the procaryotic gene pool of this ecosystem (3)
sewage-associated bacteria and viruses are entering the drinking water system at
McMurdo Station and (4) the current methods used to monitor the microbiological
quality of marine and drinking waters at McMurdo Station are underestimating the
risks associated with their respective contact and/or ingestion. These
hypotheses will be addressed by using molecular techniques (e.g., pulse field
gel electrophoresis, PCR), in situ microcosms for gene transfer experiments,
more sensitive culture based techniques for determining the extent of sewage
contamination in marine waters, sediments and seal feces and scat and performing
the most extensive microbiological survey of the drinking water distribution
system to date. A major focus of this work will be determining if the same C.
perfringens genotypes that are present in the sewage are related to those
isolated from seal feces and scat, marine waters and sediments and drinking
water samples. This approach has been used in other systems to establish a
direct epidemiological link between a bacterium's source and the colonized
(infected) host. In general, the results from this study will provide
information which can be used in the monitoring and design of remediation
efforts of coastal waters off of McMurdo Station and other coastal waters around
Antarctica that are being impacted by the discharge of untreated human sewage.
The data will also be as a baseline for studies of ecosystem recovery following
the planned installation of a sewage treatment plant at McMurdo Station.