* 0231856
* Science Partners in Inquiry-based Collaborative Education (SPICE)
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Jean Andino, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2006
* USD 1,652,013.00

The University of Florida's Museum of Natural History, Center for Precollegiate
Education and Training, College of Education, Center for Women's Studies and
Gender Research, and Departments of Environmental Engineering Sciences and
Zoology, will team with the School Board of Alachua Country to promote science
and engineering careers by placing graduate students into classrooms to
implement inquiry-based modules on Ecosystem Health and Sustainability. The
target will be middle schools in Alachua County with large populations of
students from populations underrepresented in science and engineering. Graduate
students in Zoology and Environmental Engineering Sciences will be paired with
teachers. As a team, they will participate in a summer institute and a workshop
to learn and discuss pedagogy associated with inquiry-based learning, to review
state and national science standards, and to decide upon specific topics that
meet the needs of individual classrooms and take advantage of team members'
expertise. Graduate Fellows and teachers will design and modify modules focused
on Ecosystem Health and Sustainability. These modules will specifically address
national and state science standards, and will stress hands-on exploration of
environmental "mysteries". Experimentation, data collection, analysis, and
interpretation of results will be stressed. Projects will have immediate
relevance to the students' lives and will be posted on a website. All classrooms
participating in the project will be furnished with computers and technical
support to facilitate this web-based communication. After testing and
refinement, modules will be made widely available through summer training
workshops, in which kits for implementation of modules will be provided free of
charge. Modules and complete instructions will also be made available and widely
advertised on the web. To provide mentoring, Graduate Fellows will select from a
menu of options for working individually or in small groups with students.
Likewise, middle school students will become role models for peers and younger
children by participating in already-established science programs designed to
provide opportunities for sharing scientific learning. Specifically, the program
aims to: o foster middle school students' desire to pursue careers in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics, especially within underrepresented
groups. o provide support and preparation for Graduate Fellows to pursue a
career in education. o improve science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
curricula in the public schools while addressing state and federal standards.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Title: Science Partners in Inquiry-based
Collaborative Education (S.P.I.C.E.) &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Florida&lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI: Douglas Level, Jean Andino, Betty Camp, Roberta
Harbrucker, Mary Jo Koroly&lt;br/&gt;Partner School Districts: Alachua
County&lt;br/&gt;Financing: $1,445,013&lt;br/&gt;Number of fellows per year: 9
graduate&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Rural &lt;br/&gt;Target audience of the project:
Middle School&lt;br/&gt;NSF supported disciplines involved: Science and
Engineering &lt;br/&gt;