* 0231728
* Louisiana Tech's Graduate K-12 Teaching Fellows Program
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 04/30/2007
* USD 1,580,997.00

The Louisiana Tech University Graduate K-12 (GK-12) Teaching Fellows Program
partners the Colleges of Applied and Natural Science, Engineering and Science,
and Education at Louisiana Tech University with four nearby rural school systems
and three informal science education organizations .SciPort Interactive Science
Center, The IDEA Place, and the NASA Outreach Center, CATALyST (Center for
Applied Teaching and Learning to Yield Scientific Thinking), a regional science
math education center housed at Louisiana Tech. The Fellows work with their
teacher partners to develop and deliver grade level appropriate modules that
bring the Fellows research directly into the classroom. The middle and high
school students are developing realistic and positive ideas about what
scientists and engineers do at the same time as they learn science content and
concepts. The Fellows are gaining an understanding of effective teaching methods
in science. The teachers and schools have been provided with needed technical
assistance. Each Teaching Fellow is partnered with a K-12 Partner Teacher. A
seminar course for Teaching Fellows and Partner Teachers introduces Teaching
Fellows to teaching and learning in K-12 schools and introduces both teachers
and fellows to nationally recognized curricular materials. Partnerships with
local museums provide the partners with opportunities to introduce their
students to local informal science education programs. The broader impacts of
the program are reflected in the enhanced and expanded collaborative
partnerships developed between Louisiana Tech University and surrounding school
systems as exemplified by their participation in an electronic learning
community of Teaching Fellows, Partner Teachers, and University Faculty; and the
opportunities they now have to participation in the publication of a new
journal, The Journal of K-12 Research in Science and Mathematics. This project
is partially supported by funds from the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title of Project: The Louisiana Tech University
GK-12 Teaching Fellows Program &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Louisiana Tech University
&lt;br/&gt;PI/CoPI: David K. Mills, Linda L. Ramsey, Leslie K. Guice, Shirley P.
Reagan, Jo Ann V. Dauzat&lt;br/&gt;Partner School Districts: Lincoln. Ouachita,
Jackson, Clairborne Parishes&lt;br/&gt;Funding: $1,380,997 total for 3 years
&lt;br/&gt;Fellows Per year: 5 graduate, 5 undergraduate, yr 1; 9 graduate, 5
undergraduate, yr 2-3 &lt;br/&gt;Target Audience: grades 4-12&lt;br/&gt;Setting:
Rural &lt;br/&gt;NSF Disciplines: Biology, Engineering, Chemistry, Computer
Science, Physics, Math &lt;br/&gt;