* 0231544
* Infrared Band-Specific Near Field Optical Microscopy Probing of Chemically Amplified Polymer Photoresists
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Stephen Leone, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2003
* USD 160,000.00

This project will explore mechanisms, line dimensions, and acid diffusion rates
in acid catalyzed, chemically amplified deep ultraviolet (UV) photoresists using
infrared near field scanning optical microscopy(IR NSOM). The objectives are to
(1)develop a higher resolution variant of tunable laser infrared near field
scanning optical microscopy, (2)push the limits of spatial resolution to 10 nm,
(3)use the method to study state-of-the-art samples of photolithographically
generated lines in deep-UV chemically amplified polymer photoresists, and (4) to
probe the diffusion properties of the acid species. IR NSOM is a chemically
band-specific optical characterization technique that offers an adaptable method
to study features and line dimensions. It can be applied in many situations and
as new chemical components are introduced into polymer chemistries for deep-UV
lithographic applications for smaller line dimensions. The basis for the
contrast mechanism is that the absorption features in the polymer films before
and after UV exposure and post exposure bake show dramatic wavelength-specific
changes in infrared vibrational bands. When the contrast is properly accounted
for with regard to both absorption and index of refraction changes, the method
provides a highly sensitive way of detecting chemical transformations on a
nanoscopic scale. Wavelength-specific IR NSOM is expected to provide an
important new route to characterize line dimensions and to study acid diffusion
rates quantitatively. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic
research issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological
relevance. New experimental tools are now becoming available to allow high
resolution of elementary chemical and diffusion processes which when better
understood allow advances in fundamental materials science and technology. The
basic knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to
contribute to improving the ability to lithographically define smaller and
higher resolution components for advanced devices and circuits. An important
feature of the program is the integration of research and education through the
training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant
area.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;