* 0231106
* Educational Materials Development for a General Education Course on Art and Geology
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Jane R. Hudak, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 02/28/2006
* USD 74,968.00

College courses that integrate the teaching of science and art are an
increasingly popular approach to non-science majors' instruction. These
interdisciplinary courses provide a rich environment for science teaching and
learning, and one that is well-suited for applying science education "best
practices" such as hands-on, in-context, and active learning. Recent conference
sessions and journal publications have documented the utility of teaching
geoscience with art; however, a major barrier to the concept's widespread
dissemination is the lack of publicly available educational materials in support
of geology and art courses. The goal of this proof-of-concept project is to
develop as a prototype two chapters of an introductory-level college textbook on
art and geology. The project team brings together faculty with expertise in
geology, art, and educational research, as well as experience in the design,
development, and teaching of a geology and art course and the development of
commercially published multimedia educational materials. Project activities
include: 1) the development of prototypical art and geology chapters, including
external review, 2) pilot-testing of the materials in a core curriculum course
team-taught by the PIs, 3) evaluation and subsequent refinements of the
products, and 4) dissemination to the geology and art communities about the
prototype and overall initiative, highlighted by a faculty workshop offered at a
major professional meeting. These activities are establishing the foundation for
progressing from the proof-of-concept stage to full-scale development, the goal
of which is the production of a publicly available and widely adoptable art and
geology textbook with supporting multimedia materials.&lt;br/&gt;