* 0231977
* SBIR Phase I:  Membrane Reformer for Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) Fuel Cells:  Novel Application of Deposition Processes for Low-Cost Hydrogen Separation Membranes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Anand Chellappa, Mesofuel, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,530.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will focus on the
development of economical processes to produce a highly selective, long life,
low-cost hydrogen separation membrane for the purification of a fuel stream from
a steam reforming fuel processor. Recently developed processes for rapid direct-
write deposition processes will be applied to produce thin (<10microns)
palladium alloy membranes as a primary cost reduction step. Preliminary trials
with these novel processes on porous metal show encouraging results in terms of
deposition of a uniform membrane, homogeneous alloy compositions and stability
to thermal cycling.

Producing pure hydrogen from hydrocarbon based fuels on-site and on-demand is
critical to enabling the burgeoning fuel cell industry. At present, distribution
costs for hydrogen can represent more than 99 percent of the total cost of
hydrogen. To meet and/or surpass cost projections for 2005 and beyond in the
stationary, portable and automotive fuel cell markets, it will require
innovative concepts for reducing both high volume manufacturing and material
costs. Estimates project that costs for fuel processing systems must be reduced
3x - 6x by the year 2005 to meet cost targets of $1,500 per kilowatt and allow
the fuel cell industry to become a viable energy alternative.