* 0231231
* Centerpiece Projects: Developing Large-scale, Interdisciplinary Design Experiences for Freshman Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Jonathan Stolk, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 06/30/2005
* USD 74,921.00

Over the last twenty years, NSF and the engineering community have called for
systemic changes in engineering education, including a shift to
interdisciplinary approaches, increased emphasis on teaming and communication,
and greater engineering practice and design throughout the curriculum. Our
project involves centerpiece projects, a substantial, motivational, design
project that reinforces and integrates science and math content for the freshman
year. These projects could lower the barriers associated with adoption of
integrated curricula and offer synergistic reinforcement of benefits not fully
exploited in other curricular approaches. Our project involves the development,
implementation, and assessment of prototype curricular materials for centerpiece
projects. The results of our study will be disseminated via publications,
presentations, and electronic distribution. The interdisciplinary centerpiece
projects are transferable to a variety of institutions, and a full development
program, including beta testing at other institutions, will be pursued should
the prototypes prove promising. Centerpiece projects are grounded in established
pedagogical methods, address calls for interdisciplinary approaches, and are an
attempt to help attract and retain members of underrepresented groups. In short,
centerpiece projects represent a significant opportunity to improve retention
and learning in the freshman year.