* 0231535
* Scalable Programmable Appliance-based Network Intrusion Detection Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Joseph Freeland, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Gurudatta M. Parulkar
* 12/31/2006
* USD 423,999.00

Network Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) are one of several tools used by
security professionals to detect and respond to security breaches. Typically an
IDS is implemented by tapping a network and diverting a copy of every network
message to a sensor. Usually, the sensor is a general-purpose computer running
software that examines every packet that it receives. This approach to IDS is
easy to implement as it relies on off-the-shelf hardware and software. However,
the overhead incurred by the general-purpose operating system and the limited
I/O throughput of most PC and workstation architectures restrict such IDS to low
and medium bandwidth networks. Special-purpose IDS platforms, on the other hand,
can be optimized to handle high-bandwidth traffic, but the lack of flexibility
and the high cost of custom hardware and software make this approach not viable
in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, parallel and distributed IDS
architectures exist that operate on high bandwidth traffic by distributing
network packets over a number of general-purpose machines. This approach
combines the flexibility of off-the-shelf hardware and software with the high
performance of parallel processing. A systematic study of the scalability of
this approach as well as an analysis of suitable packet distribution strategies
has not been done. Because such clustered architectures pay a potential penalty
in terms of space and power required as they are essentially a set of complete
computer systems that occupy shelf or rack space, consume power, and require
time consuming management and configuration they have space and power costs that
are high.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a scalable
parallel appliance-based architecture for network intrusion detection systems
that is able to reliably monitor high-bandwidth network segments, yet is cost-
efficient and retains the flexibility of general-purpose based IDS. High
performance is achieved by distributing network traffic among an array of low-
cost sensors in a way that does not impact the quality of intrusion detection,
while maximizing the available concurrency and minimizing required communication
among sensors. Utilizing off-the-shelf single-board computers leads to an
inexpensive and compact design that requires less power than a comparable number
of complete workstations or PCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key component of a
parallel intrusion detection platform architecture is the approach by which
network packets are distributed across the sensors. As a result, the system
design will by guided by a systematic analysis of network traffic
characteristics which will provide input into high-level models and simulations.
To verify and evaluate the performance and scalability of the resulting
architecture, a prototype system will be implemented based primarily on low-cost
off-the-shelf hardware and software. By addressing IDS issues using off the
shelf components, a product to assist in security breaches may be quickly
developed. This could have large, immediate impact on an important network
topic.