* 0231173
* Computational Neuroscience over the Access Grid Nodes
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2005
* Eric Jakobsson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 03/31/2005
* USD 75,000.00

This project is developing and delivering a course in Computational Neuroscience
originating at Carnegie Mellon University and offered for credit at remote
universities. The course is based on both research performed and workshops
taught at the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center and has a strong computational
aspect, with the lectures tied to computational examples. The course utilizes
the Access Grid group-to-group communication technology to create a distributed
classroom, and utilizes the computational resources of the Pittsburgh
Supercomputing Center for computer-intensive student exercises. The problem
addressed by this project is the national need to train students in
computational biology in general, and computational neuroscience in particular.
It is particularly difficult to meet this need for students in universities in
the EPSCoR states. The project's objective is to test whether courses
originating in universities affiliated with the National Supercomputing Centers
can be disseminated via synchronous interaction with EPSCoR universities. In
this particular project the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center is collaborating
with faculty at the University of Montana, Carnegie Mellon University, and
University of Edinburgh to provide a distributed course in computational
neuroscience. The course addresses geographical diversity and integrates high
performance networking and communication, and high performance computing, with
education in a manner that would not have been possible until very recently due
to limitations in communications technology and accessible computer power. This
project is jointly funded by the Division of Undergraduate Education in the
Education and Human Resources Directorate and by the Division of Experimental
and Integrative Activities in the Computer and Information Science and
Engineering Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;