* 0231857
* GK-12:  Middle School Investigators in Environmental Science
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Nancy McMillan, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2006
* USD 1,520,299.00

Proposal Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New Mexico State University is partnering
with the three public school districts in south-central New Mexico and the
Chihuahuan Desert Nature Park (CDNP), a non-profit organization that provides
environmental science experiences for K-12 teachers and students. The Fellows,
graduate students in biology, chemistry, biochemistry and geology, partner with
middle school science teachers and the CDNP to use weather software produced by
AWS Convergence Technologies, Inc. to allow students, Fellows, teachers, and the
CDNP staff to access, process and analyze weather data from over 6,000 locations
nationwide. The teams are involved in both implementing existing CNDP and AWS
learning modules and developing new modules that integrate weather data,
geology, biology, and chemistry to fit curricular needs and address New Mexico
and national science education standards. The broader impacts of this activity
include the mentoring relationships developed between the middle school students
and the Fellows who work with them; the increased interest of middle school
students in pursuing STEM studies and careers; the enhanced abilities of
participating teachers to develop climate focused classrooms modules reflecting
the teachers' increased content knowledge and their increased comfort with
inquiry-based learning techniques. The fellows are developing improved
communication skills (especially with non-scientists), and knowledge of teaching
methods and learning processes. In addition the interdisciplinary nature of the
teams are resulting in increased Fellow appreciation for interdisciplinary
research and an enhanced understanding of the broader scientific and social
implications of their research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title of Project: GK-12:
Middle School Student Investigators in Environmental
Science&lt;br/&gt;Institution: New Mexico State University&lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI:
Nancy J. McMillan, New Mexico State University; Stephanie Bestelmeyer,
Chihuahuan Desert Nature Park; Erlinda Martinez, Las Cruces Public Schools
District;&lt;br/&gt;Cynthia Nava, Gadsden Public Schools District; Georgia Lane,
Hatch Public Schools District&lt;br/&gt;Partner School Districts: Las Cruces,
Gadsden, Hatch &lt;br/&gt;Budget: 1,267,299 total for three years&lt;br/&gt;No
of Fellows/year: 11 Graduate Fellows&lt;br/&gt;Target Audience: Middle School
&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban, Rural&lt;br/&gt;Disciplines: Biology, Chemistry,
Biochemistry, Geology&lt;br/&gt;