* 0231850
* SBIR Phase I:  Grain Boundary Doped Thin Film Mixed Conductor for Oxygen Separation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Carl Evenson, Eltron Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,994.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on the
production of grain boundary doped thin film mixed ionic - electronic conductors
for optimized oxygen separation membranes. Ion transport properties of mixed
conducting ceramics will be studied as a function of controlled grain boundary
doping. Ceramics known to perform well for O2 separation will be doped with
magnesium for increased performance. Doped thin films will be prepared, tested,
and compared to un-doped films and films doped in the bulk rather than the grain
boundary. Cost effective grain boundary doping will be accomplished through a
tape casting procedure used to produce thin films which can be laminated onto
porous supports for increased strength. O2 separation will be maximized while
minimizing the amount of dopant used. Test structures will be mechanically
characterized for strength and durability. A cost efficient method of separating
O2 from air would be beneficial in a number of industries. Chemical industries
would benefit from a cheap source of oxygen for the synthesis of value added
chemicals; manufacturing industries such as steel, glass and paper, for example,
would be able to heat furnaces more efficiently with an oxidant undiluted by
nitrogen; and the energy industry would see improved performance in processes
such as coal gasification and conversion of natural gas to syngas.