* 0231517
* NSF/USDOT: Collaborative Research:  Impact of Real-time Carrier-shipper Interaction on Transportation System Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2003,12/31/2005
* Hani Mahmassani, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Realff
* 12/31/2005
* USD 158,001.00

The transportation sector continues to adopt telecommunication and information
technologies that provide real-time information to enhance productivity and
performance. Recently these technologies have started to modify the way
contracts are negotiated, by enabling demand and supply to be matched
dynamically through market mechanisms. A significant change may be taking place
in the structure of the transportation market, with the development of auction
markets for transportation services, in the form of Internet sites that match
shipments (shippers demand) and transportation capacity (carriers offer). The
development of these virtual hubs and their characteristics have fundamental
implications for the methodologies to both analyze the performance of such
systems, as well as to incorporate these mechanisms in the operational decisions
of carriers and shippers (and/or their agents).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will develop modeling techniques to analyze carrier-shipper
interaction in the context of an online electronic transportation marketplace.
Carriers and shippers are modeled as entities that determine their interaction
with other agents and with their environment on the basis of history
(experience), learning, expectations about future consequences of current
actions, and evolving strategies. In addition to developing methods to support
individual player strategies in a non-cooperative decision environment with
varying degrees of information sharing, the study investigates overall market
behavior, its efficiency and resulting shipper service levels under different
market settings and individual player strategies. The results obtained are of
relevance to both shippers and carriers operating in online markets, as well as
government agencies and policy-making entities concerned with the structure and
efficiency of the transportation system. To take advantage of potential
opportunities in real-time auction markets, both shippers and carriers require a
new level of mastery of real-time information about not only the state of their
shipments and./or fleets, but also about the entire system transacted through
those markets. The methodological contributions of the research have
applications that extend beyond the realm of transportation systems to include
various infrastructure services that are distributed over space and time.
&lt;br/&gt;