* 0231691
* SBIR Phase I:    Accessible Scalable Vector Graphic Authoring and Editing Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,09/30/2003
* Vladimir Bulatov, VIEW PLUS TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop proof-of-
principle software permitting any graphic to be converted easily into a
universally usable file in the Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) web language
format. Any sighted person with rudimentary computer skills could use this
software to convert a graphic to SVG and could add information that does not
change the visual appearance of the graphic, but makes it usable by individuals
who are blind or have other print reading disabilities. A blind computer user
could then download the file from the web and view it by embossing a copy on the
Tiger Tactile Graphics and Braille Embosser, placing the tactile copy on an
inexpensive digitizing pad, and pressing objects in the graphic in order to hear
them identified by the self-voicing Accessible SVG Viewer.&lt;br/&gt; ViewPlus
Technologies expects Accessible SVG to be adopted rapidly by authors who need to
display graphical information and who work in institutions required to provide
accessible information. As SVG becomes more and more popular, a substantial
fraction of web authors and webmasters are likely to purchase the SVG conversion
software. Generally, most companies and institutions are discovering that it is
good business to make their information accessible and are likely to do so if
most authors can understand easily ho to accomplish that
objective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;