* 0231119
* State-of-the-Art Practices and Educational Materials for Revitalizing Power Electronics and Electric Drives Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Ben Oni, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 05/31/2008
* USD 390,169.00

NSF has previously funded the University of Minnesota to develop novel
approaches and laboratory setups for the teaching of Power Electronics and
Electric Drives. These innovative approaches and laboratory setups have been
shown to be effective in attracting students into the power systems
concentration in the Electrical Engineering degree program at the University of
Minnesota, and these innovative methods have shown to have the flexibility to
address the different learning styles of the students. As a consequence, these
approaches can serve as national models for improving power systems courses at
other institutions. Toward this end, this project is disseminating these
approaches in effort to revitalize power electronics and electric drives courses
on a national scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The management team for the project
consists of the PI and two co-PIs from the University of Minnesota, and two co-
PIs from other universities-- one from Tuskegee University and the other from
the Arizona State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structure of the project
includes a minimum of three workshops for the dissemination of the practices and
materials. Each workshop is formulated on the experiences of the management team
with these innovative methods at the University of Minnesota. Each workshop is
designed for approximately 100 participants. The participants of the workshops
are provided with the detailed methods used in developing the approaches, and
they are given training to familiarize them with the laboratory hardware. The
goal is for each participant to gain the knowledge and experience to offer these
or similar courses at his/her home institution. Finally, the participants are
encouraged to adapt these laboratories and seek funding through the CCLI-A&amp;I
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of a detailed evaluation and
assessment plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;