* 0231395
* Collaborative Research:  Educational Materials to Bring Traditional Ecological Knowledge into Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* David Yarlott, Little Big Horn College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 01/31/2008
* USD 74,965.00

&lt;br/&gt;Traditional ecological knowledge (TEK) is increasingly recognized as
a valid partner to ecological sciences. Prototypes of course materials are being
developed to achieve integration between TEK and the science of ecology. Such
materials will be a valuable resource to educators at tribal colleges and at
mainstream universities as we endeavor to support the development of increasing
numbers of Native Americans in science disciplines. Education of mainstream
scientists in the approaches of TEK increases cross-cultural competence, reduces
barriers to participation by Native Americans, and enriches the perspectives
available for environmental problem solving. Prototypes are being developed
collaboratively between two institutions and two PIs with shared goals, but
different audiences: a tribal college, Little Big Horn College (LBHC), and a
mainstream university, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry (ESF).
At LBHC the prototype is intended as a culturally responsive, place-based
ecology course, which will integrate the science of ecology with TEK, primarily
from Crow culture. At SUNY ESF, the prototype will be concept-based and span a
wide diversity of cultures and ecosystems. The materials we develop will be
incorporated into a course presently taught at both institutions, General
Ecology. The scope of traditional knowledge has many parallels with the content
of a typical ecology course, making it an excellent forum for introducing TEK.
An Ecology course is also a nearly universal part of college biology curricula,
and it thus provides an appropriate venue for wider dissemination of the
materials developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;