* 0231746
* SBIR Phase I: Automated Pattern Recognition in Images Produced by Comprehensive Two-Dimensional Gas Chromatography
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Stephen Reichenbach, GC Image, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project initiates rigorous
investigation of automated pattern recognition in images produced by
comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography. Comprehensive two-dimensional
gas chromatography (GCxGC) is an emerging technology for chemical separation
that provides a multiplicative increase in separation capacity over traditional
GC. With this greatly increased performance, GCxGC generates data in
significantly larger quantity and with significantly greater complexity. The
quantity and complexity of GCxGC data makes human analyses of GCxGC images
difficult and time-consuming and motivates the need for automated processing.
This Phase I project undertakes both experimental and theoretical investigations
into automating the process of matching observed patterns of chemical
separations against previously recorded patterns annotated by human experts. The
goals are to determine promising statistical models for GCxGC pattern matching
and to demonstrate the feasibility of automated recognition. In this Phase I
work, important anticipated results include statistical characterization of
pattern variations and warping in GCxGC images, a catalog of useful annotations
of previously observed pattern templates, and development of a prototype
algorithm for automated pattern recognition. Phase I results, characterizing
GCxGC patterns, cataloging annotations, and demonstrating the feasibility of
automated processing, will provide a foundation for Phase II research aimed at
developing commercially sign cant GCxGC methods.&lt;br/&gt;This research has
high potential impact for a variety of applications. Commercial applications of
GC include analyses of petroleum, environmental samples, foods and beverages,
fragrances, and toxins (e.g., chemical warfare agents). The availability of
software for automated recognition of chemical components from GCxGC images will
facilitate adoption of GCxGC technology in laboratories using traditional GC and
will contribute to the development of new markets, which require superior
separation performance.&lt;br/&gt;