* 0231147
* A Framework and Network for Evaluating the Impact of Ubiquitous Computing in K-12 Schools
* EHR,DRL
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2005
* Andrew Zucker, SRI International
* Continuing grant
* James S. Dietz
* 11/30/2005
* USD 1,124,689.00

To guide large investments of time, effort, and money, policymakers need more
evidence about the impacts of educational technology, but little information
useful to them has yet been derived from evaluations of ubiquitous computing
initiatives. SRI International is working with six partner organizations to
develop a common framework for evaluating the impacts of ubiquitous computing on
K-12 mathematics and science education. The framework is based on existing
frameworks developed for other purposes (e.g., the EnGauge model developed by
North Central Regional Educational Laboratory and the Metiri Group) and on
findings from a policy study conducted for this project designed to clarify
policymakers information needs and their expectations about ubiquitous
computing. Experienced evaluators from SRI International, the Metiri Group, the
University of Virginia, the University of Minnesota, ROCKMAN ET AL, EDC's Center
for Children and Technology, and Kent State University's Research Center for
Educational Technology are also working as separate organizations conducting
evaluations of many ubiquitous computing initiatives in several states. The
framework to be developed by the group will be used to strengthen the individual
evaluations and make them more responsive to policymakers' needs. By using a
framework in which a variety of important evaluation questions about the impacts
of ubiquitous computing on mathematics and science education can be framed and
understood, we greatly increase the chances that knowledge will accumulate. The
project team is posting the framework, evaluation findings, and syntheses of
these findings on a project Web site. In addition, a number of new evaluation
tools are being developed, and these, too, will be available through the Web.
Information is also being disseminated through conference presentations and
journal articles. Other evaluators, policy-makers, and practitioners are invited
to make use of any of these products, which are intended to help strengthen
evaluation work in the field of ubiquitous computing. A better understanding of
ongoing ubiquitous computing initiatives, derived from evaluations, is expected
to lead to improvements in mathematics and science education practices that use
educational technology.