* 0231884
* Teacher Professional Development in Mathematics and Science: Do the Policies Add Up?
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Thomas Smith, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 05/31/2008
* USD 592,384.00

&lt;br/&gt;The project would focus on examining aspects of in-service
professional development of elementary and secondary teachers. The researchers
propose to use existing national surveys, such as the Schools and Staffing
Survey and the Eisenhower Professional Development Program to analyze how state
and school district policies influence teacher participation in professional
development. The study would also address how the content covered in
professional development is associated with the content covered in teachers'
instruction and student achievement. One hypothesis is that school organization
influences the teacher's participation in professional development and that the
content-focus of professional development influences the content of instruction
which is associated with student achievement for particular content areas. The
study is intended to emphasize the role of professional development within the
causal framework of affecting the adoption of reform efforts and student
achievement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal seeks to use large existing
databases about teachers to learn more about linking state and local policies to
improving professional development and how it is linked to student achievement,
if at all. The researchers will conduct extensive analysis of large databases.