* 0231632
* SGER:   Intelligent Adaptive Control of Flexible AC Transmission System (FACTS) Devices in a Distributed Power Network Containing Turbogenerators - Resubmission
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Ronald Harley, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 07/31/2004
* USD 69,796.00

&lt;br/&gt;"Flexible AC Transmission System" (FACTS) devices refer to rapidly
switching power semiconductor devices, used in power systems to control the
power flow and stabilize voltages. The decentralized nature of their actions may
cause deleterious interactions between one FACTS device and another, as well as
between FACTS devices and generators in the system. Currently there is a general
lack of understanding as to how to systematically coordinate and stabilize
system-wide dynamics via local modulation of the faster FACTS devices as well as
the slower generators. Nonlinear neurocontrollers offer a
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will evaluate the initial
application of neurocontrollers based on different adaptive critic designs to
two different types of FACTS devices (one at a time) on a multi-machine power
system. An SGER form of proposal is chosen because this is preliminary work
based on novel ideas, and if successful, the results will be used to generate a
regular proposal which will further investigate the interactions between
conventionally controlled generators and multiple neurocontrolled FACTS
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this work lies
in:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Research Benefits: Locally placed neurocontrolled
FACTS devices can provide system wide improved voltage support and stability,
thus allowing the entire power system to be operated more efficiently with a
smaller stability margin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Benefits to Society:
Economically operated reliable and secure power systems are of national
interest. When electricity demand exceeds available supply, it would be
beneficial to produce more electrical power per installed Megawatt (and Dollar)
of equipment, with the addition of relatively cheap intelligent
neurocontrollers.&lt;br/&gt;