* 0231892
* Turning to the Evidence: What Teachers Learn About Using Classroom Records and Artifacts in Mathematics Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Nanette Seago, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 12/31/2008
* USD 1,669,696.00

&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the researchers propose to examine how teachers use
student created artifacts of mathematics learning in their own professional
development. The conceptual framing for the proposal comes from two strands of
work. The first strand involves theory and research about the conceptual systems
teachers use to understand student thinking. Several investigators have recently
described cognitive schemata for mathematics education as "lenses" through which
educators perceive, organize, and enact their practice. The researchers posit
that two lenses are particularly relevant to the way teachers identify and
interpret evidence of student thinking from classroom artifacts and records: a
"mathematical content" lens and a "mathematical epistemology" one. The second
conceptual strand comes from theories of the situated nature of practice, which
emphasize that knowledge itself is a function of the contexts in which it
develops. Although practice-based professional development seeks to narrow the
distance between the learning teachers do in professional development settings
and tasks of classroom practice, the differences between the two contexts can
nonetheless be significant. &lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate two
overarching questions: (1) what do teachers learn by participating in
professional development that uses classroom records and artifacts? and (2) what
aspects of their learning do teachers apply to their classroom practice? The
study will investigate teachers' learning as they participate in either one of
two professional development programs that focus on analysis of classroom
artifacts, Fostering Algebraic Thinking Toolkit (TK) or VideoCases for
Mathematics Professional Development (VCM). &lt;br/&gt;Four sites have been
selected, two TK and two VCM seminars. Comparisons to teachers not in the
treatment will be included. Seminars will meet monthly for three semesters. Data
bearing on questions about teachers' learning in the seminars will include:
pre/post measures of teachers' algebra understanding, pre/post interviews
focusing on teachers' analysis of student work samples, video records and field
notes of seminar sessions, and embedded assessments of teachers' analyses of
student thinking. Data about the application to classroom practice will include
videotaped pre/post classroom observations of all teachers in the study
(observations include briefings with teachers before and after the lesson) and
monthly observations of a sample of target teachers. A comparison on some of
these measures will be made with teachers who do not participate in the
professional development programs. Data analysis will involve a combination of
cross-case analyses and quantitative comparisons, where appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;