* 0231875
* Implementation of Inquiry-Based Teaching and Learning of Science and Mathematics in New York City Middle Schools
* EHR,DGE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Leonard Fine, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 05/31/2007
* USD 1,613,400.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GK-12 project supports fellows at Columbia
University, from the departments of Biology, Chemistry, and Mathematics, and
undergraduate fellows at Barnard College, from the Department of Environmental
Science. The fellows engage in educational activities with middle school
students in an urban New York City school district. Nine graduate students and
three advanced undergraduates are supported per year. Teams of fellows and
science teachers utilize inquiry-based projects in an effort to develop novel
curricula based on issues that connect with the everyday lives of the students.
The science is presented with other areas of instruction such as social studies,
art and literature to enhance the students' appreciation for the social context
of science. The Institute for Learning Technologies at Teachers College of
Columbia University is a partner in this project. The intellectual merit is
evidenced by the unique inclusion of literature and history in the presentation
of science in the middle school context, e.g. including reading and writing
skills. Broader impacts relate to the relevance of the subjects targeted, e.g.
environmental issues. This project is partially supported by funds from the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
title: Implementation of Inquiry-Based Teaching and Learning of Science and
Mathematics in New York City Middle Schools&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Columbia
University&lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI: Leonard Fine, Bhawani
Venkataraman&lt;br/&gt;Partner School Districts: New York City School District
Two, &lt;br/&gt;Funding: $1,406,400 &lt;br/&gt;Number of fellows/year: 9
graduate, 3 undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban&lt;br/&gt;Target audience:
Middle School &lt;br/&gt;NSF supported disciplines involved: Chemistry, Biology,
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;