* 0231995
* Predictively Improving the Problem Solving of Science Students
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Ronald Stevens, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* James S. Dietz
* 12/31/2005
* USD 1,487,581.00

This proposed three-year study will investigate how undergraduate and high
school students make and use strategic choices as they engage in complex problem
solving in chemistry. The researchers will then use this to develop effective
collaborative approaches for modifying unproductive strategies.

IMMEX software will sequentially capture the students' actions while they
perform a series of related chemistry cases, and extract common strategies using
artificial neural network technologies. These strategies will be aggregated into
strategy types using evidence of the quality of student understanding, related
to student ability, by Item Response Theory analysis. These analyses will
suggest directed case delivery sequences for audiences with different abilities
and provide an organizing framework for linking ability, and preferred problem-
solving approaches.

Steady state models of the development and persistent usage of particular
strategies and strategy types within classrooms of students with different
abilities (i.e. regular high school, AP, undergraduate) will then be developed
through Hidden Markov Modeling. Here, additional student performances are
predicted to have little change on the distribution of strategies used
previously within a particular classroom. These models will provide baseline
probabilities that students will transit from one strategy type to another on a
subsequent series of IMMEX cases. These models are baseline in the sense that no
particular interventions will be suggested or tested.

Collaborative learning activities will then be constructed around these models
to perturb these steady states. The most refined interventions will use the
Intelligent Collaborative Learning System that will relate the interaction
sequence details of student's communication behaviors/skills with the
effectiveness of these activities in modifying strategic approaches.

The research will be used to develop practical, yet effective classroom
interventions that teachers can use in conjunction with IMMEX performance data
to accelerate the acquisition of their students' problem-solving skills. While
targeted to chemistry, the studies may be applicable to many scientific
educational activities.