* 0231574
* Directional Thermal Diffusivity of Deformed Elastomers
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Neil Wright, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 08/31/2004
* USD 158,263.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CTS-0084276&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: N.
Wright&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The uniaxial
thermomechanical response of elastomers has been studied for nearly two
centuries, but the multiaxial response has been less studied. The multiaxial
mechanical response can yield complex and unique behavior, such as unequal
biaxial deformation of sheets of rubber subject to equibiaxial loading. Not
surprisingly, complete constitutive models of the elastic response are lacking,
largely due to the scarcity of suitable multiaxial data. Scarcer still are
multiaxial measurements of thermophysical properties. This project will extend
the flash thermal diffusivity method to measure the thermal diffusivity of
elastomers subject to multiaxial finite deformation. This extended method will
allow for the thermal diffusivity of such materials to be arbitrarily
anisotropic. These property measurements and resulting constitutive relations
should lead to improved continuum models of the general thermoelastic response
of elastomers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing new property measurement
techniques remains important and relevant even with the increased use of
computer modeling, because experiments remain, in most cases, the only method of
developing the constitutive relations that the models need. The techniques
developed here can be applied to materials other than elastomers, for example
composites and biological tissues, whether or not these materials are
deformed.&lt;br/&gt;