* 0231844
* STI:  AMPATH Collaborative Research and Education Operational and Functional Support
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Julio Ibarra, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2005
* USD 482,679.00

This proposal provides staff support for the AMPATH project. This project in
advanced networking infrastructure and an international exchange point for
research and education is based in Miami, Florida at Florida International
University (FIU). The project will connect at least 10 countries' National or
Regional Research and Education Networks (NRENS), and will provide advanced
networking connectivity to US e-Science applications and major instrumentation
interests in Latin America and the Caribbean. The future work plan objectives
proposed will assist information sharing between the region and US scientific
researchers and educators, using Internet based computational grids and major
research instrumentation. The specific work plan includes objectives to: (1)
Enable and support strategic US-led projects in South and Central America,
Mexico and the Caribbean (2) Connect the NRENs in the AMPATH Service Area to the
global R&E networking community (3) Develop an outreach and dissemination
program through conferences, workshops and other channels to increase awareness
of AMPATH and its benefit to the global R&E networking community (4) Develop a
technology plan that will enable the AMPATH network to support e-Science and
experimental networks

The proposal uses "The August, 2001 AMPATH Workshop Report" prepared by a
committee of US researchers, as the foundation of its funding request. To launch
the AMPATH project, Global Crossing donated 10 DS3 (45 Mbps) circuits for three-
year periods, staggered depending on the connection date of each NREN. Cisco
Systems, Lucent Technologies and Juniper Networks donated carrier-class network
equipment; and Terremark Worldwide, Inc. donated collocation space in the NAP Of
The Americas. Since June 2001, the AMPATH project has connected three National
Research and Education Networks in South America: REUNA of Chile, RNP of Brazil,
and RETINA of Argentina; the Academic Network of Sao Paolo, ANSP5, which is a
State-funded network; the University of Puerto Rico; the Arecibo observatory;
and the Gemini-South telescope. The NRENs of Colombia, Mexico, Panama, Peru and
Venezuela remain to be connected to the project. The final DS3 is to connect the
R&E network of the US Virgin Islands, primarily targeted to the distributed
campuses of the University of the Virgin Islands.

Until funding is received this work is done on a best-effort basis by the PI and
Co-PI, the Chief Network Engineer and the International Coordinator for the
AMPATH project. NSF will establish a significant piece of international
infrastructure by funding this project and connecting NRENS for the region.