* 0231006
* Antifreeze Proteins in Antarctic Fishes: Integrated Studies of Freezing Environments and Organismal Freezing Avoidance, Protein Structure-Function and Mechanism, Genes &amp; Evolut
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Arthur DeVries, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 06/30/2007
* USD 729,833.00

This project includes on-going and new studies on the role of antifreeze
glycoproteins (AFGPs) and a new antifreeze potentiating protein (AFPP) in the
freezing avoidance of Antarctic fishes, their eggs and larvae in the freezing
Antarctic environment. The specific areas of research to be investigated are:
(1) the rate of uptake of endogenous ice by ice-free specimens; (2) structure of
AFPP and the mechanism whereby it potentiates the antifreeze activity of the
large AFGPs, but not the small ones; (3) structure-function elucidation of eel
pout AFP through directed-evolution methodologies; (4) mechanism of freezing
avoidance in embryos and young larval fish, and the temporal aspects of AFGP and
AFPP expression during embryogenesis; (5) comprehensive analyses of the
antifreeze capacity at both the protein and gene levels across the suborder
Notothenioidei; (6) evolution of the AFGP gene family and gene locus; (7)
evolution of AFPP; and (8) origin of the Patagonotothen lineage, the largest
clade of non-Antarctic nototheniids who are close relatives to the endemic
Antarctic notothenioid species. Extreme cold and icy conditions of the McMurdo
Sound marine environment arise from its association with the massive Ross Ice
Shelf and the influence of cold shelf water. To elucidate the relationship
between the McMurdo environment and ice exposure in the local fish population,
parallel physical measurements of the depth and extent of ice formation in
various microenvironments in the Sound will be conducted and biological
experiments will be completed to determine ice load in fish at these locations
by measuring the number of ice crystals in their spleens, as well as the rate of
ice entry into fish. These studies will ascertain the relationship between the
degree of environmental extremes and the ice load in
fish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has extensive international
collaborations and findings may have broad implications for agriculture, food
science, and cryomedicine. Public outreach and training of graduate and
undergraduate students are integral components of the planned work.