* 0231411
* Developing an Online Center for Global Geography Education
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2005
* Michael Solem, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 04/30/2005
* USD 152,548.00

(88) Geography Introductory textbooks and courses in world geography generally
emphasize factual knowledge and lecturing. As a result, relatively few American
students get to engage directly with the perspectives of their peers in other
parts of the world or to benefit from active inquiry. Students need
international perspectives and high levels of competency in geography to
understand and appreciate our diverse, highly interdependent world. Many
geographers believe Internet technology can help build an integrated
international community of scholars dedicated to collaborative teaching and
multinational learning. Despite some progress, this potential remains largely
untapped because of the lack of materials, training, information, and
disciplinary coordination available to faculty for planning and carrying out
online teaching collaborations with international colleagues. This proof of
concept project is working to create this integrated international community of
scholars in geography. It is engaged in producing, testing, and disseminating
three instructional modules for an online Center for Global Geography Education.
A consortium of disciplinary organizations is participating in the project over
a period of two years. In the first year, the focus is on developing student
activities and hypermedia applications for the modules. In the second year the
project plans to beta test the modules and designing the online architecture of
the Center. Growing out of that second year, the project will promote national
and international adoption of the modules by training faculty through workshops
and distance learning. Ultimately, the Center will serve as a virtual meeting
place and educational materials clearinghouse for discipline-based international
teaching collaborations.