* 0231563
* SBIR Phase I:  Innovative Assessment of Induced Subsurface Stress in Single Crystal Materials Using Photon Induced Positron Annihilation (PIPA)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Jagoda Urban-Klaehn, Positron Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2003
* USD 98,724.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will perform
research aimed at characterizing subsurface residual stresses induced through
surface treatments in single crystal and complex polycrystalline materials.
Photon Induced Positron Annihilation (PIPA) will be used to quantify subsurface
residual stress in single crystal materials and operational components subjected
to high stress/high temperature environments. PIPA as a nondestructive material
characterization technology has the potential to provide quantifiable, empirical
data on atomic level, lattice structure changes in advanced
metallic/intermetallic alloys used for critical component applications that
result in failure.

Commercially, government and industry spend billions of dollars each year in the
maintenance and repair of components and systems. Many of the maintenance
procedures are based upon conservative engineering models instead of actual
empirical data, leading to early replacement of components, accelerated
maintenance cycles, and a reactive versus proactive approach to failure
mechanisms. PIPA provides real-time, empirical information on material
characterization, redefining conservative prediction models and supplying
decision makers with the hard data to evaluate materials and components for
extension or replacement considerations, based upon the actual assessment of
material damage.

