* 0231418
* U.S./Africa Materials Institute
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Winston Soboyejo, Princeton University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Carmen I. Huber
* 07/31/2009
* USD 3,848,769.00

The proposed U.S./Africa Materials Institute will focus on the development of
collaborations between materials scientists in Africa and the counterparts in
the U.S. The Virtual Materials Institute will provide a Princeton setting for
research collaborations in the areas of materials design, synthesis and
characterization. However, the center will also coordinate interactions with
other universities in the U.S. These include: Harvard, Brown, Case Western
University, The Ohio State University, the University of California at Santa
Barbara (UCSB) and Concordia University. A total of 8 African scientists and
their students will be supported (per year) to spend between 3 months and 6
months interacting with their counterparts in the U.S. Half of these scientists
will be based at Princeton University, while the other half will be based at
participating U.S. universities. The institute will focus on research and
education in the area of materials design. It will work on areas that can
promote economic development in Africa and the U.S. This will include: materials
research on organic thin films for the next generation of light-emitting devices
and solar cells; micro-electro-mechanical systems for switching and biomedical
applications, and heterogeneous materials for affordable housing and materials
production/synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S./Africa Materials Institute
will use web-based tools to provide access to materials journals, virtual
laboratories and classrooms, and web-cast symposia and workshops. Teaching
modules will be developed to support the education of African and U.S. materials
scientists and engineers in materials selection and design, structural
materials, micro-electro-mechanical systems, and materials characterization. The
web-based teaching modules will be developed in conjunction with Internet 2, and
made freely available on the world-wide-web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an effort
to promote the interactions between U.S. and African scientists, the Institute
will work closely with the African Materials Research Society and the Materials
Research Society in the U.S. to organize joint symposia/workshops in Africa and
the U.S. One major workshop will be organized in the U.S. during each year of
the program. The Institute will also provide financial support for at least 10
U.S. materials researchers and graduate students to attend Africa MRS Meetings.
A similar number of visiting African collaborators will be supported to attend
the Materials Research Society meetings in the U.S. During these visits, the
Institute will organize information sessions designed to expose a wider range of
U.S. and African researchers to emerging U.S./Africa collaborations in materials
research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute will be guided by an
Advisory Board that will include representatives from Africa, South America,
Europe, Canada and the U.S. The Advisory Board will meet once a year to evaluate
the performance and future needs/directions of the Institute. The Institute will
be directed by Prof. Wole Soboyejo at Princeton University. Prof. Soboyejo will
be supported by an Administrative Manager and a secretary, who will help to
coordinate the activities of the Institute. The other participating
collaborators at Princeton University include Prof. David Srolovitz, Prof.
Zhigang Suo, Prof. George Scherer, Prof. Tim Baker and Prof. Antoine Kahn. At
other universities, the collaborators will include Prof. Arthur Heuer (Case
Western), Prof. Anthony Evans (UCSB), Prof. Tianjin Lu (Cambridge), Prof. John
Hutchinson (Harvard), Prof. Alan Needleman (Brown), Prof. Clyde Briant (Brown),
Prof. Alfred Soboyejo (The Ohio State University) and Prof. Primus Mtenga
(FAMU/FSU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an effort to expose more U.S. students to
the process of international collaboration, the Institute will support 4
graduate students and 4 undergraduate students per year to work on various
aspects of the proposed research. The students will work closely with the
African visitors during visits to their respective universities in the U.S. They
will also be funded to attend the symposia/ workshops that will be organized by
the Institute in Africa and the U.S. The students will include minority and non-
minority students from under-represented groups, as well as women under-
graduate/graduate students. All the U.S. collaborators will meet by
teleconference once a month. The meetings will provide a forum for discussions
on emerging collaborations. A center newsletter will also be issued once every
six months to provide highlights of the activities of the Virtual Institute. As
usual, the outcomes of all the outreach and education activities will be
recorded using the metrics provided by the NSF.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The
U.S./Africa International Materials Institute will develop strong collaborations
between materials scientists in Africa and the U.S. The scientists will work on
group projects that can impact global economic development. These include:
infrastructure materials for affordable housing; materials for lining the walls
of furnaces and kilns that are used in the trillion-dollar metal melting
industry; organic electronic materials for future light-emitting devices and
solar cells, and reliable small structures that are relevant to microelectronics
and micro-electro-mechanical devices. Each year, 16 African scientists will
spend 9 weeks working with their collaborators in the U.S. The visiting
scientists will include professors, research scientists and graduate students
from African universities and research institutes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About
half of the scientists will visit U.S. collaborators at Princeton University,
while the other half will visit U.S. collaborators at Harvard University, Brown
University, Northwestern University, The Ohio State University, the University
of California-Santa Barbara, and Florida State University/Florida A&amp;M
University. During the visits, the scientists will work on experimental or
theoretical components of group projects. They will also be trained in the use
of modern materials characterization or computational facilities. Following the
visits, the scientists will return to Africa to continue with the aspects of the
work that can be done in Africa. Each scientist will return to the U.S. over a
multi-year (2-5 year period) until a significant body of research is done and
published in international journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will also
integrate education and training of U.S. undergraduate/graduate students and
post-doctoral researchers in the process of international collaboration. Each,
at least four U.S. graduate students, four U.S. undergraduate students and one
post-doctoral research will be supported by the program at Princeton University
and the Ohio State University. These students will participate in future
U.S./Africa workshops and conferences. They will also be involved in
international exchange visits, during which they will interact with
collaborators and students at African universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
area of materials education, the program will develop web-based modules on
materials design and characterization. These will include teaching modules on:
materials selection and design; advanced structural materials; mechanical
properties of engineered materials, and materials characterization. The modules
will be made widely available on the world-wide-web. They will also be
integrated into the teaching of undergraduate and graduate courses at Princeton
University and collaborating African universities. Finally, annual that will
develop increased interactions between the U.S. and Africa in the areas of
materials research and education. The workshops will also provide an opportunity
to disseminate the new knowledge and educational tools that will emerge from the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;