* 0231800
* The AP Fellows Program: Enhancing Low-Income Urban Students' Participation and Achievement in Advanced Placement Courses
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Theodore Brown, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 05/31/2007
* USD 1,728,818.00

CUNY Graduate School is partnering with the Bronx High School Superintendency of
the New York City Board of Education, The College Board, and the New York
Academy of Sciences to address the need to increase the participation of low-
income and underrepresented minority students in high-school-level Advanced
Placement (AP) courses in mathematics and sciences, particularly in urban
schools. This will have broad impacts not only for New York City, but also for
other urban school districts eager to challenge all of their students. Project
activities include: training for GK-12 Fellows in STEM education so that they
can play a new role as an AP Fellow; enhancing the abilities of AP teachers of
science and mathematics to deliver AP courses to urban students; and developing
an exportable model that can be used by other school districts for increasing
the successful participation of urban students in AP courses. The Graduate
Fellows are assisting 20 new or novice AP teachers of science and mathematics
and both are receiving intensive summer and academic-year training and support
including College Board Summer Institutes, and workshops on such topics as
science and mathematics content, inquiry-based instruction, science and math
standards, educational technology as applied to formatting, AP course
instruction, and post-secondary programs and career opportunities in STEM. In
addition, of intellectual merit, AP teachers and university faculty who teach
parallel courses are working together toward improving AP course delivery and
articulation with post-secondary settings. This project is partially supported
by funds from the Directorate for Engineering from the Directorate for Computer
and Information Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Title of Project:
The AP Fellows Program: Enhancing Low-Income Urban Students Participation and
Achievement in Advanced Placement Courses&lt;br/&gt;Institution: The Graduate
School and University Center of the City University of New York
&lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI: Theodore Brown and Victor S. Strozak, both from CUNY
Graduate School&lt;br/&gt;Partner School District: Bronx High School
&lt;br/&gt;Other Partners: The College Board and the New York Academy of
Sciences&lt;br/&gt;Funding: $1,498,818&lt;br/&gt;# of Fellows/year: 10 AP
Graduate Fellows and 20 AP Science and Math Teachers&lt;br/&gt;Target Audience:
High School &lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban&lt;br/&gt;Disciplines: Biology,
Biochemistry, Chemistry, Computer Science, Earth and Environmental Sciences,
Engineering, and Physics&lt;br/&gt;