* 0231665
* NSF/USDOT:  Innovative Feeder Transit Services: Mobility Allowance Shuttle Transit - MAST
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Maged Dessouky, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/2005
* USD 200,001.00

Demands on urban transit agencies for improved and extended services are
increasing; yet, there is little public support for increases in fares or
subsidies. Therefore, transit agencies are currently seeking ways to improve
service flexibility in a cost-efficient manner. Traditional fixed-route bus
transit systems are cost effective; however, the general public considers the
service to be inconvenient because of a lack of flexibility. Demand Responsive
Transit (DRT) networks are flexible, but tend to be much more costly to deploy
than fixed-route systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome these limitations,
the PIs will explore and develop an innovative concept called Mobility Allowance
Shuttle Transit (MAST) that merges the flexibility of DRT systems with the low
cost operability of fixed-route bus systems. A MAST service has a fixed, base
route that covers a specific geographic zone. The innovative twist is that MAST
allows buses to deviate from the fixed path so that passengers wanting service
in the vicinity of the path may be picked up or dropped off at their desired
locations. Passengers contact the dispatch center to request a pick-up and
receive service from the next available bus. The only restriction on flexibility
is that the deviations must lie within a predetermined distance from the fixed,
base route. The PIs' research objective is to recommend a viable MAST
architecture, specifically providing (1) the route deviation distance, (2) the
schedule slack time, and (3) the policies for real-time sequencing and
assignment of pick-ups. This research will produce a regression-based demand
model and a nonlinear dynamic bus headway distribution model. These models will
be used to drive the design process as well as to synthesize operating policies.
The approach will be validated through an extensive simulation
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will determine the demand and
operating conditions that will allow MAST to be financially viable. The
successful implementation of MAST will improve the desirability of transit as an
alternative to private automobiles, and could result in increased transit
ridership. An increase in transit ridership would likely lead to reduced roadway
congestion and improved environmental conditions, such as reductions in
greenhouse gas emissions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;