* 0231997
* Lane County School Districts and University of Oregon Partnership to Enhance Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) Education
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* David Tyler, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2006
* USD 1,743,824.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GK-12 project supports fellows
at the University of Oregon, from the departments of Physics and Chemistry, for
educational activities with grade K-12 students in the rural Lane County school
districts. Eleven graduate students and two advanced undergraduates are
supported per year. The themes are hands-on experience, inquiry-based learning,
and, for K-8, the creative use of "Science and Technology for Children" science
kits. The intellectual merit of this project includes the opportunity for the
Fellows to work with teachers who help them develop effective teaching skills
while honing their own understanding of mathematics and the sciences. The
broader impact is the help given to the schools as they adapt the kits for uses
consistent with the state science standards. This project is receiving partial
support from the Directorate for Mathematics and the Physical
Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project title: Partnership to Enhance Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Oregon &lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI: David Johnson, Dean Livelybrooks,
Caroline Page, David Tyler&lt;br/&gt;Partner School Districts: Lane
County&lt;br/&gt;Funding: $ 1,490,824 total for three years&lt;br/&gt;Number of
fellows/year: 11 graduate, 2 undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;Setting:
Rural&lt;br/&gt;Target audience: K-12 &lt;br/&gt;NSF supported disciplines
involved: chemistry, physics and mathematics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;