* 0231635
* Pan-American Seminar and Workshop on the Interface Between Automobile Traffic Networks Under Dynamic Traffic Assignment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Jorge Velez-Arocho, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/2004
* USD 89,906.00

This award represents funding for a conference-workshop to assess the state of
the art and the state of the practice and suggest research priorities in the
integration of Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) and automobile traffic systems under
Dynamic Traffic Assignment (DTA) in North, Central and South America. This
conference-workshop will provide an extraordinary opportunity to bring together
leading researchers and practitioners from the Americas to exchange ideas and
information concerning the integration of BRT and other transit systems and
automobile traffic networks under DTA and other ITS systems. During this
activity and in follow-up activities, the participants will present existing DTA
modeling approaches and BRT systems operations, suggest ways of integrating
them, prioritize needs for research, and create hemispheric awareness of local
and regional needs.

This conference-workshop, which will take place in Puerto Rico, will be an
example of international exchange and collaboration as well as the integration
of BRT technology into the DTA modeling approach to produce improvements in
urban mobility in the near future. Puerto Rico has unique comparative advantages
for joint North-South research and technology transfer because of its
understanding of Latin American and US transportation environments.

This conference-workshop provides a special opportunity for hemispheric
cooperation because it brings together countries with complementary knowledge,
in a situation where sharing information will result in mutual benefits. This
international conference-workshop will help identify the most advanced thinking
and technologies from the US or other countries in the Americas; for example,
modeling techniques developed in the US and successful implementation of BRT in
major Latin American cities. In addition, this activity will foster the exchange
of ideas in terms of future collaboration on cooperative research projects and
international events.

