* 0231328
* On-Line Support for Object-Oriented Programming Language Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 12/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Allen Hanson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 05/31/2005
* USD 399,999.00

This project addresses the issues of attracting, engaging, and competently
training students in computer science by developing innovative multimedia-based
instructional software for introductory computer science classes. The software
tools is built on top of an existing system called Online Web-based Learning
(OWL), a system that has been used with great success in chemistry, physics, and
mathematics. This project identifies three broad characteristics of first year
CS instruction in object-oriented (OO) programming instruction, particularly in
Java: 1) there is too much material for students to learn in a single 14 week
semester; 2) staffing in introductory courses is stretched too thinly and
devotes too much time to background chores such as grading; and 3) because of
very uneven instruction in high schools and varying expectations about the
purpose of programming instruction, student competence, interest, and
expectation varies greatly in a single class. Moreover three additional features
characterize defects in teaching strategies: 1) students are reluctant to read
code (programs) carefully; 2) students often complete the first two semesters of
Java programming instruction with a very poorly developed sense of high-level
design; and 3) students are isolated and work together poorly. We are
implementing the following pedagogical and technical remedies for these problems
in the context of the first two courses in a traditional CS curriculum,
introduction to programming and data structures. These remedies include: the
development of a wide range of on-line exercises that teach about the
fundamental concepts of OO programming and data structures; the development of
exercises that train students to be careful code-readers; the development of
exercises that teach students first to understand code from a UML perspective,
and second to use UML thinking to design code at a high level; and finally,
through the mechanism of an informal drop-in center, and through the development
of multi-student on-line exercises, we train students to collaborate more
effectively with their peers.