* 0231708
* SBIR Phase I: An Adaptive Remote-Data Access System For Wireless Handheld Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Xiaohui Carol Song, L. S. Technology
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,840.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project designs and develops an
adaptive remote-data access system for wireless handheld devices. The key
innovations in the project include adaptive data compression and adaptive
partitioning techniques to save network bandwidth and battery consumption. The
central concept is the ability to adapt to the changing wireless network
environment and to different types of data. The proposed techniques go beyond
existing bandwidth-saving techniques such as nonadaptive compression and
"diff"-based data synchronization. A research prototype will be built for
extensive experimentation in order to measure the effectiveness of the proposed
technique for the saving of network bandwidth and battery consumption. This
prototype will integrate heterogeneous systems, runtime systems, and compiler
techniques. Commercial Applications of Research: The success of this research
will lead to a software product which provides users of wireless handheld
devices with secure, convenient, and cost-effective access to the data (and
associated applications) located on their stationary computer systems, such as
desktop machines and servers. This product can be used by both business and
individual users for various functionalities which require to access data stored
on the main computer systems in the form of text, graphics, photographs, data
images, speeches, sound, and so on. The adaptive features of the system fulfill
the need of remote-centric workforce to access host-based data and applications
from anywhere at any time over wireless connections in a highly cost-effective
way.