* 0231886
* Developing Subject Matter Knowledge in Mathematics Middle School Teachers: A Cross-National Study of Teacher Education as a Follow-Up of TIMSS
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2011
* Maria Tatto, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 06/30/2011
* USD 1,557,490.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number: 0231886 &lt;br/&gt;PI: William
Schmidt&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Michigan State University&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Developing Subject Matter Knowledge in Mathematics Middle School Teachers: A
Cross-National Study of Teacher Education as a Follow-up of
TIMSS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies in countries how middle school
mathematics teachers learn to teach subject matter content as a result of their
preparation. Specifically, the study will address: &lt;br/&gt;(1) What is the
general structure of teacher preparation in the countries selected? The study
will select six countries using criteria such as high levels of achievement in
TIMSS, challenging 8th grade curricula, distinctive teacher preparation
approaches and "map" the structure of teacher preparation in each country.
&lt;br/&gt;(2) What is the mathematical and pedagogical content those preparing
to teach eighth graders have an opportunity to learn? The project will select a
probability sample of teacher preparation institutions in each country and
within it a sample of students in their last year of study to probe their
curriculum experiences and mathematical and pedagogical knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;(3) What is the cost-effectiveness of different approaches to teacher
preparation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that results from the study
will provide a conceptual framework for comparative study of teacher
preparation; help understand the greater diversity of approaches; provide a
methodology, indicators and analytic tools to study the influence of teacher
preparation on prospective candidates; and provide policy insight on how to
improve the preparation of middle school mathematics teachers. &lt;br/&gt;