* 0231638
* Watershed-Integrated Sciences Partnership (WISP) between UMassBoston and Local School Districts
* EHR,DGE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Michael Shiaris, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2006
* USD 1,727,458.00

PROJECT SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teacher-Fellow teams in seven Middle
Schools (Harbor, McCormack, Woodrow Wilson, Lewis, and Gavin Middle Schools in
the Boston Public Schools; Pierce Middle School in the Milton Public Schools;
Dedham Middle School in the Dedham Public Schools) located within the Neponset
River watershed are adapting existing instructional materials such as FOSS kits
to use a study of the local watershed as a unifying theme for middle school
science. Data is being gathered from the school playground, the students'
backyards and the larger community surrounding the participating schools. Inter-
school information exchange enables the students at each school to relate their
situation to the larger picture and the community of schools can collaborate to
gain a sense of conditions within the entire watershed. Quantitative examples
and activities are being emphasized in order to hone students' mathematics
skills, reinforce the existing mathematics curriculum, and demonstrate
mathematics' relevance to science and everyday life. Fellows receive a Summer
Teacher Training workshop in pedagogy, state and national frameworks, and
effective classroom management. Each Fellow is then teamed with a middle school
Teacher in a weeklong Summer Environmental Science Content Institute that uses
specific examples and hands-on activities within the watershed to strengthen the
Teachers' and Fellows' science content knowledge and concept understanding. In
addition to their classroom duties, Fellows are required to take a specially
developed course, Teaching Environmental Sciences and Technology. (TEST), that
provides continuing pedagogical and content training. Five daylong workshops are
held for all Fellows and Teachers during the school year to exchange information
and experiences and provide additional content and pedagogical material. A
1-credit spring seminar is used as a base to allow one cohort of Fellows to pass
on their experiences and knowledge to the next. Special events such as canoe
trips, river cleanups, Boston Harbor cruises, and citizen science activities
help foster a sense of connectedness across municipal boundaries. WISP will be
evaluated internally by a science pedagogy faculty member and externally by the
Educational Development Center, Inc. of Newton, MA. The broader benefits of the
program accrue to the Fellows, the teachers, the middle school students and the
institutions involved. The Fellows are developing the interest, skills, and
commitment necessary to be actively engaged in K-12 education throughout their
scientific careers. Teachers are gaining environmental science content knowledge
and enhancing their ability to teach science curricula and to reflect on their
teaching practices. Middle school students are gaining a deeper understanding
and appreciation for science and mathematics. A set of school districts diverse
in size, ethnicity and socio-economics and the University of Massachusetts,
Boston are developing a shared learning community focused on common needs and
shared resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: A Watershed-Integrated Sciences
Partnership (WISP) &lt;br/&gt;Institution: The University of Massachusetts--
Boston &lt;br/&gt;PI/co-PI: Robert F. Chen, William E. Robinson, Michael
Shiaris, Clara Jennings, and Marilyn Decker, &lt;br/&gt;Partner School
Districts: Boston Public, Milton Public, Dedham Public&lt;br/&gt;Funding:
$1,497,458 total for 3 years&lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows/year: 10 Graduate and
3-5 Undergraduate &lt;br/&gt;Grade Band: Middle School &lt;br/&gt;Setting:
Urban, suburban&lt;br/&gt;Disciplines: Geosciences, Biology, Chemistry, Computer
Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;