* 0231843
* GK-12 OCEANS: Ocean sCientist Educator pArtnerships eNhancing Science
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Teresa Greely, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2006
* USD 1,684,879.00

Project Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teacher-Fellow GK-12 teams are
introducing, ocean based science into Pineallis County K-8 classrooms, aligning
their efforts with the Earth Science, Life Science, and Physical Science content
strands in the Florida state science standards. The teams collaborate to
discover and then meet the expressed needs of school district administrators.
Through their work with the Fellows, the teachers, many of whom have little
previous background in ocean science, are becoming adept at stimulating and
elevating students' interest in a variety of science topics by capitalizing on
the fact that Florida is surrounded on three sides by ocean. Faculty
collaborators from the College of Marine Science and the College of Education
serve as mentors and educators to provide professional support in content and
pedagogy for Fellows and teachers. Recruiting strategies for student and faculty
participation capitalize on the growing interest of College of Marine Science
graduate students in education, outreach learning and teaching opportunities,
and the initiation of expanded Ocean Science content based Science Education
degree programs offered by the College of Education. The broader impacts of the
project are reflected in the benefits accruing to each of the participants. The
Fellows are becoming better prepared for the classroom environment and are
developing improved communication skills in such areas as connecting with
diverse audiences. The participating teachers, many of whom have little academic
background in ocean science, by working with content experts, are becoming adept
at capitalizing on the fact that Florida is surrounded on three sides by ocean
to stimulate and elevate students interest generally in a variety of science
topics. Other teachers benefit from the resources the teams have developed and
put on the web. The K-8 students benefit from their interaction with real-life
scientists who act as role models and content specialists, and who are a source
of career information. Schools benefit through 1) professional development for
teachers which expands both their content knowledge and inquiry-based
instructional skills, and 2) an improved science learning environment for
students which incorporates the local ocean setting into real world science
applications. The higher education partners benefit because the project
facilitates collaboration between scientists and educators, fosters development
of innovative degree programs, and serves as a recruitment incentive for
prospective graduate students in Marine Science and Education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title of Project: GK-12 OCEANS: Graduate Teaching Fellows
in K-12 Education Institution: University of South Florida &lt;br/&gt;PI/CoPI:
Teresa Greely and Paula Coble&lt;br/&gt;Cooperating District and Schools:
Pinellas County, Canterbury School of Florida &lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows per
year: 10 graduates, 3 undergraduates&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban, Suburban
&lt;br/&gt;Target Audience of the project: K-8 &lt;br/&gt;NSF supported
disciplines involved: Geosciences/Ocean Science &lt;br/&gt;