* 0231792
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Novel Metallaborane Chemistry:  A Combined Experimental and Theoretical Study
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Thomas Fehlner, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2007
* USD 22,590.00

0231792 Fehlner

This three-year award for US-France collaboration in chemistry involves
researchers and students at the University of Notre Dame and the University of
Rennes. Thomas P. Fehlner in the US and Jean-Francois Halet in France lead this
collaboration. They will investigate the electronic structure and reaction
chemistry of a class of metallaborane clusters. The former will address advanced
qualitative molecular orbital theory and electron counting and the latter
addresses metal properties responsible for exhibited structural behavior. In
these investigations, the researchers focus on explanations of chemical bonding
of hypoelectronic metallaboranes. They posit that the high thermal stability,
low reactivity with air and water suggest new chemical species that lie
somewhere between metallaboranes of later transition metals and solid state
metal borides.

The French team brings to the collaboration theoretical expertise and will
perform large cluster, cross-cluster bonding and other calculations. This is
complemented by US experimental expertise in electrochemistry, design and
synthesis. The collaboration will advance understanding of the bonding and
structural aspects of metallaboranes and approaches for new materials.

This award represents the US side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS.
NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigator and his
students. The CNRS will support visits by French researchers and students to the
United States. .