* 0231202
* Collaborative Research: Teaching Data Structures to the Millennial Generation
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Roberto Tamassia, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 12/31/2005
* USD 124,999.00

This proposal focuses on novel approaches to teaching data structures to the
Millennial Generation and on the development of tools to support them. The
project addresses the communication of key concepts in the design and analysis
of data structures, which are typically taught in a course known by the acronym
CS2, as it is often the second course that a computer science student will take
in their major. This course is full of powerful ideas that have many
applications, yet key concepts are not properly appreciated by many students.
This lack of enthusiasm is likely due to the fact that these concepts are often
presented and justified in ways that do not resonate with the student's prior
experiences and expectations. This project will take this historical approach
and replace it with a more vibrant and visual approach that is just as rigorous
and content led as the previous text-based approach, but is a better match to
the way modern students learn. The components of the project are particularly
focused on studying the use of multimedia, visual teaching styles, and
motivating applications from society and the Internet. A fundamental goal is to
teach computer science students of the Millennial Generation how to design and
utilize data structures in a way that incorporates new technologies and shows
the connection between topics being taught and their potential applications.