* 0232270
* SBIR Phase I: Novel Sensing Materials Based on Carbon Nanotube-Polymer Composites
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Mohammed Abdelkader, Materials and Electrochemical Research Corporation (MER)
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the effect of carbon nanotubes on the photoconductivity of electroactive polymer
matrix composites and on their performance and sensing efficiency. Several
formulations of additives/polymer(s), including functionalized carbon nanotube
systems, have potential to interact selectively, sensitively, and reversibly
with trace analytes in the electroactive matrix. Nanotube-polymer sensing probes
based on conductivity changes or mechanical force fluctuations exerted by the
surrounding media, will be developed and tested for their sensitivity,
reversibility, fast response to different analytes, and chemical and
environmental stability. Superior formulations will be tested and compared to
existing commercial sensing materials. Commercially, conventional metal oxide
and polymer based sensors are usually impractical at ambient temperature due to
low sensitivity. The combination of advanced conformal coating processes and
advanced formulations of nanotube/polymers has the potential to alleviate the
sensitivity and response to inorganic, organic, and biological analytes. These
low cost ultra-light weight nanotube-polymer composite films with improved
structural, stability and electrical properties will be important for portable
sensor applications.