* 0232775
* SBIR Phase I:   Visualization of Large Multidimensional Datasets in a Lower Dimension
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Boris Igelnik, Pegasus Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 98,683.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims on creating
a visualization technology for advanced analysis of large multivariate datasets.
Such technology will be harnessed for finding hidden dependences in data,
revealing its cluster structure, selection of features, and finding regions of
extreme values of the functions defined on the data. Successful solutions of
such problems require preserving the most important distances between data
patterns in a lower dimension. Currently existing visualization methods only
preserve distances for datasets of the size up to few thousands. Many
applications in the process industries, bio-informatics, medicine, and defense
include analysis of datasets containing large datasets with 10,000-1 million
patterns. The hierarchical technique suggested in this project will expand the
use of visualization for advanced data analysis to that range of datasets. The
first applications are seen in process industries such as power generation.
Broader use of this innovation is anticipated in medicine, bio-informatics, and
defense for knowledge discovery through revealing the structure of data. This
project will be used in education for teaching multivariate analysis. The Phase
I activities are expected to create a foundation for further development in
Phase II, leading to integration in a commercial software package. The first
applications of this visualization technology will be for building models for
use in coal-fired power plants advanc pollution control systems. The
visualization tool will become part of a commercially available package and will
be incorporated into a more comprehensive data analysis, modeling, optimization,
and control systems. Medicine, bio-informatics, and defense are seen as
additional potential beneficiaries of the visualization tool.