* 0232527
* SBIR Phase I:  A Law Enforcement Analytical Tool for Visualizing Complex Relationships
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Robert Fund, KNOWLEDGE COMPUTING CORP
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 69,360.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I will develop research of a
commercial application that permits law enforcement or intelligence analysts to
visualize complex relationships among objects in a consolidated database. This
software will operate on large data stores that automatically refresh to
maintain currency. Existing tools that perform this function display the results
of user queries in textual or numeric formats. Certain inherent human cognitive
processes interpose difficulties in converting the raw data to actionable
information and knowledge. This visualization program will give analysts the
ability to discover previously hidden linkages and relationships among
criminals, organizations, locations, weapons, and vehicles that may not be
readily apparent by simply examining raw data. The Phoenix and Tucson police
departments have agreed to be development partners in this effort. Interviews
and observations of investigators and analysts at work will form the basis for
the research outcome. This will be a comprehensive software requirements
statement. There is substantial demand for easy-to-use analytical software that
removes technical and data entry burdens from analysts. Software of this type
can assist law enforcement and homeland defense agencies in carrying out their
tasks more effectively, at less expense and more quickly than is currently
possible.

The commercial application of such a software product is all law enforcement
agencies at the federal, state and local level that engage in criminal
investigations, and all intelligence gathering agencies.