* 0232365
* SBIR Phase I:    Joblet:    A System For Creating Software Development Exchanges
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Todd Touris, Touris                  Todd           C
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the feasibility of a unique system, known as Joblet, which offers the potential
to improve innovation and success in software engineering. Joblet utilizes
economic principles to address areas of software development that have been
chronically problematic. Failures in software development have been rampant in
many technology industries. This problem has grown as the complexity of
software, and the number of developers needed to create it, have grown. Open
Source software has demonstrated the power of distributed collaborative
development, and has shown that independent, creative individuals can join
together to develop innovative products. Joblet combines this power of
collaborative development with the concepts of economic markets to enable a
software engineering environment that will foster innovation, productivity and
project success. The aim of this research is to demonstrate the feasibility of a
system that will support Joblet exchanges and study key mechanisms of Joblet
that will lead to sustainability of markets for software development services
and knowledge. Such a system will have broad application in all areas of
software development and can enable the creation of active communities for
product innovation.

The commercial potential for the Joblet system includes application as a public
website for hosted development services, as well as a product for application in
private enterprises for internal and outsourced development efforts.