* 0232963
* Mini-Symposium on Contemporary Algebra and Algebraic Geometry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX; November 14-16, 2002
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Lourdes Juan, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2003
* USD 15,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator is organizing the 2002
Red Raider mini-symposium at Texas&lt;br/&gt;Tech University on ``Contemporary
Algebra and Algebraic Geometry". The &lt;br/&gt;mini-symposium will consist of
five distinguished lectures on current &lt;br/&gt;research topics on group
theory and its applications, algebraic structures &lt;br/&gt;and algebraic
geometry. The distinguished lectures will be delivered by &lt;br/&gt;William
Fulton, Robert Griess, James Lepowsky, Gregory Margulis and Efim
&lt;br/&gt;Zelmanov.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the mini-symposium
series is to put together a program in&lt;br/&gt;which some of the most
oustanding scholars in selected areas of&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics and Statistics
will deliver lectures on timely research topics&lt;br/&gt;and methodology, with
the objective of providing members of the &lt;br/&gt;mathematical community,
especially early career mathematicians and&lt;br/&gt;graduate students, an
opportunity to broaden their repertoire of research&lt;br/&gt;tools and to learn
about new research venues. The event also provides a&lt;br/&gt;forum for members
of the mathematical community to interact with&lt;br/&gt;outstanding scholars in
a relaxed atmosphere. The above list of speakers&lt;br/&gt;includes two Field
Medalists (the Field Medal is the highest recognition &lt;br/&gt;bestowed in
Mathematics) and three members of the National Academy of &lt;br/&gt;Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;