* 0232223
* SBIR Phase I:    Artificial Intelligence Software for Student Assessment in Chemistry Education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Benny Johnson, Quantum Simulations Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on the
development of meaningful interactive tutoring and assessment capabilities for
chemistry tutorial software. Although there has been a clearly articulated user
demand for advancement in this area, it has been repeatedly identified as one
for which existing offerings are weak. Quantum Simulations a new and different
approach, adapting and incorporating new concepts from artificial intelligence
(AI). More than just assigning a grade, meaningful opportunities will be created
for students to learn directly from the assessment itself. The proposed
technology will benefit all students. The technology, however, is specifically
targeted to help those who have the greatest need--such as students of average
or marginal performance and students from historically underrepresented groups--
by lowering barriers to accessing high-quality science instructional software.
The firm has established a partnership with an NSF-funded systemic reform
initiative to further these goals. The customers for the proffered technology
include textbook publishers, software providers, hardware vendors and distance
learning companies. Quantum has entered into a long-term contract with a
prominent textbook publishe, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, to commercialize this
technology. This arrangement will result in rapid dissemination to an
established end user base.

