* 0232749
* SBIR Phase I:  Polymer Workbench:  Web Service Based Modeling Application Service and Integration for the Polymer Industry
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Glen Ko, RES Group, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a prototype
Polymer Workbench - for use by scientists/ engineers in the polymer industry -
using the concept and tools developed around Web Services. Large investments in
developing models for use in polymer manufacturing are not effectively utilized
as the usage is currently limited to few specialists because the user needs to
navigate through a multitude of models in a multiple and highly disjointed user
environment, often requiring tedious manual transfer of data and modeling
results from one environment to another. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Polymer
Workbench will address this need through applying Web Services concept designed
to allow the user to access a large number of various polymer models through a
single software platform with common user interface, database, and communication
protocol for all models. This work will develop the common communication
protocol by developing an XML-based markup language specific for polymers,
PolymerML, to achieve standardization of the data and information flow between
the user and models. The proposed work will address this important need in a
very large industry where annual sales in the U.S. for polymer materials alone
are $250 billion and expenditure on modeling and simulation exceeds $ 100
million.&lt;br/&gt;