* 0232616
* Collaborative Research:  Characterizing Land Surface Memory to Advance Climate Prediction
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* C Schlosser, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2004
* USD 98,928.00

0232616&lt;br/&gt;Schlosser&lt;br/&gt;We hypothesize that interactions between
the land and atmosphere may be a considerable source of land surface memory, and
that this memory poses an element of coupled land-atmosphere predictability in
the climate system that can advance water-cycle prediction. However, accuracy of
simulated land memory must be assessed, strength of land-atmosphere water
recycling must be identified, and systematic errors in global prediction systems
need to be corrected in order for climate models to faithfully harvest any
degree of land-atmosphere predictability and advance global water-cycle
prediction. An integrated and collaborative effort is
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;Investigations into land surface memory include analysis of
land-model simulations driven by observed meteorology (in conjunction with the
Global Soil Wetness Project Phase 2) and available in situ observations to
produce a global picture of soil moisture persistence; forward and backward
water vapor trajectory analysis to quantify the extent of land-atmosphere water
recycling across the globe; and contemporaneous and lagged correlations between
the two analyses above to determine if indeed strong recycling is the cause of
persistent soil moisture anomalies. Climate model sensitivity studies will
verify the role of high-memory regions in the global water cycle suggested by
the above analyses.&lt;br/&gt;Recent research indicates that removal of
systematic errors in climate models improves their sensitivity to land surface
anomalies, and improves predictive skill. We will also pursue development of an
empirical correction of land and atmospheric errors in a global prediction
system to improve the numerical simulation and seasonal-to-interannual
prediction of the land-atmosphere branch of the global water cycle, with the
ultimate aim of application of empirical correction to further improve climate
prediction capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adjustments to work
plan:&lt;br/&gt;At the request of NSF, the original budget has been revised to
reflect a 30% reduction. This had been achieved by roughly equal percentage cuts
among the three collaborating institutions. Details of the changes that affect
the original work plan are listed below.&lt;br/&gt;* The post-doc level of
effort has been reduced to 6 months during year one, anticipating a later start
date for the post-doc.&lt;br/&gt;* Levels of effort for the PIs have been
reduced, meaning a slower rate of progress than originally proposed.&lt;br/&gt;*
The work plan as been adjusted (below), shifting more work to later in the
project and moving the final elements of the originally proposed work to a
follow-on for which we will seek support from a future program solicitation.
This shift will primarily delay the final synthesis between characterization of
land memory and predictability, identification regions of strong land-atmosphere
water recycling, and advancement of water-cycle prediction through these
identifications of land memory and empirical correction of systematic errors in
climate models.&lt;br/&gt;Characterizing Land Surface Memory to Advance Climate
Prediction&lt;br/&gt;Dirmeyer &amp; DelSole (COLA), Brubaker (UMCP), and
Schlosser (UMBC/GEST).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;