* 0232158
* SBIR Phase I:  Virtual Gorilla Construction Kit - Virtual Modeling for Learning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Charles Cohen, CYBERNET SYSTEMS CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,714.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project provides a plan
to develop, deploy, and evaluate a virtual reality-based modeling kit that will
enable students to build virtual models of gorilla motion and social interaction
within a web-based inquiry framework. Using the Virtual Gorilla Construction
Kit, students will build virtual models within the context of answering
questions about gorilla behavior. The modeling possible with the virtual
environment the investigator is proposing, which is quantitative/logical in its
underlying operation, can help students move beyond the purely descriptive to an
understanding of the relationships between relevant variables. Virtual reality
is an environment that is uniquely suited for the dynamic nature of 3-D gorilla
motion. Research has shown that students do not effectively blend lectures, 2-D
static images, and textual descriptions of scientific phenomena. Building
virtual reality models provides the right match for the content and builds deep
understanding of the 3-D nature of science concepts and the inquiry skills of
model-based science. Thus, the investigator will develop the Virtual Gorilla
Construction Kit as representing an exciting learning environment, which uses
the power of cyberspace to learn about gorilla space.

The market for the project for this immediate version of the software will be
other zoo educational programs, middle school life science, high school biology,
and university freshman-level animal behavior survey courses.