* 0232597
* SBIR Phase I:    Growth of "BioCarbon" Nanotubes on Nanostructured Silicon Templates
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Nader Kalkhoran, Spire Corporation
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
novel material, Bio-Carbon Nano-Tube (BCNT), for a neural prosthetic
application. The project involves a highly innovative approach, which uses a
surface-engineered nanostructured silicon wafer as a template to grow the
desired BCNT material. In this way, the carbon nanotubes nucleate will grow in a
specific alignment due to the restrictions set by the size and shape of the
nano-structured silicon matrix. Also, the project will investigate the
feasibility of forming BCNT material on nanostructured porous silicon substrates
and will conduct in-vitro studies on nerve cell function and fibrous scar tissue
formation. Subsequent work will optimize the growth process for BCNT and conduct
systematic studies aimed at demonstrating the medical, and possibly industrial,
applications of the proposed functional nanostructured material.

Commercially, the material is expected to perform many functions, in particular,
as a neural prosthetic material to bridge damaged areas of the central and
peripheral nervous systems in patients with neurological disorders. Preliminary
studies conducted using existing nano-carbon tube technology, have had limited
success due to the lack of control on growth of aligned nanotubes with desired
size, shape, and electrical properties. The current approach will overcome these
limitations.

