* 0232638
* SBIR Phase I:    Direct Conversion of Heat to Electricity with Nanowire Antenna Arrays
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Lin Simpson, ITN ENERGY SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,991.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the feasibility of collecting and converting to DC power infrared radiation (IR)
from heated sources using monolithically integrated, nanowire antenna/rectifying
diode arrays (IR-AAID). Using scaleable, self-organizing, and inexpensive
electrochemical processing on low cost substrates, the antenna/diode systems can
be engineered to convert IR radiation from a particular heat source/emitter with
specific characteristics by simply changing the antenna geometry. Unlike
traditional semiconductor-based IR photovoltaic materials with their associated
low efficiencies, high material costs, temperature sensitivity and matched high
temperature emitter requirements, an IR-AAID system could potentially convert
heat to electricity at over 40% efficiency. The best IR photovoltaic modules
typically operate at less than 5% efficiency, require 1200 to 2000 Celsius
emitter temperatures to match available band gaps, and require very expensive
materials with chemically tailored compositions to match specific energy
applications.

The commercial and broader impacts of this technology will be low-cost nanowire
arrays with high density and tunable diameter/length aspect ratios over a
relatively large area for heat collection applications. These applications will
vary from portable power packs that use low temperature heat, to the generation
of electricity from high temperature nuclear and conventional heat sources where
noise or other environmental concerns are an issue.