* 0232362
* SBIR Phase I:  Robotic Surface Finishing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Steven Somes, Western Robotics Co
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a new
robot architecture targeting fine-fidelity, force dependent tasks. The project
will use an innovative 2 degree-of-freedom manipulator with lightweight
construction and smooth, low friction joints. The control system follows the
biological model of sensing the environment by touch and performing work by
applying force. The project will test the validity of a manipulator concept by
constructing a simple unit and attempting a task commonly required of cast metal
parts, such as grinding excess material left by the casting process to produce a
smooth surface. Successful results can be applied to more sophisticated
manipulators for automating the finishing of cast, forged, and molded parts. The
concept can also be extended to other labor intensive industrial processes that
are difficult and hazardous for people to perform. Further, its more natural
mode of operation could permit it to safely work in close concert with people,
including the physically impaired. The potential commercial applications include
automated finishing of fabricated parts, including grinding, deburring,
polishing, and blending. Automated assembly of closely fitting parts. Robots
that can work in close proximity, and provide assistance to, human laborers as
well as the physically impaired.