* 0232877
* SBIR Phase I:  A New Approach for Effective Detection of Cyber Attacks Based on Anomalous Program Behaviors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,07/31/2003
* Umamaheswari Ganapathy, Immunet Security Solutions, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 07/31/2003
* USD 99,983.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on the
development of an Intrusion Detection System (IDS) based on recognizing
anomalous system call patterns via finite state machines. Networked information
systems play critical roles in essential infrastructures such as power
generation and distribution, transportation, commerce, and national security.
The continuing spate of security incidents from the CERT Coordination Center
(the CERT/CC was originally the Computer Emergency Response Team) demonstrates
that existing approaches for securing systems against cyber attacks are not
effective. These approaches are focused almost exclusively on previously
exploited vulnerabilities, and offer no protection against attacks that may
exploit countless (as-yet-undiscovered) vulnerabilities that continue to exist
on the target systems. Whereas current threats are largely attributed to
unskilled hackers (script kiddies), the future holds the threat of rapid
escalation of cyber-warfare, cyber-terrorism and cyber-crime. Attackers in these
cases are highly skilled, organized and well funded, and can develop new kinds
of attacks very quickly. Thus there is an urgent need for developing approaches
that can protect against unknown attacks launched by highly skilled attackers.
In previous research conducted at SUNY, Stony Brook, the key personnel have
developed a new approach for securing systems against unknown attacks. Immunet
Security's approach is based on a new algorithm for learning program behaviors
using finite-state automata models and detecting attacks as deviations from this
model. The approach has been show to be very effective in detecting known as
well as unknown attacks and produces significantly fewer false alarms than
previous approaches. This proposal seeks to develop the approach into a
commercial intrusion detection system (IDS).

The market for commercial Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) is large, running
into billions of dollars, and is growing fast. Given the market for IDS and the
heightened national interest in security, this technology offers the possibility
of more sensitive detection than currently exists.