* 0232777
* SBIR Phase I:  Quality-Based Knowledge Discovery for Information Retrieval in Large Organizations
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Gary Robinson, Transpose, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,799.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will determine the
feasibility of a novel, powerful technique to determine the quality of documents
and the reliability of human reviewers in a large community, such as a company,
government agency (particularly intelligence organizations), or university. Many
organizations have difficulty locating their own knowledge. They cannot
determine the quality of their internal documents nor the ability of their
employees to evaluate those documents. Important information may get buried in
layers of bureaucracy. This research seeks to address these problems by
measuring document quality and user reputation, based on human evaluation and
automated processing of those evaluations. The research objectives are: study
and refinement of information theoretic techniques underlying the current
technology; discovery of practical designs for expanding its scope; and creation
of proof-of-concept demonstrations. The research will produce technical papers
describing such systems and prove them feasible through software. Potential
applications include stand-alone knowledge management products focused on
document quality and plug-ins to add this capability to existing KM systems.
Members of communities using these products will find the information they need
more quickly and with greater confidence, enhancing efficiency and effectiveness
in corporations, academic institutions, and government agencies. The research
will lead to marketable knowledge management software products and/or services
which offer quality-based knowledge discovery and are targeted to large
organizations in any sector (business, public, academic, or not-for-profit).
This technology is not another kind of search engine. It is an evaluation system
that identifies the best sources of knowledge, and the most valuable knowledge
items, based on the experience of the users in the community. Today there are
many vendors providing a variety of knowledge management solutions to large
organizations, but we know of none that offers a knowledge discovery solution
based on quality.