* 0232614
* SBIR Phase I:  Inductive Analysis Environment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Jeffrey Worthington, Technology Innovation Enterprise, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,300.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will research the
technical feasibility and commercial viability of an innovative interactive
environment that supports an inductive analysis approach to unifying
heterogeneous, distributed information systems. This innovation, called the
Inductive Analysis Environment, will allow end users to develop abstract models
of target domains by manipulating existing data and creating new relationships
and attributes. By enabling end-users to manipulate representations of data
objects while itself taking care of housekeeping tasks (such as connecting to
data sources and converting data), the environment will allow users to
essentially develop applications on the fly, making many of the traditional
application development cycles unnecessary. After creating these new application
contexts, users may then save them and share them in a multi-user, collaborative
space. This process will represent a new kind of problem-solving environment.

The Inductive Analysis Environment thus will introduce a new methodology for
developing certain classes of information systems. This innovation will also
enable seamless, end-user controlled integration of heterogeneous systems
without requiring the intermediate steps of software development or data
warehousing. By making many steps of the traditional software development
process unnecessary, the Inductive Analysis Environment will make the creation
of software applications a much higher- quality, more reliable process.