* 0232735
* SBIR Phase I:    Neutralizing Utility Mercury Control Sorbents for Fly Ash Use in Concrete
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Qunhui Zhou, SORBENT TECHNOLOGIES CORP
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
inexpensive methods to pretreat commercial powdered activated carbons (PAC) used
for power plant mercury control so that they will not interfere with effective
use of fly ash in concretes. The objective of this project is to screen and
optimize such pretreatment methods. Major project tasks include producing
pretreated samples; testing for effects on AEAs, resulting cements, and mercury
removal performance; and developing a fundamental understanding of the chemical
processes involved. Carbon materials researchers at Brown University and their
Energy and Environmental Technologies Laboratory will assist in the effort.
Commercially the substitution of fly ash wastes for cement in construction
applications is one of America.s biggest recycling successes. Unfortunately, it
was recently discovered that if even minimal PAC is injected into power plant
flue gases for mercury emission control, the fly ash will be rendered unusable
for concrete. The highly-adsorbent carbons severely interfere with the air-
entraining admixtures (AEAs) added to concrete for air entrainment and
stabilization. The economic implications for utilities may be huge. Thus the PAC
pretreatments developed here which minimize adverse effects on AEA while
enhancing, or at least not degrading, PAC mercury removal performance are of
prime importance.

