* 0232204
* SBIR Phase I:    Purification of Metallic Nitride Nanomaterials by Chemical Separation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Steven Stevenson, Luna Innovations, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,990.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
trimetallic-nitride-template metallofullerenes (trimetaspheres) for use as
improved MRI contrast agents. The largest barrier to providing these
trimetasphere materials in significant quantities is the lack of an economical,
efficient means of separating these materials from undesirable empty-cage C60
and C70 fullerenes. To address this issue, the proposed effort offers
innovative, ingenious solutions to the problem of large-scale synthesis and
separation processes for these nanomaterials. The project tasks are 1) to
increase generator throughput of trimetasphere-containing soot, 2) to advance
vapor-phase deposition techniques as a prepurification step, and 3) to establish
the feasibility of a chemical-separation process, which will enable large-scale
nanomaterials production. The expectation is to totally remove HPLC from all
stages of purification.

Commercially, trimetaspheres are expected to find valuable applications in 1)
improved medical care through novel imaging and diagnostic properties, 2) new
pharmaceuticals, via high throughput screening, 3) faster and more productive
internet use, through faster optical switches and components that provide higher
bandwidth, 4) faster computers, through quantum computing devices built from
nanomaterials, and 5) military devices including sensors, imaging devices, non-
linear optical devices, new superconductors and variable capacitors.