* 0232945
* STTR Phase I:  PDA-Based Bird Identification Program
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Paula Mabee, SOUTH DAKOTA HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES INNOVATIONS INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,968.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop and
test a PDA (Personal Digital Assistant)-based software that will facilitate bird
identification in the field by combining geographic information with images,
audio, and descriptive data. The proposed software will facilitate research and
educational activities by allowing multiple users to collate their observations
via the desktop version of this software. Rather than being locked into one
platform, the application will be designed for efficient transfer across both
Palm OS and Pocket PC platforms. The specific platform decision for Phase I will
be made in the initial stages of design after re-evaluation of existing
technology. In Phase I, South Dakota Health Technology Innovations, Inc. in
collaboration with the University of South Dakota, proposes to develop and test
a prototype system for 100 South Dakota birds. The research team will work with
the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology to establish appropriate links between
this software and their BirdSource website, and to coordinate with Citizen
Science programs. The three main selling points of this application will be the
mobility offered by the PDA, the access to multimedia and GIS data in the field,
and the potential for building an interactive community of naturalists. The
software will provide for the first time, mobile access to multimedia data on
birds via the PDA. It is expected that this integration of data on the PDA will
be purchased by and greatly benefit educators, communities of birdwatchers, and
researchers.