* 0232698
* SBIR Phase I:  A Hydrothermally Stable H2 Selective SiC Membrane for Membrane Reactor Appliction
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,09/30/2003
* Paul Liu, Media and Process Technology Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 09/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This NSF Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program involves the use a
hydrothermally stable SiC membrane as a membrane reactor for steam reforming. We
have developed an innovative hydrogen selective SiC membrane. This membrane has
demonstrated an excellent material stability required for performing methane
steam reforming and dehydrogenation via a catalytic membrane reactor. Thus, we
believe that the time is ripe to harvest the catalytic membrane reactor
technology. We will be able to perform experimental and reaction engineering
study to demonstrate a commercially viable catalytic membrane reactor process
using an appropriate membrane under an ideal operating condition. We will
conduct a bench-top experimental study using this selected membrane to
demonstrate the benefits of reactive separations for an industrial significant
reaction, hydrogen production via methane steam reforming. In addition, the
hydrothermal and chemical stability of the SiC membrane under the proposed
reaction condition will be experimentally verified. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
use of hydrothermally stable SiC membranes froe reactive separations can
overcome the key technical barriers preventing the implementation of membrane
reactor technology in the steam reforming of methane, as well as in
dehydrogenation applications. Both are industrially important reaction
processes.&lt;br/&gt;