* 0232632
* SBIR Phase I:  DIAGNOSTICA:  Clinician's Assistant for Diagnostics and Treatment Planning in Mental Health
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Joseph Gartner, Medicine Rules Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,965.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on
computational aspects of Diagnostica, an application that provides advanced
diagnostic decision support and outcome monitoring for individual mental health
clinicians without significantly altering accepted clinical practices. A
critical problem in mental health care is that while a definitive standard for
making formal diagnoses exists (as encoded in the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), its complexity prevents community
clinicians from utilizing it effectively. This project will develop the
computational machinery needed to model and process the temporal and severity
aspects of DSM-IV. Diagnostica's reasoning capabilities will be implemented by
combining techniques drawn from constraint processing, non-monotonic reasoning
and logic programming. Diagnostica will use explicit temporal and severity
measures, thereby enabling rigorous DSM-IV diagnostic work in the normal course
of documenting a clinical encounter. With increasing pressure by third party
payers for detailed DSM-IV based documentation and the need to minimize
misdiagnosis, a majority of clinicians may be expected to use DSM-IV-based
systems over the next decade. By enabling the improvement of the quality of
mental health diagnosis, widespread use of Diagnostica will dramatically improve
the quality of care, enable the aggregation of community data for public health
improvement, and spur further development of the DSM rule base.