* 0232009
* High Resolution Observations of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) with Arcminute Cosmology Bolometer Array Receiver (ACBAR)
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* William Holzapfel, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 04/30/2007
* USD 905,944.00

This proposal seeks continued support for observations with the Arcminute
Cosmology Bolometer Array Receiver (ACBAR). ACBAR is a 16 element 230-mK
bolometer receiver designed to produce high resolution images of the CMB in
three mm wavelength bands. Mounted on the 2.1m Viper telescope at the South
Pole, ACBAR has sensitivity that rivals balloon-borne experiments and angular
resolution that they cannot hope to achieve. Making full use of the excellent
atmospheric conditions in the Austral winter at the South Pole, ACBAR is
producing images of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) radiation with
sensitivity and resolution that exceed the capabilities of even the proposed
Planck satellite. Observations of the CMB provide a unique window to the early
Universe; these data play a key role in the transformation of Cosmology to a
precise science. In particular, small angular scale observations of the CMB are
a new frontier about which comparatively little is known. On these angular
scales, contributions from secondary anisotropies introduced by intervening
structure are expected to become dominant. For example, the scattering of
photons by hot gas bound to clusters of galaxies results in a spectral
distortion of the CMB known as the Sunyeav-Zeldovich (SZ) effect. Observations
of the SZ effect can provide important new constraints on theories of the growth
of Universe's structure. The unique capabilities of ACBAR allow it to address a
broad range of science focused on measuring the primary and secondary
anisotropies of the CMB. ACBAR was deployed to the South Pole in December 2000
and has been operating since. The second half of the winter of 2003 and the
entire 2004 season will be dedicated to observations with ACBAR. The requested
18 months of support for observations with ACBAR and analysis of the resulting
data will help to realize the full potential of this uniquely powerful
instrument for the study of cosmology. The four institutions supported by this
proposal will continue to collaborate in the maintenance and operation of ACBAR
and Viper, and participate in the analysis of the data. The results from ACBAR
will serve as a vital complement to the large-scale MAP spacecraft dataset, and
provide an essential check of the fine-scale excess power reported by the single
frequency BIMA and CBI experiments. The novel instrumentation, observation
techniques, and analysis developed for ACBAR are generally applicable to future
ground based millimeter astronomy experiments. This project has provided hands
on research experience to more than seven undergraduate students and will result
in the theses of four graduate students.