* 0232274
* SBIR Phase I:  Breaking the Barriers to the Commercialization of Super-Resolution Video Enhancement Algorithms
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Richard Schultz, Machine Visionaries
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 84,023.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the two primary barriers to the commercialization of super-resolution video
enhancement, namely, that (1) the motion compensation-based video enhancement
algorithms are extremely computationally-intensive, and (2) the ability to
extract additional visual information from digital video is highly dependent on
image sequence content. Provided that people, objects, and entire scenes move in
subpixel increments between video frames or fields, this motion can be exploited
by temporally integrating neighboring pictures to increase spatial resolution
and to actually see details where there were once blocky pixels. The proposed
research focuses on determining the feasibility of significantly increasing the
processing speed of the associated numerical algorithms on desktop and notebook
personal computers running Microsoft Windows or Linux, as well as determining
the feasibility of automatically detecting the video frames/fields which
contribute additional information to a specific region-of-interest selected for
enhancement.

A number of commercial applications in forensic image analysis for law
enforcement and security end-users can be developed around this technology.
Super resolution video enhancement is of particular interest to government
agencies, such as the Department of Defense and the Department of Justice for
extracting additional details from reconnaissance and surveillance video, as
well as to the private sector for forensic image analysis in law enforcement,
surveillance, and security. By successfully tackling the proposed technical
objectives, the capability will be developed to embed super-resolution
enhancement video technology into commercial nonlinear video editing software
packages such as Adobe Premiere.