* 0232215
* SBIR Phase I:  Automatic Classification of Magnetocardiograms
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Karsten Sternickel, CARDIOMAG IMAGING INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 90,518.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks development
of novel machine learning capability for pattern recognition in
magnetocardiography (MCG), which measures minute magnetic fields emitted by the
electrophysiological activity of the heart. The company has developed a
revolutionary measuring device for early identification/diagnosis of heart
disease, inside regular, magnetically unshielded hospital rooms. However,
interpretation of MCG recordings remains a challenge for cardiologists, since
there are no databases from which precise rules could be deduced. Hence, there
is an urgent need to automate and guide interpretation of MCG measurements, in
order to minimize cardiologists' efforts to make meaningful diagnosis. The
company will explore the application of automatic pattern recognition and
classification schemes to MCG data. The goal is to develop a technique to
accurately differentiate between abnormal and normal heart patterns and even to
identify heart diseases. The differentiation will be performed using Support
Vector Machines because they can handle high dimensional data and are especially
suitable for a small number of samples. Since it is expected that different
diseases will be located in separate clusters the investigative team plans to
apply Self Organized Maps because they are suitable for multi-cluster formation.

The proffered technology, which has the potential to deliver a diagnostic system
for the detection of ischemia and coronary artery disease, could lead to the
production of devices for detecting small disturbances in cardiac function and
thus may warn doctors and patients of impending malfunction.