* 0232704
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of High Performance NbTi Superconductors Utilizing Nanometer-Scale Metal Oxide and Nickel Pinning Sites
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Mark Rudziak, Supercon Inc
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop an
innovative process for incorporation of nanometer-scale inclusions into
superconducting Niobium Titanium (NbTi) alloy wires. These inclusions will serve
as magnetic flux pinning sites, resulting in improved critical current density
(Jc) performance as compared to that which can be obtained by conventional
processing methods. The innovation will consist in the use of mixtures of
nanometer-scale NbTi powder and nanometer-scale metal oxide powder or nickel
powder. The use of nanometer-scale powders will greatly reduce the amount of
wire deformation required for optimum inclusion (pin) size and spacing as
compared with other powder metallurgical and rod-based processes. This will be
beneficial for wire piece-length and processing costs. At the same time, the
process will have the benefit that pin volume may be easily adjusted for maximum
Jc performance. By contrast, the volume of pinning sites that may be realized by
conventional thermomechanical processing techniques for NbTi conductors is
limited by precipitation kinetics, resulting in an upper limit to Jc
performance. &lt;br/&gt; Commercially, an improved NbTi conductor will find
application in superconducting magnets used for high energy physics
accelerators, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) systems, and Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) devices. Increased critical current density performance will
translate directly into cost savings and greater design flexibility for the MRI
and NMR industries. This will be of particular interest to the MRI industry (an
industry rapidly approaching $3 billion dollars in sales), where it is difficult
to maintain an advantage in an increasingly competitive international market.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;