* 0232943
* SBIR Phase I:  QoS guaranteed VTC for telemedicine over broadband IP networks
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Xinhua Zhuang, SPEEDATECH LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will research, develop,
and deliver an unsurpassed high performance video teleconferencing (VTC) system
in software, based on Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) protocols and the
growing Quality of Service (QoS)- provisioning IP architecture. This VTC system
will be specifically designed for premier telemedicine application over
broadband IP networks in the USA and throughout the world, and will provide a
great help for achieving ``Healthy People 2010'' by reducing the cost of health
care for both the providers and patients, extending the high-quality services
otherwise limited by location and time. Specifically, this Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project is to (a) design and analyze improved
transport mechanisms for real-time interactive telemedicine oriented VTC, as
well as control and management mechanisms of IP networks with some measures of
QoS guarantees; (b) design high-speed high performance, error resilient, and
network-friendly layered video coding and transmission scheme; (c) analyze the
interaction between the VTC transport mechanism and the IP network.s service
provisioning mechanisms to find the best feasible combination, and explore, in
particular, the relationship between the importance-based video layering and the
network.s methods of differentiating the QoS grades. The commercial applications
of the project are premier telemedicine services at low cost required by health
care providers and patients, as well as high quality VTC services required by
government organizations and corporations.