* 0232688
* SBIR Phase I:    Multimodal Activated Network of Tactile Interfaces for Advanced Computing With Haptics (MANTIACH)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Thomas Crabb, ORBITAL TECHNOLOGIES CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project, Multimode Activated
Network of Tactile Interfaces for Advanced Computing with Haptics (MANTIACH), is
an innovative approach to provide a virtual tactile stimulation display to a
human operator in three-dimensional space. This device conveys both the haptic
information about a virtual object such as position, placement, and orientation
as well as the tactile information of force, compliance, and texture. MANTIACH
provides a non-visual interface to enable visually impaired operators and to
augment the ability of visually enabled operators to interact with 2D and 3D
graphics environments. MANTIACH uses proven stimulation technology, finger and
hand positioning, stimulation mapping, and a three-dimensional graphics
interpreter. MANTIACH is designed to be integrated into standard computer
systems with minimal effort and standard interfaces. Key to this device is its
ability to completely free the operator from fixed mechanical arms or levers in
the work area, while still providing the full haptic and tactile stimulation
directly related to the virtual graphic of screen display. MANTIACH provides
humankind with a new user interface to standard computers for full 2D and 3D
display capability to enable blind and visually impaired people. Ultimately
Orbital Technology Corporation projects a simple human interface that plugs into
a standard computer that would provide the entire control and feedback interface
with 2D and 3D simulated objects and screens. A primary application would be
computer graphical displays and controls for the blind. Additional commercial
applications include virtual reality training and entertainment systems,
feedback for calibrated and remotely controlled tools and robots and feedback
and control interfaces for hazardous chemical and weapon handling, laparoscopic
and robotic surgical equipment and many other applications. Advanced user
interfaces for the blind to decrease the gap between sighted and blind users of
computer systems is possibly the most far reaching and general use for the
system. Specific commercial areas to be investigated further include the
following: (1) 2D and 3D graphical user interfaces for the blind, (2) software
and entertainment interface equipment, (3) interfaces for current robotic and
telerobotic equipment, (4) sound interpreters for the deaf, (5) prosthetic hand
sensor augmentation, (6) augmented surgical and instrumented tools, and (7)
force feedback systems for nano-manipulators.