* 0232255
* SBIR Phase I:    Highly Accurate Reconstruction Module For Multidisciplinary Computation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Lei Tang, ZONA TECHNOLOGY INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 81,636.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a highly
accurate reconstruction module for Godunov-type schemes to upgrade the
capability of current multidisciplinary computational software packages for
simulation of a class of engineering problems with small scales and high
frequencies. The unique and innovative aspect of this work is to combine both
Weighted Essentially Non-Oscillatory (WENO) concept and compact differencing
into a single upwind algorithm. Instead of using multiple polynomial candidates,
a hybrid power-exponential spline is used as the underlying interpolation for a
WENO scheme with local smoothness measures as the perturbation parameters. In
this way, the weight functions of a WENO scheme can be analytically determined
from the underlying interpolation. Their Taylor series expansions around the
smooth regions can be used for further accuracy improvement. The resulting
piecewise quadratic reconstruction with compact difference computed slope and
curvature can dramatically reduce numerical diffusion inherent in upwind
schemes. By using this upwind scheme, the numerical simulation of vortex
dominated flows, boundary layers, turbulence, acoustic waves, and
electromagnetic waves, etc., can be significantly improved without loss of the
shock-capturing feature. &lt;br/&gt; The highly accurate reconstruction module,
which is independent of physics, can be easily integrated into the current
production and research codes and has the potential of providing cost
improvement of at least an order of magnitude over the current
versions.&lt;br/&gt;