* 0232882
* SBIR Phase I:   Generation of Metal Nanojets and Precise Monosize Nanospheres
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Robert Dean, Jr., SYNERGY INNOVATIONS INC
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2003
* USD 111,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel
process capable of high-volume production of monodisperse nanoparticles of
arbitrary metallic composition. Such highly-controlled materials are desired as
components for engineered nanostructures. The current standard precipitate or
aerosol processes for metal nanoparticle formation are limited in available
materials, the particle size distribution, or productivity. In this project an
adaptation to jetting processes will be used to enable formation of metal
nanojets and nanoparticles. Because this is entirely a physical process, it is
expected to be able to be adapted to any metal alloy. second The specific tasks
of the project will inolve survey of possible approaches, analyzing the proposed
process, and preparing the preliminary design of the key parts of a prototype
apparatus. The objective is a system capable of the precise formation of
nanojets and monosize nanoparticles at rates greater than one gram per second.
Commerically, there are many possible long-term applications for metal
nanoparticles. Nanoelectronics and high-density data storage are two appealing
examples. The established markets for the technology described with the most
initial opportunity relevant to this proposal appear to be in the following
fields: solid propellants, explosives, and catalysts. Monodisperse nanoparticles
will allow mechanical packing into ordered array structures for filtration. The
high surface area of nanoparticles enables their use as substrates for catalysis
of chemical reactions. While supported by these initial markets, further
innovation in many other markets and derivative technologies (such as oxide
ceramic nanoparticles, and nano-patterning devices) will be developed from this
new technology. This technology offers a means of producing significant
quantities of monodisperse nano-spheres at commodity prices. It also enables
further significant innovations in nanoscale fabrication, materials and
processing.



