* 0232380
* Computational Complexity in Combinatorial and Algebraic Models
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Satyanarayana Lokam, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,560.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational Complexity in Combinatorial and
Algebraic Models&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental goal of research in theory
of computing is to understand the inherent computational complexity of specific
problems. Progress in computational complexity is essential to establish limits
to efficiency of algorithms, to understand the role of randomness in
computation, and to build rigorous foundations for important areas such as
cryptography and machine learning. This research program will study complexity
questions in several combinatorial and algebraic models of computation. In
particular, this research will develop lower bound techniques for these models
based on linear algebra, communication complexity, and graph theory. Specific
directions of research proposed are&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Robustness Functions
of Matrix Rank and their Applications: broad classes of functions that describe
the robustness of the rank of a matrix have wide-ranging applications in
computational complexity. In particular, several such functions can be used to
attack lower bound problems on Boolean and algebraic circuits, decision trees,
branching programs, and communication complexity. Known results by the PI and
other researchers also indicate that spectral methods provide a unified approach
to understanding rank robustness. This project proposes to extend these
techniques and apply them to study combinatorial and algebraic complexity. Some
alternative approaches that may overcome certain technical barriers faced by
existing methods are also studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Multiparty
Communication Complexity: This fundamental model has applications to the
complexity theory of circuits, branching programs, and time-space trade-offs.
Some weaker models of multiparty communication complexity have recently been
investigated due to their continued relevance to circuit complexity and the
apparent hope for stronger lower bounds. This project will study the relative
strengths of the various multiparty models and their connections to complexity
theory. General techniques such as discrepancy bounds and tensor rigidity will
be explored to attack lower bound questions in these models. Recent discoveries
of unexpected upper bounds in this area with critical consequences to some lower
bound approaches motivate several new questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Graph
Theoretic Approaches to Boolean Function Complexity: A combinatorial model that
generalizes the models of both Boolean circuits and two-party communication
complexity is obtained by considering computations on graphs. The research will
explore the effectiveness of some graph-theoretic techniques to Boolean
complexity using the framework of this model. In particular, various linear
algebraic representations of graphs, with potential applications to other areas,
will be studied to derive lower bounds on graph complexity that may have
consequences to circuits. A unifying theme among these three topics is the use
of communication complexity techniques to attack lower bound questions in
computational complexity. Furthermore, each of these topics provides potential
approaches to attack some long-standing open questions in computational
complexity such as superlinear size lower bounds on log-depth circuits and ACC
circuits. More generally, the research will advance the technology for lower
bounds by targeting less restricted and/or more abstract models than those for
which strong lower bounds are currently known. Techniques developed in these
topics give rise to mathematical problems that have wider interest to other
branches of theoretical computer science such as algorithms and cryptography as
well as to subjects like linear algebra, combinatorics, and graph
theory.&lt;br/&gt;