* 0232518
* SBIR Phase I:  Texturing of High Curie Temperatures (Tc) Piezoelectrics by Templated Grain Growth
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Seongtae Kwon, TRS Ceramics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,655.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project will lead to the
fabrication &lt;br/&gt;process of Bismuth Scantanate-Lead
Titanate(BiScO3-PbTiO3) ceramics with a textured microstructure to yield
materials with very large piezoelectric properties over a broad temperature
range. In the case of existing ceramics, the piezoelectric properties are too
low for these applications while recently discovered single crystal materials
suffer from low Curie temperature and high manufacturing costs. The objective of
this research is to develop textured ceramics from the BiScO3-PbTiO3 system.
These materials have been shown to possess a very high Curie temperature (Tc.
&gt;450 C) and high piezoelectric properties suitable for meeting the needs of
emerging sensor, transducer, and actuator applications. The templated grain
growth method will be used as a means of texturing microstructure to produce
polycrystalline ceramics with properties close to those of single
crystal.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Commercially, piezoelectric ceramics and single
crystals are tantalizingly close to enabling a broad range of advanced
applications including vibration sensors with sensitivity at the theoretical
limit, two-dimensional ultrasound phased arrays for three dimensional volumetric
imaging, and high authority actuators for smart structures (vibration control
and surface morphing). This program will lead to highly piezoelectrically active
material produced at nearly the same cost as existing ceramic compositions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;