* 0232312
* SBIR Phase I:    Smart Engineered Composites for Thermal Management
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* T. Sudarshan, Materials Modification Inc.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project will synthesize
and&lt;br/&gt;consolidate a smart composite material, copper-zirconium
tungstate, with high thermal conductivity (&gt;240 W/m.K) and low thermal
expansion (&lt; 5 x 10-6/K) for thermal management applications. As packaging
densities and power requirements increase, more and more power is being
generated per specific area, thereby generating more heat. The current chip
performance limitation is related to packaging materials when considering the
component size reduction. The recent findings of negative thermal expansion in
zirconium tungstate (ZrW2O8) have attracted many interesting applications for
this material particularly in composites where thermal expansion is a major
concern. Copper (Cu) has good thermal conductivity but it is not currently in
use as a thermal management material, because of its high thermal expansion
mismatch with either silicon (Si) or gallium arsenide (GaAs). A composite such
as Cu- ZrW2O8, consisting of a high-conductivity metallic matrix and ceramic
phase with strongly negative coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) is ideally
suitable for electronic thermal management applications. In the project
synthesis of Cu-ZrW2O8 composite will be achieved using the microwave plasma and
low temperature chemical coating methods. Consolidation of Cu-ZrW2O8 composite
will be carried out using a rapid consolidation technique, plasma pressure
consolidation (P2C).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercially, the major applications
of this material are in substrates for microelectronics, and heat sinks in
electronic devices. It will also improve the performance of ceramics in
electrical insulators and power transistor modules.The other potential uses of
zirconium tungstate are in thermal expansion compensation in dental
fillings.&lt;br/&gt;