* 0232603
* SGER AWARD: A Potential Example of Fold Growth Due to Kink-Band Migration on Near Earthquake-Cycle Timescales
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Andrew Meigs, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2004
* USD 18,926.00

One of the most active debates in structural geology over the last 20 years has
focused on the existence of folds formed due to kink-band migration (e.g. the
fault-bend (FBF) and fault-propagation (FPF) folds).A suite of folded geomorphic
surfaces in western Argentina have been identified that apparently display the
essential geometrical characteristics of folding due to kink-band migration.
Because the folded surfaces are closely associated with flexural slip surface
faulting in an earthquake in 1944,this site may contain the first evidence of
kink- band migration on near earthquake cycle time scales. The primary purpose
of this exploratory research is to establish whether the structural geometry of
a suite of folded geomorphic surfaces is consistent with fundamental predictions
of kink-band migration fold growth. The present knowledge of their structural
characteristics is limited, however, which precludes clear definition of their
potential for providing new insight into kink-band migration and folding
mechanisms in general. Thus, an exploratory grant is sought to develop an
initial data set from these unique, superbly exposed surfaces to define more
clearly the potential and direction for future investigation. Key objectives of
this initial investigation include:(1)understanding the geometrical evolution of
folds at the spatial and temporal scale of successively younger geomorphic
surfaces;(2)detailed characterization of the geomorphology of the surface of an
actively growing emergent fold in which fold growth and erosion/deposition are
out-of-phase; and (3)determination of the extent to which kink-band migration
folding is the mechanism by which this fold is growing. These data and analyses
will help to frame more explicitly questions regarding the structural and
geomorphic evolution of this and other growing folds in the region, the
interplay between fold growth and intervening periods of erosion and deposition,
and the incremental growth of folds at near-earthquake time scales. Increased
knowledge of fold growth on this time scale has potential impacts for
understanding the earthquake hazard associated with active blind faults, the
interpretation of fold growth history from syntectonic strata, petroleum
exploration in basins characterized by syntectonic sedimentation and in regions
of basement-involved thrusting, and fault-related fold models.