* 0232142
* Session on "New Directions in Glass Structure and Dynamics"; at the Glass and Optical Materials Division Fall Meeting; Pittsburgh, PA; October 13-16, 2002
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Jacqueline Johnson, American Ceramic Society
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2003
* USD 11,200.00

A special session (including a luncheon) has been organized by the Glass &amp;
Optical Materials Division Fall Meeting, Pittsburgh, PA
(http://www.acers.org/meetings/GlassFallMeet/glass.asp) to be held October
13-16, 2002. The goal is to bring as many pioneering glass scientists as
possible from National Labs and Universities in the USA and other parts of the
world to this meeting. There are several aspects to the session: &lt;br/&gt;a)
Science: New ideas in the area of glass research and an overview of modeling:
this will give guidance to the researchers as to the value of modeling in
experimental research&lt;br/&gt;b) Mentoring: Women role models in the form of
invited speakers. &lt;br/&gt;c) Dissemination: The information contained in
conference presentation will be disseminated to researchers in this field in the
form of a refereed special edition of J. of Phys., Condensed
Matter.&lt;br/&gt;d) Luncheon: The presentations will focus on international
opportunities and career issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The session will
stimulate interest, discussion and ideas by bringing together a variety of
different disciplines and outlooks. Topics covered in the scientific session
will be of interest to the DMR community in the areas of materials theory,
condensed matter physics and ceramics. The luncheon talks will have a broader
appeal; interested persons should contact Jackie Johnson at Argonne Nat. Lab.
(jaj2@anl.gov)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;