* 0232465
* SBIR Phase I:  Computational Design of Nanostructured High-Performance Shape Memory Alloys
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Weijia Tang, QUESTEK INNOVATIONS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,855.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project focuses on the
computational design of a new class of shape memory alloys (SMAs ). In this
project advanced computational design methodology will be used to incorporate
precipitation strengthening and demonstrate the feasibility of computationally
designing a nanostructured high performance nickel titanium (NiTi) SMA. The
computational tools, based on thermodynamic and mechanistic modeling, will be
extended to predict the nanoscale Heusler precipitation microstructure and
strengthening within a NiTi matrix. Reversible thermoelastic transformation of
the matrix will be modeled with multicomponent thermodynamic modeling and
martensitic interfacial mobility theory. Integrating the extended models, the
predictive design of novel high strength SMAs will be undertaken by assessing
various design strategies and trade-offs. Commercially, the most common SMAs are
monolithic NiTi, having a wide range of use in markets representing billions of
dollars. However, along with copper-based SMAs, they have been empirically
optimized to their limits and the true economic potential has yet to be
realized. This approach promises to lead to the production of robust SMAs, with
fundamentally designed characteristics, possessing longer cyclic lifetime and
superior performance for both thin film and bulk applications.

