* 0232816
* SBIR Phase I: Electron Beam Curing of Polymer Interlayer in Silicon Carbide Joints
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Lek Len, FM TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,999.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project entitled "
Electron Beam&lt;br/&gt;Curing of Polymer Interlayer in Silicon Carbide Joints"
will develop the technology to&lt;br/&gt;enable economical commercialization of
silicon carbide components. Current joining techniques are too time consuming to
be economically viable for commercialization and mass production They tend to
produce excessive polymer shrinkage and thus require excessive number of polymer
infiltrations. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed pulsed electron beam curing technology
will remove these obstacles by&lt;br/&gt;completing the polymer cross-linking in
the microsecond time scale, which is comparable&lt;br/&gt;to the duration of the
electron beam pulse. In this Phase I effort, the polymer shrinkage&lt;br/&gt;in
the interlayer material will be studied first by subjecting it to electron beam
irradiation.&lt;br/&gt;The resulting samples will be compared to those processed
under conventional method,&lt;br/&gt;i.e., without undergoing electron beam
processing. This will then be followed by the&lt;br/&gt;production of SiC
joints. These joined test samples, produced with electron beam
curing,&lt;br/&gt;will again be compared to a control joint sample. Computer
simulation code will be used&lt;br/&gt;to guide the
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success of this project will pave the way for
commercializing&lt;br/&gt;SiC components in many different industrial and
manufacturing markets, including&lt;br/&gt;petrochemical, semiconductor, heat-
treating and heat-exchanger systems, aircraft and&lt;br/&gt;terrestrial gas
turbines, and aircraft structural components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;