* 0232551
* SBIR Phase I: A New Class of Transparent Coatings with Multiple Functionalities
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Mohit Jain, NEI CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
transparent conducting oxide (TCO) coating suitable for polymer substrates which
are attractive alternatives to TCO coated glass, because of their low cost,
reduced weight and enhanced toughness. Conventional techniques used for
depositing TCOs require the substrate to be heated to elevated temperatures,
since low temperature deposition leads to films with poor optical and electrical
properties. However, polymeric substrates cannot be processed at elevated
temperatures. Further, the surface of polymeric materials needs to possess
adequate abrasion and scratch resistance. Accordingly, there is a need for a low
cost coating technology that imparts multiple functionality to the surface, i.e.
combined electrical, optical and mechanical properties. In this project it is
proposed to develop coatings composed of a high volume fraction of homogeneously
dispersed conducting nanoparticles in an organic-inorganic matrix. The project
team will develop coating formulations, deposit films on polymer substrates,
characterize the structure, and determine the electrical, mechanical and optical
properties. The properties will then be benchmarked against currently used
coatings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercially, the proposed technology can be
used in applications, such as, electromagnetic shielding, low emissivity
windows, automobile side windows and aircraft transparencies because of their
superior mechanical, optical and electrical properties. &lt;br/&gt;