* 0232001
* SBIR Phase I: A New Approach for Enhancing Capital Investment Decisions by Optimizing Returns and Risks of Project Portfolios
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Fred Glover, OptTek Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,962.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project seeks to design an
algorithmic approach and develop pilot software for optimizing the returns and
associated risks of project portfolios to significantly improve the performance
of capital finance and budgeting. This project is expected to achieve: an
algorithmic approach for intelligently achieving near-optimal solutions for
project portfolios in industries such as oil and gas, pharmaceuticals,
bioengineering, heavy manufacturing, etc.; pilot software that incorporates this
approach when integrated with simulation; key performance indicators to test the
software; and a value proposition to assess the satisfaction of customer
requirements.

This new approach will provide a way to generate a model representation that is
far more exploitable than those produced by past efforts. Coupled with other
software, the outcome will provide a major advance in the ability to solve
problems of project portfolio management effectively. The commercial
applications anticipated for the ultimate software system are enhancement of the
performance of capital budgeting and project portfolio management. While
recognition of the limitations of current approaches is universal, none of the
alternatives to these approaches has proved attractive enough to become widely
embraced as a viable method of choice. Based on this observation and an estimate
of the market size to be over $750M, a significant business opportunity exists.