* 0232521
* Crossband Transponder System and Harmonic Radar System To Track and Monitor Small Animals Over Long Time Scales
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Michael Henke, Earthspan, Incorporated
* Continuing grant
* Nily R. Dan
* 07/31/2004
* USD 528,272.00

This award supports further development of a system for tracking of small
animals and of other types of organisms as small as insects and seeds. The
system makes use of a radar transmitter/receiver to trigger either of two types
of small devices that will be used to tag individuals. Cross-Band Transponder
(CBT) tags consist of a small battery and a microcircuit that sends a VHF radio
signal in response to the triggering radar signal. The VHF signal, which will
provide identifying information unique to each individual tag, will be detected
using an array of conventional directional antennas. As planned, the CBT tags
will weigh 1 gram, last for at year and be useful over a range extending to
about 2 kilometers from the radar set and antenna array. Tags of this size
should be useful with animals weighing as little at 20 grams. Harmonic Radar
(HR) tags use the power of the same incoming radar signal to generate a outgoing
radar signal at twice the incoming frequency. As they require no power source,
their lifetime is unlimited. The signal strength is limited by the strength of
the incoming radar signal, and thus the range is dictated by the cost and
portability of the radar set to be used. As planned, these tags may be used on
organisms (or objects) weighing as little as 50 milligrams, and over a range of
up to 700 meters. The signals will not allow individual tags to be
differentiated. As part of this project, the use of HR tags to monitor seed
dispersal will be tried for the first time. With the development of biotelemetry
technology, researchers have been able to monitor movement of individual
organisms at multiple spatial and temporal scales ranging from meters and hours
to thousands of kilometers and many years. This has led to new insights into the
study of organism movement, and has been applied successfully for management and
conservation purposes. Depending on the desired range and lifetime, existing
biotelemetry tags typically require a relatively heavy power source. Thus,
useful application of the technology has been limited to relatively large
organisms whose ability to move is not impaired by the size and weight of the
tag. The proposed system, if successful, will lead to a substantial increase in
the types of organisms that can be monitored through biotelemetry, and an
increase in the time period over which individual animals can be monitored
without the effort and expense of recapturing the animal to apply a new tag.