* 0233583
* WCR:  Effect of Changes in Climate, Snow Pack, Glaciers, and Permafrost on River Runoff in Tien Shan, Central Asia
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Vladimir Aizen, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2006
* USD 380,000.00

0233583&lt;br/&gt;Aizen&lt;br/&gt; The evaluation of the long-term dynamics of
water cycle components in the World's largest closed drainage system has not
been examined in detail. Location of the Tien Shan and rich data provide a
unique opportunity to assess the pathways of water among hydrological surface
and subsurface reservoirs and to quantify the precipitation partitioning among
land surface stores with different residence times. The main objective of our
research is estimating, simulating, and predicting the variability in water
cycle components and water composition in the Central Asian alpine basins. This
project proposes to: (1) Provide background information and evaluate the long-
term changes in type and quantity of precipitation, evaporation, total river
runoff and snow/glacier/permafrost runoff, major ions, pH, conductivity, and
dissolved oxygen. This data will be posted at the University of Idaho web site
(www.mines.uidaho.edu/~aizen/aizen.html). (2) Discover the controls on the water
chemistry (changes in glacier, snow, and permafrost river runoff, atmospheric
deposition, rock weathering, etc.). Define the input/output chemical budget
emphasizing on the watershed geology. (3) Implement modular-design,
deterministic, distributed-parameter modeling systems: i.e., "Precipitation
Runoff Modeling System" and/or snow-ice simulation with "Snowmelt Runoff Model"
in application with the operational runoff modeling, which simulates active
layer freezing and thawing. Geochemical modeling includes specification of the
various elements and determination of saturation indices for various metals
based on MINTEQA2 and WATEQ. Mass-balance calculations will be facilitated by
computer codes such as BALANCE, NETPATH and PHREEQE. Validation of simulation
results will be based on data sets other than those used in model calibration.
(4) Develop and validate the transition from small hydrological units to complex
geographical systems through the scaling relationships and to determine the
distribution of point measurements. Three representative sub-basins will be used
to determine water balances using data during each time step (daily, monthly,
seasonally, and annually). (5) Apply climate scenarios to assess the climate-
driven impact on future water resources and model the effect of global warming
on water chemistry. &lt;br/&gt; The basis of this integrative research is the
collaboration with the Central Asian, the USA, the Japan, and the Chinese
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;