* 0233248
* Dissertation Research:  Socioecology of Spider Monkeys (Ateles geoffroyi panamensis) in Wet Forest
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2002,09/30/2003
* Robert Sussman, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 09/30/2003
* USD 10,350.00

Investigating the range of behavioral and ecological variability within species
is crucial for understanding broader patterns of social adaptation while
minimizing confounding effects of phylogeny. Variability may be seen by studying
the social system of one species in several different habitats. Differences in
social systems within the same species may be explained by differences in food
availability and distribution across different habitats. This project will
investigate social system variation of spider monkeys (Ateles spp.) by studying
them in productive, wet forest, a habitat where they have never before been
studied. Spider monkeys are one of only several mammalian species that has a
fission-fusion social system, in which the entire group rarely coalesces but
instead is split into subgroups with fluid, variable membership. These monkeys
specialize on eating ripe fruit, and their social system has been suggested to
be an adaptation for reducing feeding competition within the group. How spider
monkeys respond to fluctuations in their environment, and how their responses
vary across a wide range of habitats, is informative for the broad scope of
socioecology. The fluid nature of spider monkeys' fission-fusion social system
allows sensitive detection of how such variables as diet, food availability and
distribution, and subgroup size and composition interact. No long-term studies
exist of spider monkeys living in a large, continuous tract of productive,
diverse, lowland wet forest where they also live with a complete suite of
potential predators. Living in this productive forest may result in relatively
decreased feeding competition for this population of spider monkeys, so their
social system may differ from populations living in drier habitats. The
objectives of this project are the following: (1) to test hypotheses relating
diet and foraging ecology to the social structure and organization of spider
monkeys living in a diverse, wet forest with a decreased dry season, (2) to gain
a clearer view of this primate's variation in behavior and ecology by comparing
the results of this study with those of published studies of spider monkeys from
other sites, and (3) to provide the first investigation of the relationships
between subgroup changes and social and ecological variables in a large group of
spider monkeys. This project has intellectual merit that spans several academic
disciplines. This project will be of interest to physical anthropologists
because chimpanzees and bonobos (Pan spp.), our closest living relatives, are
the only other primates to consistently display a fission-fusion social system
like that of spider monkeys; comparative studies of Pan and Ateles provide a
relatively phylogenetically-independent approach for understanding the
environmental determinants of the fission-fusion social system. This project
will be of interest to biologists, especially behaviorists and ecologists, due
to its focus on the relationships between spider monkeys' demography, social
behavior, and ecology.

