* 0233700
* CAREER: Immunochemical Techniques for Investigations on the Occurrence and Fate of Agrochemicals in the Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Diana Aga, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 12/31/2004
* USD 151,557.00

This project entitled "CAREER: Immunochemical Techniques for Investigations on
the Occurrence and Fate of Agrochemicals in the Environment" is directed by Dr.
Diana Aga from the University of Nebraska at Kearney. The project is supported
by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and the International Programs
Office, which will provide funds in support of Dr. Aga's international
collaboration with Dr. Bertold Hock of the Technical University of Munich. The
purpose of this research is to study the presence, disposition and transport of
agrochemicals in soil and surface water. Specifically, new methods will be
developed for the detection of a new herbicide (which currently has no detection
methods), metabolites of a known herbicide (which has 8 isomeric forms) and for
antibiotic residues used widely in feedstocks. The investigator will use known
analytical techniques such as immunoassay (ELISA), liquid chromatography/mass
spectrometry (HPLC/MS), gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS), high
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and capillary electrophoresis (CE).

The CAREER program for young investigators focuses on research, as well as,
innovative educational activities. The educational component of this research
will involve undergraduate research and enhanced laboratory curricula which
directly impacts the research project. The potential impact of this research on
society in a state which has an economy based largely on agriculture is
significant. The research could provide more rapid and lower cost analyses of
soil and water samples used to monitor the environment.





