* 0233363
* Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms Governing Cnidarian/Algal Symbioses
* BIO,EF
* 02/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Virginia Weis, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 06/30/2006
* USD 471,971.00

This study will examine the cellular and molecular interactions between
cnidarians, such as reef-building corals, and their single-celled symbiotic
algae that reside within their tissues. Weis' group will identify and
characterize genes in host corals and closely related anemones that are turned
on specifically due to their symbiosis with algae. The time-course for the
expression of these so-called symbiosis genes during the initial establishment
of the cnidarian host and symbiotic algae partnership will be explored in
microscopic larval corals that acquire their algae from their environment, by
ingesting them with food. New state-of-the-art genetic techniques will be used
to block the correct functioning of the symbiosis gene products. This approach
will help determine the role that symbiosis genes play in the regulation and
maintenance of coral/algal symbioses. Symbiotic associations between two or more
unrelated organisms are found throughout every ecosystem. These relationships
encompass a spectrum of lifestyles, from mutualistic to parasitic, and from
extracellular to intracellular. Among the most significant marine mutualisms are
those between corals and their algal symbionts, which together form both the
trophic and structural foundation of the entire coral reef ecosystem. A great
deal is known about corals on a macroscale level, such as their global
distribution and ecology. However, microscale processes of inter-partner
communication and regulation that occur during the initiation, establishment,
and maintenance of these symbioses remain largely unexplored. A lack of basic
knowledge of these processes has hampered efforts to understand the global
phenomenon of coral bleaching, which is the result of the breakdown of the
symbiosis. Widespread bleaching, which leads to coral death and reef
degradation, is considered a serious environmental threat. This study will take
a multileveled approach to the examination of the events surrounding the
initiation, establishment and maintenance of symbioses between corals and their
symbiotic algae.







