* 0233152
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Experimental Measurements of the Diffusion Coefficients in Minerals of the Transition Zone of the Earth's Mantle
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Robert Liebermann, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2007
* USD 15,057.00

0233152&lt;br/&gt;Liebermann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for US-
France collaboration in earth sciences involves Robert Liebermann of the State
University of New York at Stony Brook, Frederic Bejina and Olivier Jaoul at the
University Paul Sabatier in Toulouse, France. The project focuses on the
measurement of diffusion coefficients in high-pressure minerals, which
constitute the transition zone of the Earth's interior. Specifically, the
investigators will measure silicon diffusion in stishovite and magnesium
diffusion in wadsleyite. The measurements of these diffusion coefficients are
critical to understanding point defect chemistry of high-pressure minerals. In
turn, this will elucidate kinetic processes occurring in the deep interior of
the Earth. The US and French investigators will conduct diffusion experiments on
materials at the High Pressure laboratory at Stony Brook. The materials will
then be analyzed by nuclear microanalysis techniques using a Van De Graaf
accelerator in France. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side
of parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS. NSF will cover travel funds and
living expenses for the US investigator. The CNRS will support visits by French
researchers and students to the United States. &lt;br/&gt;