* 0233217
* JIETSSP:  Investigation of Silicon Carbide (SiC) Power Electronic Converters for Wireless Microwave Power Transmission
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Prasad Enjeti, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 12/31/2005
* USD 159,999.00

Improved power management and distribution is essential for wireless power
transmission (WPT) for next generation Space Solar Power (SSP) systems. A highly
efficient C-band rectifying antenna (rectenna) array for WPT has been
demonstrated to operate at 5.61 GHz at 78% efficiency at Texas A&amp;M. The
rectenna array combines high efficiency RF to DC diode conversion with a
wideband, high gain and circularly polarized array to produce DC power
regardless of array's orientation. In this project we propose to further extend
this work by investigating suitable DC to DC and DC to AC Converters employing
Silicon Carbide (SiC) devices. Silicon Carbide (SiC) is a nearly ideal material
for power switching devices and diodes. The primary objective of this proposal
is to investigate a variety of new converter topologies, which can be directly
interfaced with rectifying antenna array. The project consists of two parts. The
first part will focus on an experimental setup to demonstrate suitable converter
topologies for rectenna type DC power source. An experimental 100V, 200W,
500kHz, SiC power conversion powered by a rectenna will be studied for its
performance followed by an in-depth evaluation. The second part of this project
will perform a trade study to investigate rectenna power converter architectures
for higher power, higher voltage WPT systems. A rectenna array interfaced to a
power converter will be considered as a building block and several series /
parallel combinations of the building blocks will be studied for increased
voltage and current capability.