* 0233313
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Tribological Thin Films on Rough Surfaces: Design, Analysis, Characterization, Fatigue and Wear
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Gary Dargush, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2007
* USD 19,800.00

0233313&lt;br/&gt;Soom&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for US-France
collaboration in mechanical engineering involves researchers and students at the
State University of New York at Buffalo and the University for Science and
Technology in Lille, France. Andres Soom and Gary F. Dargush in the US and Jacky
Lesage and Gerard Mesmacque in France will lead this collaborative program to
model the tribological performance and failure of thin coatings and films. In
particular, they will conduct a series of experiments, resulting in patterns of
wear or film failure. In parallel, computational mechanical modeling of 3D
contact stresses and strains will be developed. The US investigators are expert
in computational, contact mechanics and tribological testing. This is
complemented by French capabilities in characterization, preparation and failure
of thin films, and nano-indentation measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thin
films and coatings are frequently used to enhance performance and durability of
mechanical components and production tooling where some sliding occurs at
contact with the surface. Recently advanced designs of surfaces have challenged
current ability to design films, and predict behavior, based on mechanical
properties. This joint effort will advance understanding of life-cycle
performance and predictive modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents
the US side of joint proposals to the NSF and the French National Center for
Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for
the US investigators and graduate student. CNRS will support the visits of the
French researchers and graduate students to the United States. &lt;br/&gt;