* 0233483
* US-France Cooperative Research:   Variability in Thermohaline Circulation and North Atlantic Climate
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Roger Francois, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2008
* USD 21,150.00

0233483&lt;br/&gt;McManus&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for US-
France collaboration in climate change involves researchers at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution and the Laboratory for Climate Sciences and
Environment of the French National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). Jerry
F. McManus in the US and Laurent Labeyrie in France will lead this collaborative
program to model and analyze the variability in thermohaline circulation and
impact on North Atlantic climate. The ocean's thermohaline circulation has
undergone reorganization on various time scales, with important implications for
understanding the Earth's climate in the past and present. Nutrient proxies
provide important evidence of watermass reconfigurations. Dynamical tracers may
provide an ideal complement to this information by allowing quantitative
evaluation of changes in the rates of deepwater formation and export.
Combination of watermass properties and overturning rate could yield direct
estimates of the transport by the ocean's thermohaline circulation. To this end,
the US and French investigators will refine a method that utilizes two long-
lived uranium series, 231 Pa and 230 Th. They will construct maps of the burial
ratio (231Pa/230Th) in bulk sediment cores of the Atlantic Ocean. In addition,
they will evaluate the link between changes in circulation and climate
variability through high-resolution time series. The US group brings to this
collaboration expertise in the area of Uranium-series radiochemistry. This is
complemented by French expertise in spatial coverage and resolution and access
to the IMAGES cores repository in France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
represents the US side of joint proposals to the NSF and the French National
Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living
expenses for the US investigators. CNRS will support the visits of the French
researchers and a graduate student to the United States. The project will
advance understanding of the causes and potential impact of ocean circulation on
climate change and abrupt climate change in the North Atlantic.&lt;br/&gt;