* 0233899
* LTREB: Continuing Long-Term Demography of Florida Scrub Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Eric Menges, Archbold Expeditions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 12/31/2008
* USD 348,310.00

Intellectual Merit: This award will continue a long-term demographic study on
plant populations in the Florida sandhills. Three new types of modeling
approaches will be added: individual-based modeling, mark-recapture modeling to
improve estimates of demographic rates, and larger-scale, spatially explicit
modeling. The long-term demographic datasets allow characterization of
environmental stochasticity, microhabitats, effects of fire, and metapopulation
dynamics. Environmental stochasticity is incorporated into demographic
projections. In addition, microhabitat effects on demographic variation have
been characterized. These microhabitats are controlled in large part by fire,
which creates or enlarges gaps, the preferred microhabitat for many of the study
species. Expanded data collection on species' occurrences in defined habitat
patches and expanded analyses of the interaction of spatial habitat structure
and demography will occur. Spatially explicit models of demographic change will
be built that are parameterized with observational data and experimental
results. A new focus will be the long-term demography of Florida scrub plants in
experimental restorations. One single-species introduction is underway in a
sandhill ecosystem being restored with fire. Also, a long-term, multi-species
demographic experiment within a large restoration will be started. Restoration
goals of providing conditions for equivalent or improved demographic performance
of introduced populations relative to wild populations will be evaluated.
Experimental introductions in the restoration can in turn provide insights into
colonization dynamics, dispersal rates, and microsite requirements of Florida
scrub species. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research on the long-term
demography of Florida scrub plants has accumulated data and models that have a
broader impact than the advancement of research. Data and models are shared with
the scientific community and thus facilitated more effective conservation
biology. In addition, this study has provided many graduate and undergraduate
student research opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;