* 0233241
* US-Germany Collaborative Research:  Perceptions of Fairness: Attitudes about Opportunity and Status Among Women Scientists in Germany and the US
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Sandra Hanson, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2007
* USD 10,000.00

0233241 Hanson This award supports Sandra Hanson and a junior faculty member
from Catholic University in a collaboration with Stefan Fuchs of the Department
of Sociology at the University of Munich, Germany. The project will analyze
differences in attitudes about opportunity, status, and inequality among women
in science and technology occupations in the former East Germany, West Germany,
and the US. It will also compare attitudes of female scientists with non-
scientists and male scientists. Changes over time in women scientists' attitudes
will also be considered. One hypothesis is that the experiences of women
scientists in the former East Germany will result in a very different set of
ideas about what it takes to get ahead, about their own socio-economic position
and mobility, and about reasons for inequality than will be found among from
West Germany and the US. Examination of mobility-related attitudes in an
important area of social mobility research since those attitudes provide insight
into the relation between the structure of political and socio-economic systems
and the structure of mobility attitudes at the individual and country levels.

The project also has an educational objective. The project will allow a junior
faculty member to benefit from performing research in another country. She will
develop a heightened appreciation of the world while also learning important new
technical skills.