* 0233339
* JIETSSP:   Cost Effective, Efficient Monitoring and Control of Space Solar Power Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2009
* James Johnson, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2009
* USD 211,896.00

Power distribution voltages and insulation are areas of critical importance to
the study of SSP systems. Due &lt;br/&gt;to the importance of the mass and cost
of the SSP system, most designs for the SSP operate at high voltages
&lt;br/&gt;in order to reduce transmission losses and mass. Some design concepts
even use no insulation. Use of these &lt;br/&gt;high voltages will present
challenges of electrical breakdown and performance of insulators, insulation,
and &lt;br/&gt;switchgear. As a result, there is a strong research motivation
for technology geared towards enhancement of &lt;br/&gt;PMAD systems exposed to
electrical breakdown and corona type faults. In harsh environments (aerospace),
economic and effective fault management (maintenance and monitoring of electric
power systems) is needed to ensure high performance. In the effective fault
management of the aerospace environment, the maintenance cost of aging
distribution cables is a major consideration. The installation and maintenance
of the equipment on board the SSP is also of high significance. These operations
can be significantly improved by more accurate predictions of insulating aging,
as well as detection and location of faults within the components of the power
system. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the design of an
integrated system using state-of-the-art technology for &lt;br/&gt;continuous
and periodic monitoring of a space power system with emphasis on the detection
and diagnosis &lt;br/&gt;of corona and soft faults. This scheme involves the
cost effective, efficient monitoring and control for an &lt;br/&gt;enhanced
space solar power network. A network of sensors will monitor the network, report
information &lt;br/&gt;for the detection of faults, and provide health-status
information of electrical insulation and other &lt;br/&gt;components in the
system. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Center for Energy Systems and Control
(CESaC), Howard University is one of the research centers in &lt;br/&gt;the US
that has demonstrated capabilities in the following combination of fields: Power
system analysis in &lt;br/&gt;the terrestrial, non-terrestrial, naval systems,
and spacecraft energy power systems; Application of &lt;br/&gt;optimization
techniques to improve the solution of different problems, and applications of
intelligent &lt;br/&gt;systems to the solution of complex problems. This
combination is necessary for completion of the complex
&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary tasks that will be faced in this project. The
project will create an opportunity for students &lt;br/&gt;from differing
branches of electrical engineering - material sciences, communications, power
systems and &lt;br/&gt;controls - to become aware of modern problems in the
power industry and contribute to the technical &lt;br/&gt;progress in this
field.