* 0233925
* Structural and Electronic Properties of Insulating Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2002,05/31/2006
* David Vanderbilt, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2006
* USD 315,000.00

This award supports fundamental theoretical research on the structural and
electronic properties of insulating materials, with special emphasis on
development of novel techniques for the computation and analysis of these
properties. The objectives are to continue the development of accurate,
efficient, robust and informative algorithms for computing the electronic
structure of complex materials, and to apply these methods to study several
important material systems, especially dielectric
oxides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The context of the computational work will
primarily be the plane-wave pseudupotential approach to density-functional
theory, with the use of ultrasoft pseudopotentials where appropriate. The novel
methodologies that will be applied and developed are ones that give a local
real-space picture of electronic and dielectric properties via theoretical
concepts connected with Wannier functions, electric polarization, and response
to electric fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications will be focused mainly on
insulating oxides, either having strong potential for applications, or else
having unusual dielectric properties. A primary thrust will be to study so-
called "high-K" dielectrics, i.e., insulating oxides having dielectric constants
about 20 or higher that could be candidates for the next generation of
microelectronics. A secondary emphasis will be on a newly discovered class of
materials having enormous static dioelectric constants. While recent work by
ourselves and others tends to point to an extrinsic mechanism for this enormous
dielectric response, there are also anomalies associated with the lattice
dielectric response that deserve further investigation. We also plan to carry
forward our previous interests in wide-gap III-V semiconductors by studying
screw dislocation in GaN.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical computational research on materials. The reserach will further
develop novel computational techniques to better understand the electronic and
structural properties of materials. &lt;br/&gt;These state-of-the-art techniques
will then be applied to materials having unusual electrical properties.
Successful completion of this fundamental research will yield new computational
methods and a better understanding of materials properties of interest to the
microelectronics industry.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;