* 0233806
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Proper Actions, Symmetric Imprimitivity Theorems, and Representations of Dynamical Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 03/22/2002,08/31/2005
* Dana Williams, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 08/31/2005
* USD 28,600.00

0124216&lt;br/&gt;an Huef&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-year
collaborative research project in mathematics between Dr. Astrid an Huef of the
University of Denver, Dr. Dana Williams of Dartmouth University, and Dr. Iain
Raeburn of the University of Newcastle in Australia. This project will focus on
three goals: 1) to prove a symmetric imprimitivity theorem for commuting proper
actions on a non-commutative C-algebra, 2) to show that this new symmetric
imprimitivity theorem applies in a wide variety of examples, and 3) to extend
related results known for reduced crossed products to full crossed products. The
proposed research is central in operator algebra theory and has applications to
representation theory.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the
efforts of three laboratories (two in the United States and one in Australia)
that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. An Huef is well
versed in the modern theory of integrable and proper actions, Williams has
expertise in vector-valued integration and harmonic analysis, and Raeburn is an
expert on nonabelian duality. This project will broaden our base of basic
knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. &lt;br/&gt;