* 0233776
* JIETSSP:  Nanomaterials for Space Solar Power
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2005
* Brian Dixon, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 10/31/2005
* USD 200,000.00

An adjustment of the original statement of work outlined in the proposal is
being made to reflect the reduced level of support. While the overall technical
approach remains the same, the number of materials systems that will be
investigated and their subsequent analysis will be scaled
back.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will reduce the number of conjugated polymers that
will be investigated for our proposed devices. Year I will focus almost
exclusively on the understanding and use of P3OT. This may be expanded in years
2 and 3 as dictated by our scaled-back theoretical modeling efforts. We will
focus our modeling work towards the understanding of the important mechanisms in
nanotube/quantum dot/P3OT films and the identification and analysis of other
conjugated polymers that could be investigated in years 2 and 3. These
theoretical modeling efforts will be completed in year
1.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will restrict our quantum dot system synthesis
efforts to those that we have previously identified suitable for this type of an
application. Specifically, we will only concentrate on the incorporation of the
CdSe and CuLnS2 into polymeric materials designed for thin film photovoltaic
devices. The synthesis efforts and fundamental studies regarding these quantum
dots will be completed by the end of year 2. We will concentrate our efforts in
year 3 on fabricating and testing devices using the materials generated during
first two years of the program. By reducing the number and variety of quantum
dot systems and polymeric hosts investigated, we will no longer have any sub
contracts in the third year of the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
derivatization attempts using thiols, amides, esters etc. to enhance covalent
interaction with quantum dots will still be investigated but to a lesser degree.
In addition, other nanotube purification studies using chromatographic
techniques (i.e., gel permeation and reverse phase chromatography) will be
eliminated. We will also forgo any study of ultransonically induced quantum
dot/carbon nantoube interactions. Finally, the femtosecond laser spectroscopy
studies designed to probe the energetics and the dynamics of ultrafast
electronic transitions in colloidal semiconductor nanoparticles and nanotubes in
solutions and from solid-state surfaces will no longer be within our scope of
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the notable exceptions outlined above, we will
perform all other tasks outlined in the original proposal. The reduction in the
number of materials investigated and extent of their analysis significantly
reduces the man-hours required for this program. In addition, the materials and
supplies costs are reduced by 1/3 each year accordingly, and the travel costs
are also reduced proportionally. These changes will make it possible for us to
still make a substantive contribution to the JJETSSP program within the revised
budget we have submitted.&lt;br/&gt;