* 0233978
* SGER: Restoring Assumptions of Safety and Control Following the 2001 Terrorist Attacks
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Suzanne Thompson, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 05/31/2004
* USD 33,872.00

The terrorist attacks of September 2001 were not just an assault on the physical
infrastructure of the U.S. -- they also represented a blow to the sense of
safety and security of millions of Americans. The attacks were personally
salient to all Americans because of the extensive media coverage, the choice of
Americans as targets, and the likelihood of further attacks. Thus it seems
likely that the majority of Americans who were not victims themselves suffered
significant effects from the attacks including anxiety and reduced personal
control, a challenge to their sense of meaningfulness in life, and a sense of
vulnerability regarding airline passenger travel, the water supply, and anthrax.
Although some of these effects have abated as most individuals found ways to
restore their adaptive assumptions of control, invulnerability, and meaning, it
seems likely that many individuals remain in a heightened state of anxiety and
have not found useful ways to regain a sense of security and meaning. The long-
term consequences for those who remain anxious are a lowered quality of life,
including increased stress and restrictions in lifestyle. The goal of this small
grant for exploratory research is to explore how most people in the general
public have restored adaptive assumptions of control, invulnerability, and
meaning following the terrorist attacks. Through open-ended interviews and
questionnaires, the cognitive and behavioral strategies to restore control
following the attacks will be identified. Based on "Assumptive Worlds Theory,"
it is predicted that the use of strategies to restore a sense of control will be
associated with higher current levels of adaptive assumptions and lower anxiety.
Furthermore, it is expected that success in restoring assumptions will be
associated with prior resolution of a victimization, a sense of general
perceived control, and the use of social support in times of crisis. It is
critically important that public decision makers and Americans themselves
understand the process of restoring adaptive assumptions following a nationwide
disaster. This research will help individuals understand their reactions to the
events and will identify adaptive responses that reduce anxiety and disruption
to everyday life. This practical information about common responses and adaptive
reactions to the attacks will be disseminated to the public through the popular
media and made available to public health officials through the professional
literature. At the same time, this study extends theories about personal
traumatic life events to individuals who are not victims themselves, but fellow
members of a targeted group, and can establish the utility of Assumptive Worlds
Theory for understanding these widespread reactions to a national disaster.