* 0233189
* RUI:  Deduction in Classical and Multiple-Valued Logics
* CSE,CCF
* 05/16/2002,04/30/2003
* James Lu, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* John Staudhammer
* 04/30/2003
* USD 10,165.00

This project examines several areas of research related to theorem proving
techniques for multiple-valued logics (MVL's) and for proving completeness: -
The most important work may be a new rule of inference, a resolution-like rule
tentatively named Modification, for regular MVL's. It appears likely that
Modification is more effective than existing methods of inference for MVL's; it
is also likely that the insights provided by Modification can be adapted to
improve the search behavior of other MVL inference rules. - Signed logic is an
adaptation of classical logic for reasoning about MVL's. Several modest
implementations have been developed recently for signed logic. The current
project will broaden the focus to implementations in the general theorem proving
setting. Experiments with logic programming and constraint solving will also be
undertaken. - Annotated logic corresponds to a naturally arising class of signed
logic and has been applied to reasoning with inconsistency. Current systems of
annotated logic are paraconsistent, that is, inconsistency tolerant, with
respect to epistemic inconsistency, but they behave classically with respect to
ontological inconsistency. A mapping from signed logic to annotated logic has
been defined which has the effect of mapping ontological inconsistency to
epistemic inconsistency. Further investigation into properties of this mapping
in the proposed project is expected to lead to fruitful insights on the
relationships between the two notions of inconsistencies. - The Anderson-Bledsoe
excess literal proof of the completeness of resolution was recently generalized
to provide simplified proofs of known results as well as to prove completeness
of connected tableaux and of connected regular tableaux for NNF formulas and the
completeness of linear non-clausal resolution. The project will examine the
application of the technique to still other methods of proof procedures.