* 0233366
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Evolution and Function of Hopanoid Lipids in Symbiotic and Thermoacidophilic Actinomycetes
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Alison Berry, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2007
* USD 15,200.00

0233366&lt;br/&gt;Berry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for US-France
collaboration in microbial genetics involves Alison M. Berry of the University
of California at Davis and Philippe Normand of the University of Claude Bernard
- Lyon 1 and their students. The objectives are to study the biology of Frankia,
a nitrogen-fixing prokaryote that forms root nodule symbioses and to address a
key metabolic control point, the hopanoid lipid biosynthetic pathway. The
production of specific hopanoid lipids in Frankia is a pivotal microorganism in
that it is similar to the gram-negative rhizobia in its capacity to nodulate a
group of related nitrogen-fixing plants. Frankia is related to thermoacidophilic
Acidothermus cellulyticus. They will explore the role of hopanoids in symbiotic
nitrogen fixation and as an adaptation to environmental stress through (1) DNA
sequence information from the 17-kb Frankia genomic clone, and corresponding
genes in close relatives: (2) comparisons of the profile of Frankia hopanoid
lipids with that of A. Celluloyticus; and (3) environmental sampling of the
thermoacidophilic actinomycetes, and expression of hopanoid genes. The
information obtained in this collaboration will be used in expanded
investigations of the evolution and function of hopanoid synthesis under extreme
environmental conditions and by symbiotic signaling compounds. The US
investigator brings to this collaboration expertise in hopanoid lipids and their
importance in nitrogen fixation in Frankia. This is complemented by French
expertise in Frankia phylogeny and in the use of molecular genetic tools for
examining microbial communities in soils. This group also has the capacity to do
proteomic analysis of Frankia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the
US side of a joint proposal to the NSF and the French National Center for
Scientific Research (CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for
the US investigator and graduate students. The CNRS will support the visits of
the French researchers and students to the United States. US students will
benefit from the exchange of scientific techniques and experience with an
international research team. &lt;br/&gt;