* 0233618
* WCR:  The Hydrology of Extreme Floods in Mountain Watersheds
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2003,08/31/2007
* James Smith, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2007
* USD 215,000.00

0233617&lt;br/&gt;J. A. Smith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research entails
observational studies of extreme floods along the western margin of the central
Appalachians in West Virginia . We will focus on floods produced by organized
systems of thunderstorms in mountainous terrain. These storm systems have
produced some of the largest rainfall accumulations in the world at time
intervals less than 6 hours, including 780 mm in 4.5 hours from the 18-19 July
1942 Smethport Pennsylvania storm and 483 mm in 2 hours from the 18-19 July 1889
Rockport West Virginia storm. Our research will utilize two principal
observational resources: 1) research watersheds of the Fernow Experimental
Forest for examination of flood response at basin scales between 0.1 and 10.0
km2 and 2) U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) stream gaging stations and WSR-88D
radar rainfall estimates for analysis of extreme flood response at basin scales
between 1 and 1,000 km2. A 51-year stream-gauging record from the Fernow
watersheds will be combined with 3 years of intensive field measurements to
examine runoff production mechanisms and extreme flood response. Field
observations will be integrated with rainfall and discharge measurements through
modeling studies based on the unsaturated flow equations. Analyses of 16 extreme
floods that have occurred along the western margin of the central Appalachians
during the period 1996 - 2002 will be carried out for 12 drainage basins
upstream of USGS stream gauging stations. Drainage area for the 12 basins ranges
from 145 to 1,023 km2. The core science questions that will be examined in the
project are the following: 1) What are the rate-limiting processes for extreme
flood response in humid, mountain watersheds? 2) Are rate-limiting processes for
extreme floods scale-dependent, and if so, how does scale dependence arise? 3)
Are rate-limiting processes for extreme floods dependent on the return interval
of the flood, and if so, how does this dependence arise? These science questions
will be addressed through analyses of flood response in West Virginia that
examine a series of hypotheses concerning runoff production mechanisms and
space-time variability of rainfall. The proposed research is designed to provide
the scientific basis and scientific methods for improved flood hazard management
in high rain rate, mountain watersheds. &lt;br/&gt;