* 0233050
* SBIR Phase I:  Cross-language Information Retrieval Using Deep Syntax Parsing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Konstantin Bogatyrev, Universal Dialog, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,973.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
construction of a cross-lingual retrieval system based on deep linguistic
analysis intended to deliver efficiencies and cost savings and reduce
communication barriers worldwide. By 2003, 70 percent of the estimated 1.3
billion users of the Internet will be non-English speaking. Thus the need to
enable automated, reliable accessibility to information in more than one
language is clear. Most existing information retrieval systems are either
monolingual or cross-language with limited success and no translation
capabilities. The investigator's Cross-Language Information Retrieval System
(CLIR) will produce significant performance increases in the recall and
precision of a cross-language sear. The investigative team will encapsulate
cutting edge natural language processing (NLP) technology developed on a
consistent theoretical foundation into a modular and scalable application-
programming interface. The system will incorporate an extraction component for
the matching of relevant lexemes based on their syntactic context, and a
probabilistic module, which will disambiguate multiple interpretation based on
expectation. The firm has secured an exclusive license from Russian Academy of
Sciences for the use of complex NLP algorithms that will be integrated into the
CLIR technology, creating a state-of-the-art linguistic kernel.

Universal Dialog proffered technology will provide any person, business,
organization or government, as well as any software that integrates their Cross-
Language Information Retrieval, a faster, less costly solution for the retrieval
of multilingual information, with a higher degree of precision, recall and
scalability that CLIR methods currently available. The firm plans to integrate
the technology to be developed in this project into its Cross-Language
Communication Platform (CLCP). CLCP will enable users to retrieve, summarize,
and fully translate retrieved data.