* 0233698
* JIETSSP:  Coordination of Robotic Teams for Space Solar Power Assembly Operations
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Sanjiv Singh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2004
* USD 350,000.00

Assembly of Space Solar Power facilities will be significantly more complex and
demanding than any prior on-orbit assembly. While it is evident that human
workers will not be able to construct such facilities directly, alternatives
involving many robot teams and few human supervisors are not yet mature. To
succeed in this enterprise, revolutionary new capabilities are needed in areas
such as autonomous robotic assembly and human-robot interaction. This project
will seek fundamental new insights and demonstrations of how Space Solar Power
(SSP) facilities can be built using autonomous robots supervised by humans. It
will have two main objectives, important to the future of Space Solar Power
assembly:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enable heterogeneous multiple robots to
coordinate in the performance of complex tasks, such as
assembly~&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enable flexible human-robot interaction during
assembly operations to deal contingencies that cannot be
anticipated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For some of the key tasks, such as moving
substructures, autonomous control is already feasible. For other aspects, such
as fine manipulation to connect components, human perception and control is
needed.&lt;br/&gt;The PI seek to develop a general framework, which they term
sliding autonomy, where any subtask, on any of the robots, can be performed
either autonomously or by a tele-operator, depending on the situation. The
framework will enable mixed-initiative decision making: Human users can decide
to take control, if they want, and the autonomous systems can decide to hand
over control, when they need help.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
utilize an existing robotic testbed, developed for a previous NASA program,
consisting of three heterogeneous robots (a crane, a mobile manipulator. and a
roving eye) that are used for autonomous assembly. It will demonstrate several
basic assembly tasks, such as docking beams and stringing cables. It will
quantify the advantages of sliding autonomy for this task, in terms of time
spent and success ratio. A clear improvement in efficiency will demonstrate the
feasibility of such assembly for Space Solar Power facilities.&lt;br/&gt;