* 0233940
* SGER: Nonlinear IV Approach to Inference in Nonstationary Panels
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Yoosoon Chang, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2003
* USD 35,000.00

The project explores a nonlinear IV approach to inference in general
nonstationary panels with unit roots. The approach relies on the standard IV
methods with instruments constructed from nonlinear transformations of
integrated processes. Though the methodology is very simple to implement, it
provides extremely effective tools for testing unit roots in panels. Our tests
for unit roots in panels are simply based on individual nonlinear IV t-ratios,
which are nothing but the usual t-ratios based on the IV estimators using as
instruments the integrable transformations of lagged levels.

Such nonlinear IV based tests have many desirable properties and can be used
for very general models. The test statistics have Gaussian limit distributions
at each cross- sectional level, and more importantly, they are asymptotically
independent across different cross-sectional units. The asymptotic Gaussianity
and independence indeed hold under very mild conditions that allow for cross-
sectional dependency and heterogeneity. In contrast, virtually all of the
related work done previously assumes either cross- sectional independence or
specific forms of dependency across individual units. Needless to say, the
assumption of cross-sectional independence is highly unrealistic for many
economic panels of interest. Any presumption on the form of cross-sectional
dependency may also severely restrict the applicability of the tests. Our
asymptotics only require the time dimension to be large, so the tests are valid
for panels with both large and small cross-sectional dimensions.

The proposed tests for unit roots allow not only for the cross-sectional
dependencies of nnovations, but also for the presence of cointegration across
cross-sectional units in levels. Unbalanced panels and panels with heterogeneous
individual shortrun dynamics and cross-sectionally related dynamics are also
permitted. The proposed tests also make it possible to more carefully formulate
the unit root and cointegration hypotheses in panels, and use order statistics
to test for and against the presence of unit roots and cointegration in only a
fraction of individual units. None of the currently available tests can be used
to test for unit roots in such general panels. Some preliminary simulations
indicate that our nonlinear IV based tests perform very well in finite samples
even for panels with relatively small time and cross-sectional dimensions.