* 0233236
* Dynamic Modeling and Analysis of Right-angle Geared Rotor   System
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Teik Lim, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/2003
* USD 79,882.00

ABSTRACT Teik C. Lim, The University of Alabama Proposal Number: 9978581 Dynamic
Modeling and Analysis of Right-angle Geared Rotor System

The objective of this research project is to perform analytical modeling and
computational analysis of the dynamic transmission error excitation and coupled
torsional-lateral vibrations of right-angle geared rotor systems. This class of
power transmission system is commonly used in automotive and rotorcraft drive-
train applications because of its ability to transmit high torque levels and
rotational motion in the perpendicular direction. However, the geared systems
are quite susceptible to dynamic response amplification that causes undesirable
noise and damaging structural fatigue. In this study, the nonlinear time and
spatial-varying gear mesh-coupling model of the gear pair system is developed.
The formulation includes the effects of tooth geometry and flexibility, angular
rotation, and multi-tooth meshing process. Also, the system dynamic response
subject to transmission error excitation and input torque fluctuation is
computed. The analysis specifically examines the significance of time-varying
mesh stiffness, clearance non-linearity, friction excitation, and variation of
the tooth engagement process. The proposed research is expected to significantly
enhance the understanding of transmission error excitation generation and its
effect on the system response. In addition, the information and knowledge from
this research are expected to contribute to the advancement of right-angle
drive-train technology and development of newer generation power transmission
systems with superior dynamic characteristics.

