* 0233887
* Role of Cdk Phosphorylation of HsCdc6 in DNA Replication
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Wei Jiang, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Lei
* 02/29/2004
* USD 161,871.00

In all eukaryotic cells, accurate duplication of chromosomes and precise
segregation of the sister chromatids into two daughter chromosomes are essential
for faithful propagation of their identity. The first event, DNA replication, is
a tightly regulated process that is strictly coupled to the progression of the
cell cycle. It occurs at discrete chromosomal locations (replication origins)
during the S-phase of the cell cycle. When DNA replication is initiated, the
cell must ensure that all of its genome is replicated and that the replication
of every DNA section occurs once and only once per cell cycle. HsCdc6, a human
protein homolog to the budding yeast DNA replication protein Cdc6p, plays an
essential role in the initiation of DNA replication in human cells. Like all
Cdc6-related proteins, HsCdc6 contains a bipartite Walker nucleotide-binding
motif and shows significant sequence similarity to the eukaryotic and
prokaryotic clamp loaders that load ring-shaped DNA polymerase processivity
factors onto DNA. Recent studies have shown that HsCdc6 has intrinsic ATP
binding and ATPase activity, which play important roles in regulating the
initiation of DNA replication. HsCdc6 is a physiological substrate of cyclin-
dependent kinase (Cdk). Cdk phosphorylation of HsCdc6 is required for the
initiation of DNA replication and results in its nuclear exclusion via a
receptor-dependent nuclear export. Therefore, it is suggested that Cdk
phosphorylation of HsCdc6 prevents its reassociation with chromatin, thereby
preventing DNA re-replication. Nevertheless, the exact mechanisms by which
phosphorylation of HsCdc6 by Cdk is needed for the initiation and how
phosphorylated HsCdc6 is specifically exported from the nucleus are unclear.
Determination of these mechanisms is the goal of this project. The first aim of
the project is to determine how Cdk phosphorylation of HsCdc6 regulates the
initiation of DNA replication. Recombinant HsCdc6 and its Cdk phosphorylation
mutants will be purified from insect cells using the baculovirus-based express
system. Purified HsCdc6 proteins will be used to determine whether Cdk
phosphorylation of HsCdc6 regulates its intrinsic ATP binding and/or ATPase
activity. Moreover, the functional roles of Cdk phosphorylation of HsCdc6 in
regulating the initiation of DNA replication will be determined using the
Xenopus cell-free DNA replication system. The second aim of this project is to
determine the nucleocytoplasmic transport pathway that regulates the nuclear
export of Cdk phosphorylated HsCdc6 and identify factor(s) that specifically
regulates the process by in vitro binding protein purification or yeast two-
hybrid screen strategies. This will ultimately lead to elucidation of the
molecular mechanism by which Cdk phosphorylation of HsCdc6 prevents DNA re-
replication in mammalian cells. These studies will contribute to a better
understanding of the function roles of Cdk phosphorylation of HsCdc6 in
regulating the initiation of DNA replication and preventing DNA re-replication.
The results will also lead to a better understanding of the fundamental
biological processes of DNA replication and nucleocytoplasmic transport, which
are still enigmatic in higher eukaryotes.