* 0233835
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Food Availability, Predation Risk and Antipredator Behavior in Blue Monkeys
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Marina Cords, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 02/29/2004
* USD 0.00

Animals must obtain food and avoid predators to survive. However, empirical
evidence suggests that food acquisition and predator avoidance are conflicting
demands. Behaviors that reduce predation risk may also reduce food intake.
Therefore, animals must develop strategies that allow them to balance the need
to eat with the need to avoid being eaten. One factor that may largely determine
how individuals respond to predation risk is food availability. When food is
scarce, individuals may accept greater predation risk and minimize investment in
antipredator behaviors if by so doing they are able to increase their food
intake.

The role of food availability on antipredator behaviors in primates has not been
well studied. This project addresses this gap in primate research by
investigating the influence of food abundance and distribution on antipredator
behaviors in three habituated groups of blue monkeys (Cercopithecus mitis) in
Kakamega Forest, Kenya. By examining how food availability and predation risk
interact and influence behavior in blue monkeys, this project will contribute to
a better understanding of primate behavioral ecology in several ways. First,
determining the extent to which predation risk influences foraging patterns in
blue monkeys will lead to a better and more realistic understanding of foraging
behavior. Second, data from this project will elucidate how predation risk and
food availability interact to determine the amount of competition for food
within a group. Third, studying how individual group members balance the
competing demands of food acquisition and predator avoidance will provide
insights into how the costs and benefits of sociality are distributed among
group members, and this in turn will provide insights into the relative
importance of predation vs. food competition in group-living primates.

With the help of local Kenyan assistants, observational data on antipredator
behaviors in adults and juveniles will be collected over a 12- month period.
These data will be compared with ecological data on food abundance and
distribution to determine whether blue monkeys reduce antipredator behaviors and
accept a higher risk of predation in periods of low food availability. Playback
experiments, in which vocalizations from crowned hawk eagles, a predator of blue
monkeys, are played to a blue monkey group, will be conducted each month to
assess the effects of simulated predator presence on foraging and antipredator
behavior among group members. This project will provide additional data to an
on-going, long-term study of blue monkey behavior at Kakamega Forest. It will
have the broader impacts of benefiting the Kakamega Environmental Education
Project, a local, grassroots organization, by employing local conservationists
and naturalists and providing educational materials to environmental education
teachers and students while assisting in the professional development of the co-
PI.