* 0233584
* Collaborative Research:  WCR:  Ecohydrology of  semiarid  woodlands: Role of woody plants in  the water cycle
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Jay Banner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 05/31/2006
* USD 166,335.00

0233584&lt;br/&gt;Stern&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extensive areas of semiarid
grasslands and savannas have been converted into shrublands. There is a common,
but untested, assumption that reducing shrub cover will have tangible and large-
scale effects on streamflow and ground water recharge. Our study area is the
Edwards Plateau of Texas, where coverage by juniper is extensive and hillslopes
are composed of highly permeable and fractured limestone. Our research will
answer basic questions about flow processes at multiple scales on these
limestone hillslopes and better define how much, if any, of an increased water
yield could result from shrub control. Large plot (3 m wide, 12 m long) rainfall
simulation will be applied above the tree canopy to develop an understanding of
water fluxes for a number of rainfall regimes. During a simulation event, we
will continuously monitor overland flow, lateral subsurface flow, canopy
interception, soil water, and transpiration. Three plot locations will be
selected for simulation experiments: one on a steep rocky hillslope, one on
flatter slopes with deeper soils, and a third site above a cavern. The cavern
site is especially significant because we should be able to obtain a good
estimate of recharge rates. In addition, a series of isotopic studies at the
hillslope, catchment and watershed scale will be conducted with the goals of (1)
differentiating soil water loss via evaporation versus transpiration (2)
conducting hydrograph separation using naturally occurring strontium (Sr) and O
isotopes and trace element concentrations and ratios (Sr/Ca and Mg/Ca), and (3)
determining shrub water use of rainfall, surficial soil water, and deep storage,
both seasonally and spatially. The proposed study is a highly interdisciplinary
examination and promises to be the most comprehensive examination of the
ecohydrology of semiarid scrublands. &lt;br/&gt;