* 0233169
* Conjugate Studies of ULF Waves and Magnetospheric Dynamics Using Ground-Based Induction Magnetometers at Four High-Latitude Manned Sites
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Mark Engebretson, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 08/31/2006
* USD 426,218.00

Since the beginning of the space age increasingly sophisticated efforts have
been made to explore and understand Earth's space environment. Scientists now
understand much about the configuration of the ionosphere and the region above
it, the magnetosphere, but much remains to be done before we fully understand
the dynamical processes involved in transferring energy and momentum from the
rapidly changing solar wind (driven by both quiescent and explosive processes
near the surface of the Sun) into Earth's magnetosphere, ionosphere, and upper
atmosphere. It is increasingly understood that doing so requires the coordinated
use of multiple data sets, including both a variety of individual spacecraft and
strategically located ground observatories. Because those parts of Earth's field
that reach farthest out into space intersect the ground at high latitudes,
arrays of ground magnetometers have long been a valued means of monitoring
processes in remote parts of the magnetosphere. This proposal requests support
to continue to operate and analyze data from four search coil magnetometers
located at high latitude sites in the North American sector, two in Antarctica
(South Pole and McMurdo) and two in the Arctic (Sondrestromfjord, Greenland, and
Iqaluit, Nunavut, Canada). South Pole and Iqaluit provide close magnetic
conjugacy near-cusp latitudes, while Iqaluit and Sondrestromfjord provide data
at similar northern latitudes but with a local time separation of 1.5 hours.
During daytime hours these locations provide a window to the magnetospheric
boundary and the interactions of the magnetosheath with the magnetosphere, and
during nighttime hours they provide an increasingly appreciated high-latitude
perspective on the development of substorm activity. The proposers are also
involved in analysis of data from other high latitude arrays of ground-based
instruments, including the multi-instrument U.S. and British AGO (Automated
Geophysical Observatory) and developing autonomous magnetometer arrays in
Antarctica, and the MACCS and CANOPUS magnetometer arrays in Arctic Canada. The
10 Hz sampling rate of the search coil magnetometers in this project provide an
important complement to the more limited sampling rates of other search coil and
fluxgate magnetometer systems (= 2 Hz) in these regions. Taken together, these
instruments make it possible to study the entire range of ULF variations, from
Pc 1 and Pi 1 pulsations down to Pc 5 pulsations, with high sensitivity. In
conjunction with data from other instruments located at the Antarctic sites and
with both low-altitude and high-altitude satellites, these magnetometers have
played, and we expect will continue to play, a significant role in a variety of
studies of geospace phenomena. During the next three years we expect our
scientific efforts to focus on (a) studies of several classes of Pc 1 and 2
waves (0.2-1 Hz), including waves observed poleward of the cusp, so-called
"mantle waves"; (b) the propagation of Pc 3-4 pulsations and the generation of
quasiperiodic (QP) emissions, a class of ELF/VLF emissions modulated at Pc 3-4
frequencies (15-60 mHz); and (c) studies of both short-period and long-period
irregular ULF waves, especially during substorms and magnetic storm periods.
Analysis and data processing efforts associated with these data sets are highly
suitable for undergraduate as well as graduate research participation, and build
on continuing strong programs of faculty and undergraduate student research.