* 0233068
* SBIR Phase I:  Adaptive Personalization and  Context Management for Location-Based Mobile Devices (AdaptTribe)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2003
* Curt Powley, BIGTRIBE CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to dramatically
improve the usability of location-aware devices such as mobile phones. Mobile
internet devices herald a revolution in personal computing, but small screen
sizes, awkward input capabilities, and poorly designed application environments
can limit their potential. BigTribe addresses these problems with a Location
Application Platform that incorporates adaptive location-based personalization,
chaining context management and context-based applications. The personalization
system tracks a user.s behavior and, using a new, distributed algorithm,
predicts preferences and adjusts menu selections. Chaining context management
helps users rapidly select venues, such as a theater, select activities to
perform there, such as purchasing tickets, and then .chain. to other nearby
activities, such as reserving a table at a nearby restaurant. Context-based
applications present a natural user interface to find and operate on venues,
friends or events. These innovations reduce the .clicks. users must perform to
accomplish tasks. They will improve personal efficiency for a broad, price
sensitive consumer market (including underrepresented populations not reached by
Internet advancements), save people time, improve social interaction, make
planning for meetings more efficient, and reduce fuel consumption. This work
advances knowledge in personalization algorithms, location-based services,
context-awareness, and ubiquitous computing.