* 0233946
* Research Starter Grant: Enrichment Culture Studies of Anaerobic Methane Oxidation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* David Valentine, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 01/31/2005
* USD 54,865.00

Intellectual Merit The anaerobic oxidation of methane is a microbially-mediated
process by which the reduction of sulfate is coupled to the oxidation of
methane. This process is prevalent on a global scale and is estimated to consume
between 12 and 50% the net modern atmospheric methane flux (70 to 300 Tg per
year). The microbes responsible for this process are important as methane is a
potent greenhouse gas in the atmosphere, and their metabolism prevents large
quantities of methane in the Earth from reaching the atmosphere. Despite the
importance of this process, the responsible organisms have never been cultured
in the laboratory. Recent studies conducted in our lab indicate that sustained
growth of these organisms is possible in the laboratory given the appropriate
conditions, especially elevated pressures of methane (50 to 150 atmospheres). We
therefore propose to continue growth of these enrichment cultures, to
characterize the microbial community composition and physiology of the
enrichments, and to isolate the methane oxidizers. Specifically, we propose to:
1) Characterize changes in microbial community structure as well as in methane
and sulfate metabolism during growth of successive enrichment cultures, 2)
Characterize growth of the CH4-oxidizing archaea in the enrichment cultures
including species-specific analyses of growth rates, carbon conversion
efficiencies, growth morphologies, and the impact of methane partial pressure,
3) Quantify isotope fractionation factors (for 13C and 2H) associated with
methane oxidation and lipid biosynthesis, and 4) Isolate the responsible
organisms using modified roll tubes at elevated (100 atmosphere) methane levels.
Broader Impacts In addition to the studies proposed above, this work will also
lead to development of new methods for culturing strictly anaerobic bacteria and
archaea at low temperatures with high gas pressures. These methods promise to
enhance infrastructure for microbiological research. The proposed studies also
promise to enhance our understanding of anaerobic methane oxidation and to lay a
foundation for future studies. The ability to grow the responsible organisms in
the laboratory will allow for a variety of biochemical, genetic, physiological
and molecular studies of this environmentally important process. Key questions
that may be addressed in future studies include: 1) how is the stable methane
molecule activated in the absence of oxygen?, 2) can this chemistry be applied
to methane cracking in an industrial setting?, 3) what is the evolutionary
history of anaerobic methane oxidation and how does it relate to the evolution
of Earth.s climate system?, and 4) is the physiology of the isolate consistent
with environmental observations of anaerobic methane oxidation? Understanding
the physiology of these organisms and isolating them in the laboratory are the
first steps in answering these and other important questions.