* 0233320
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing Land Surface Memory to Advance Climate Prediction
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Paul Dirmeyer, Institute of Global Environment and Society
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 06/30/2007
* USD 252,997.00

0233320 Dirmeyer We hypothesize that interactions between the land and
atmosphere may be a considerable source of land surface memory, and that this
memory poses an element of coupled land-atmosphere predictability in the climate
system that can advance water-cycle prediction. However, accuracy of simulated
land memory must be assessed, strength of land-atmosphere water recycling must
be identified, and systematic errors in global prediction systems need to be
corrected in order for climate models to faithfully harvest any degree of land-
atmosphere predictability and advance global water-cycle prediction. An
integrated and collaborative effort is proposed. Investigations into land
surface memory include analysis of land-model simulations driven by observed
meteorology (in conjunction with the Global Soil Wetness Project Phase 2) and
available in situ observations to produce a global picture of soil moisture
persistence; forward and backward water vapor trajectory analysis to quantify
the extent of land-atmosphere water recycling across the globe; and
contemporaneous and lagged correlations between the two analyses above to
determine if indeed strong recycling is the cause of persistent soil moisture
anomalies. Climate model sensitivity studies will verify the role of high-memory
regions in the global water cycle suggested by the above analyses. Recent
research indicates that removal of systematic errors in climate models improves
their sensitivity to land surface anomalies, and improves predictive skill. We
will also pursue development of an empirical correction of land and atmospheric
errors in a global prediction system to improve the numerical simulation and
seasonal-to-interannual prediction of the land-atmosphere branch of the global
water cycle, with the ultimate aim of application of empirical correction to
further improve climate prediction capability.

Adjustments to work plan: At the request of NSF, the original budget has been
revised to reflect a 30% reduction. This had been achieved by roughly equal
percentage cuts among the three collaborating institutions. Details of the
changes that affect the original work plan are listed below. * The post-doc
level of effort has been reduced to 6 months during year one, anticipating a
later start date for the post-doc. * Levels of effort for the PIs have been
reduced, meaning a slower rate of progress than originally proposed. * The work
plan as been adjusted (below), shifting more work to later in the project and
moving the final elements of the originally proposed work to a follow-on for
which we will seek support from a future program solicitation. This shift will
primarily delay the final synthesis between characterization of land memory and
predictability, identification regions of strong land-atmosphere water
recycling, and advancement of water-cycle prediction through these
identifications of land memory and empirical correction of systematic errors in
climate models. Characterizing Land Surface Memory to Advance Climate Prediction
Dirmeyer & DelSole (COLA), Brubaker (UMCP), and Schlosser (UMBC/GEST).

