* 0233187
* CAREER: High Force, High Speed Electro-Thermal Micro-Actuators: Design, Fabrications, and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Yogesh Gianchandani, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 03/31/2006
* USD 235,543.00

&lt;br/&gt;The absence of suitable actuators limits the development of silicon-
based microsystems. For in-plane actuation, the best contenders are
electrostatic and thermal actuators, but the former require high drive voltages,
and both deliver forces in the range of only about 1-10 uN. This proposal
addresses a new class of electrothermal microactuators that promises 100X
increase force and 10X reduction in drive voltage. They leverage deformations
caused by localized thermal stresses to efficiently produce large forces without
compromising displacement.&lt;br/&gt;The devices will be designed by two
complementary approaches, and further refined by numerical analysis in
conjunction with optimal design of experiments. Designs that offer rectilinear,
circular and customized loci of motion will be developed and evaluated for
performance criteria such as output force and displacement, input power, drive
voltage, response speed, device lifetime, trajectory errors, mechanical
vibration, etc. Time-sequenced engines such as inchworms, which offer high
displacement and force with negligible standby power, will also be developed.
Designs will be fabricated in multiple technologies to permit comparative
evaluations of performance and degradation mechanisms. Maskless process
variations are proposed for standard technologies for selective confinement of
heat and current flux, which minimize power consumption and response
time.&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results indicate that static displacements &gt;100
microns and peak forces &gt;1 mN are feasible with standard technologies.
Several applications are proposed, with complementary demands on various
performance aspects: a positioner for scanning probe microscopy; a positioner
for optical elements in a micro-optomechanical system; and a sliding shunt for
high-frequency telecommunication systems. In the long term these actuators will
also be used to develop haptic interfaces, e.g. for simulating
microsurgery.&lt;br/&gt;One educational objective is to increase the
participation of under-represented groups in the MEMS research community using
early recruitment programs and interaction with student groups. Another is to
facilitate interdisciplinary education using practical engineering projects that
force the convergence of multiple specialties to fill the pedagogical gaps
between relevant departments. These efforts will be reinforced by interactions
with industry.&lt;br/&gt;