* 0233318
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Segmentation and Reconstruction of Scenes with Dynamic Objects
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2006
* William Karl, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 10/31/2006
* USD 24,480.00

0233318&lt;br/&gt;Konrad&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for
U.S.-France collaboration in information technology research involves Boston
University and the University of Nice at Sophia-Antipolis. Janusz Konrad and
William Karl in the US and Michel Barlaud in France lead the team of
investigators and students on a joint project in video segmentation and
subsurface sensing. They will develop new variational methods for segmentation
and reconstruction of scenes with dynamic objects, with particular attention to
temporal event detection by applying contour-based representations of the
underlying object geometry. The approach builds on the investigators' previous
work in dynamic medical imaging, video segmentation, and image reconstruction.
The US investigators are known for their computational expertise in motion
estimation algorithms, motion based segmentation, and image reconstruction. This
is complemented by French expertise in mathematical methods for image and video
processing and coding. The French team is currently pursuing applications using
medical data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of a joint
proposal to the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research
(CNRS). NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigators
and graduate students. The CNRS will support the visits of the French
researchers and to the United States. US students will benefit from the exchange
of scientific techniques and experience with an international research team.
&lt;br/&gt;