* 0233284
* JIETSSP:  Development of a Micro Loop Heat Pipe Using Novel Coherent Porous Silicon: A System for Thermal Management of Space Solar Power Generation Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2005
* Frank Gerner, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 11/30/2005
* USD 238,000.00

0233284&lt;br/&gt;Henderson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Waste heat transfer and
management constitutes one of the major issues for devices in space development
- - whether for electronics, solar cells, concentrators or other
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes the development of a very
novel planar micro Loop Heat Pipe (LPH) to accomplish this purpose, based upon a
potentially revolutionary Coherent Porous Silicon (CPS) configuration as the
integrated wick.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LHP provides a circulating fluid,
which carries away massive heat by virtue of the latent heat of phase
transformation from liquid to vapor, and the vapor condenses back to liquid at
the condenser, where it drops the latent heat (to be radiated) . The liquid is
returned to the surface to be cooled by the all-important wick which serves as
the "engine" for circulation - - thus requiring no other external power except
for the waste heat itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The wick works by capillary
action, and the CPS wick is the revolutionary element, where a batch
photoelectrochemical process has been developed to place many thousands of
coherent uniform "worm holes" of micron size vertically through an ordinary
(100) silicon wafer which when oxidized produce wicks of enormous capillary
"sucking" pressure. A flat (planar) cooling surface results directly. Moreover,
silicon is an ultralight material. Areas may be made as extensive as needed,
with calculated cooling capacities of 300 or more
W/cm2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;