* 0233283
* US-France Cooperative Research:   Inhomogeneous Strains in Thin Films and Nanostructures
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Shefford Baker, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2007
* USD 18,000.00

0233283&lt;br/&gt;Baker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for US-France
collaboration in materials research involves researchers and students at the
Cornell University and the University of Aix-Marseilles. Shefford P. Baker in
the US and Olivier Thomas in France lead this collaboration. They will
investigate stress distribution in nanofabricated metal structures. They will
also determine the effects on mechanical behavior and reliability. This work
will be accomplished by a combination of high-resolution x-ray diffraction
experiments at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source. Samples will include
model single and bi-crystal thin film systems, polycrystalline films, and
nanofabricated line arrays. The French investigators will focus on x-ray data
analysis and modeling of x-ray spectra and the US investigators will contribute
sample preparation and mechanical modeling. Both groups will participate in the
design and execution of x-ray measurements at the Cornell High Energy
Synchrotron Source. Research on metal films and nanostructures at the 10-1000
nanometers play critical roles in virtually all nanofabricated devices. The
result of this collaboration will advance understanding of the mechanical
behavior of thin metal films and nanopatterned structures, which will be of
value in industries that rely on nanofabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award represents the US side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS. NSF
will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigator and his
students. The CNRS will support visits by French researchers and students to the
United States. &lt;br/&gt;