* 0233165
* Low-level Turbulent Zones and Associated Rotors in the Lee of Mountains
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Joachim Kuettner, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/2005
* USD 306,014.00

This research utilizes data from numerical simulations and field observations to
evaluate and extend existing dynamical understanding of low-level turbulent
zones (LLTZ) and rotors associated with mountain waves. In recent decades, LLTZ
have been left largely unstudied, despite their potential feedbacks on mountain
wave characteristics and structure, their influence on destructive down-slope
windstorms, dispersion, and the danger they present to aircraft operations
throughout the world. Advances in mesoscale models and computing power have made
high-resolution simulations of this atmospheric phenomenon feasible, thereby
creating the opportunity for potentially large advances in understanding of
these important counterparts to mountain waves. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
authors hypothesize the following: 1) The most intense and turbulent LLTZ occur
in association with high-amplitude mountain waves; less intense LLTZ form in
association with trapped lee waves. 2) The severity of LLTZ depends on the
horizontal vorticity budget, which in turn depends on details of the upstream
environment; hence the LLTZ intensity can be quantified and forecast. 3) The
diurnally evolving boundary layer can significantly modify the spatial structure
of LLTZ, which then modifies the overlying mountain wavelength and amplitude.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will employ numerical simulations of
increasing complexity. Simulations will use fine resolution, with grid spacing
of O[100m], since most previous numerical mountain wave studies have used grid
spacing too coarse to adequately capture details within LLTZ. The work begins
with two-dimensional simulations initialized using a single upstream sounding
with no moisture and using no surface heat fluxes. Realistic surface heating
will be added over a diurnal cycle to more completely study the boundary layer
effects on LLTZ. Recognizing the likely importance of three-dimensional effects,
a series of idealized three-dimensional experiments similar to those in two
dimensions will be run. Finally, the validity of the stated hypotheses will be
explored by investigating the role of changing synoptic conditions superimposed
on the diurnal cycle via a select number of fully three-dimensional case
studies. Wherever possible observations from past and upcoming field campaigns
will be utilized to validate conclusions obtained from simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that this study will yield a far more
complete understanding of LLTZ and their relation to the overall mountain-wave
system, and result in benefits within the atmospheric science, aviation, and air
pollution disciplines.