* 0233676
* WCR:  Designing a Pilot Study for Floods in the Walnut River Basin, KS, Using a Scaling Framework
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Seth Veitzer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2006
* USD 515,564.00

0233676&lt;br/&gt;Gupta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses the long-
standing, fundamental problem of unifying the spatial statistics of floods with
its physics. We propose to address this problem within a newly developing
statistical scaling framework. Statistical scaling is an emergent property of a
complex physical system, which is not built into the physical equations
a-priori. Scaling provides a new mathematical framework to link emipirical
observations with numerical or analytical solutions of physical processes. Our
objective is to design a pilot study of floods in the Walnut River basin, KS,
using the scaling framework. Special emphasis will be given to the role of
scaling in space-time variable rainfall and spatially variable channel network
structures in determining the scaling parameters of peak flows. This proposed
pilot study is also a first step to conduct a large-scale cooperative field
experiment in the Walnut River basin in Kansas. We propose to test the scaling
framework for peak streamflows using existing observations from the Walnut Gulch
basin, AZ, and the Goodwin Creek basin, MS. Tests will also be carried out using
GIS-based numerical simulations for these two basins. In addition, we will
simulate peak flows in the Walnut River basin, KS, which is a site for
cooperative atmospheric surface exchange studies (CASES). From the simulation
results, we will design a pilot study for strategically gauging the basin to
test peak flow scaling. The scaling framework unifies spatial flood statistics
with its physics, and thereby addresses a longstanding fundamental open problem
in hydrologic sciences and engineering. The body of new knowledge under scaling
provides the scientific foundations for solving the long-standing applied
problem of prediction of floods and low flows from ungauged and poorly gauged
basins. The scaling framework can be used to detect the effects of man-made
changes on landscape and changes in climate on floods on a global basis. This is
a cooperative interdisciplinary proposal involving scientists and engineers from
the University of Colorado, Boulder, the U.S. Geological Survey and the
University of Iowa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;