* 0233057
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Archaeology of Culture Contact in Northern Honduras
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Rosemary Joyce, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2004
* USD 8,502.00

Ms. Kira Blaisdell-Sloan will collect data for her doctoral dissertation under
the supervision of Dr. Rosemary Joyce. Ms. Blaisdell-Sloan will continue her
archaeological excavations at the site of Rancho Ires, located in the Ulua River
Valley, in Honduras. Rancho Ires was occupied continuously from the Postclassic
(c. AD1400) to Late Colonial period (c. AD1800). This long occupational span is
unusual for colonial period indigenous sites in Honduras. Such long term
occupation allows archaeologists to explore the changing nature of contact to
colonial period life through the archaeological examination of differences in
architecture, diet, trade goods, and locally produced goods both between
different households at a given time and within a given households over multiple
generations. This project will use an "agent-centered" approach to examine the
varied and changing strategies of cultural retention and identity creation
employed by individuals and groups of individuals living at Rancho Ires as their
traditional social and economic networks were disrupted and new ones formed.

An "agent-centered approach" will place a critical focus upon the strategic
choices that people (as individuals and groups) made as they interacted with
colonial powers beyond their control. Rancho Ires provides an ideal situation to
use such an approach. Ethnohistorical research indicates that the Ulua Valley,
one of the most fertile river valleys in Central America, was of considerable
inter-regional economic importance before the arrival of the Spanish. When the
Spanish arrived and attempted to dominate the area, they were met with
hostility, and conflict ensued. The seat of this resistance was a town called
Quitamay. Based on ethnohistorical and archaeological research, the
archaeological site of Rancho Ires appears to be the town identified in the
documentary as Quitamay. Despite their initial rejection of the Spanish and the
disruptions caused by Spanish domination, documentary and preliminary
archaeological evidence indicates that the settlement continued to have dealings
with the Spanish. To address the dynamic nature of the intercultural contact
experienced by the residents of the community of Quitamay from an agent-centered
perspective, this project will focus on the domestic group. Though there have
been explicitly agent-centered approaches to culture contact and colonialism, as
yet these have not been rooted in household archaeology. However, the household
is the finest scale at which we, as archaeologists, can identify discrete
cooperative groups. These then will be linked to larger perspectives, allowing
for an understanding of the relationship between individuals, groups communities
and cultures.

The significance of this research is threefold. First, it will provide the data
to test the efficacy of an agent-centered approach to contact and colonization
in a household context. Second, it will contribute specific archaeological
knowledge of under documented colonial settings in Latin America. Beyond being a
matter of simple historical curiosity, our understanding of these early contacts
between Aboriginal and European people is important because they shaped many
subsequent developments in the countries in which they occurred. In Spanish
America in particular, current race relations, systems of inequality, social
stratification and many issues of identity relate back to the original colonial
setting. Finally, as a doctoral project, this project will also aid in the
training of a young scientist with great potential.