* 0233365
* Conference: Annual Meetings of the West Coast Bacterial Physiologists, to be held in Pacific Grove, California, December, 2002
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2007
* John Meeks, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 11/30/2007
* USD 25,000.00

The objective of the annual meetings of the West Coast Bacterial Physiologists
(WCBP) is to foster communication among established investigators, postdoctoral
fellows and graduate students working in the broad area of microbial physiology.
Started in the 1940.s by C. B. van Niel for his associates on the West Coast,
participants now come from Canada, the Midwest and the East Coast of the USA.
This is one of the few conferences in North America that have retained a focus
on microbial physiology, with a primary, but not exclusive, emphasis on the
physiology of prokaryotic microorganisms. The conference especially provides a
forum for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to present and discuss the
results of their research projects utilizing experimental systems ranging from
model organisms to those of specific relevance to pathogenic and environmental
microbiology. The conference has been held continuously since 1963 over a
weekend in the middle of December at the Asilomar Conference Center in Pacific
Grove, California. The annual meeting is announced in August and September by
direct mailings and by posting on the WCBP web site
(http://wcbacterialphysiologists.ucdavis.edu). The meeting is organized with
four formal sessions (Friday evening, Saturday morning and evening, and Sunday
morning) and four unstructured informal sessions (Friday afternoon and late
evening, and Saturday afternoon and late evening). Each of the four formal
sessions is initiated with a 45 min overview lecture. The overview lectures are
endowed by the Genentech Corporation and identified as the John Ingraham
Lectures in Microbial Physiology. The John Ingraham Lecturers may be principle
investigators, postdoctoral fellows or graduate students. They are selected by
the conference co- directors on the basis of scientific merit and current high
profile research topic of relevance to microbial physiologists. The overview
lectures are followed by offered papers of 15 or 20 min duration. Typically, 7-9
and 5-7 offered papers are scheduled for the morning and evening sessions,
respectively, depending on the number of abstracts submitted. No graduate
student submitting an abstract has been denied a chance to present her/his data
and conclusions. A registration fee covers lodging, food, meeting room expenses
and support for the informal sessions. A differential between the registration
fees for graduate students and all other participants has traditionally been
preserved. NSF funding will be applied to maintain at least a 20% lower
registration fee for graduate students and go toward support of poster sessions,
if the participants desire such sessions.