* 0233719
* Collaborative Research:  Nonlinear Population Dynamics:     Mathematical Models, Biological Experiments, Data           Analyses
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,09/30/2004
* Robert Costantino, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2004
* USD 26,792.00

Costantino&lt;br/&gt;9981374&lt;br/&gt; Understanding the fluctuations in animal
numbers is a&lt;br/&gt;central issue in population biology that has far-reaching
impact&lt;br/&gt;on and implications for problems ranging from food production
to&lt;br/&gt;the conservation of species. Nonlinear dynamics opens the way
to&lt;br/&gt;a new phase of population research in which theory
and&lt;br/&gt;experimentation focus on phenomena such as cycles
and&lt;br/&gt;quasi-periodicity, chaos and strange attractors,
multiple&lt;br/&gt;attractors and complicated basins of attraction, saddle sets
and&lt;br/&gt;their stable manifolds, and so on. This
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;project, in which Robert Costantino, Jim Cushing,
Brian Dennis,&lt;br/&gt;Robert Desharnais, and Shandelle Henson collaborate,
covers a&lt;br/&gt;spectrum of activities essential to testing nonlinear
population&lt;br/&gt;theory: the translation of the biology into the language
of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics and back again, the analysis of deterministic
and&lt;br/&gt;stochastic models, the development and application of
statistical&lt;br/&gt;techniques for the analysis of data, and the design
and&lt;br/&gt;implementation of biological experiments. A series of
experiments&lt;br/&gt;with flour beetles of the genus Tribolium provide
rigorous&lt;br/&gt;experimental tests of nonlinear phenomena. Topics
include&lt;br/&gt;nonlinearity in the context of stochasticity, chaos
and&lt;br/&gt;population control, the impact of periodic environments on
animal&lt;br/&gt;abundance, demographic dynamics and natural
selection,&lt;br/&gt;nonequilibrium species interactions, and statistical
questions&lt;br/&gt;concerning parameterization and validation of
models.&lt;br/&gt; With a sound understanding of the underlying dynamics
of&lt;br/&gt;animal populations, ecologists can anticipate the consequences
of&lt;br/&gt;environmental degradation and learn better ways to manage
natural&lt;br/&gt;populations and control populations of pests. For example, one
of&lt;br/&gt;the experiments suggests that, by taking advantage of
the&lt;br/&gt;"sensitivity to initial conditions" that is the hallmark of
a&lt;br/&gt;chaotic system, managers can dramatically decrease
pest&lt;br/&gt;population numbers without the use of chemical pesticides
by&lt;br/&gt;making small perturbations at critical times. The marriage
of&lt;br/&gt;ecological theory and experiments by the
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;research team leads to new techniques for the
application of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics to ecological problems. The project is
supported by&lt;br/&gt;the Applied Mathematics, Computational Mathematics,
and&lt;br/&gt;Statistics programs in MPS and the Population Biology and
Ecology&lt;br/&gt;programs in BIO.&lt;br/&gt;