* 0233465
* Collaborative Research: Chemistry of Groundwater Transport Pathways Associated with a Coastal Lagoon System
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2008
* Herbert Windom, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 12/31/2008
* USD 306,852.00

Under this award, study will focus on understanding of reaction and transport
pathways in permeable sediments and will attempt to determine how nutrients and
other trace substances are transported and modified in the subterranean
freshwater-seawater mixing zone connecting a Brazilian lagoon to the adjacent
ocean. The study will also evaluate how these processes are altered by
hydrologic forcing conditions. The field area is the barrier spit adjacent to
the Patos Lagoon on the extreme southern coast of Brazil. This site was chosen
because: 1) the PIs preliminary results demonstrate that this region is
favorable to Submarine Groundwater Discharge (SGD) and they anticipate large
chemical signals and exchange rates. 2) it is relatively unimpacted by human
activity. 3) there are two ILTER Programs focused on this system, and 4) this
system provides a contrast to the southeastern US coast. This study will
identify relevant reactions and estimate the fluxes of nutrients and trace
elements (using radium isotopes). The PIs will detenrnine if permeable sediments
are a significant source or sink for the materials of interest, which reaction
pathways control their behavior in the sediments, and how processes are affected
by external forcing (primarily lagoon water level). The project has three
components: 1) field campaigns, 2) laboratory kinetic experiments, and 3)
synthesis of results through qualitative and quantitative analyses and simple
numerical simulations. Field work will involve placement of wells both across
the barrier spit and along the beach on the ocean side, benthic chamber
deployments, and coastal cruises, the latter to establish offshore gradients of
radium isotopes to assess SGD fluxes. Laboratory studies will use core cuttings
in flow-through plug reactors to assess better the nature and kinetics of
reactions. And finally, numerical simulations will be used to aid in
interpreting results.