* 0233955
* Global Thunderstorm Activity and its Effects on the Radiation Belts and the Lower Ionosphere
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Umran Inan, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 03/31/2006
* USD 334,973.00

The project proposes an experimental study of thunderstorm coupling to the
radiation belts, characterization of lightning flashes which lead to upward
electrodynamic coupling, ionospheric variability and parameters, and global
lightning and climatology. Newly discovered precipitation of radiation belt
particles by magnetospherically reflecting whistler waves launched by lightning
discharges will be measured via the associated localized and transient
disturbances of the lower ionosphere. The latter disturbances are sensed
remotely by means of their effect on the phase and amplitude of very low
frequency (VLF) signals propagating in the nearby earth-ionosphere waveguide.
Broadband ELF/VLF radio atmospherics measurements at the Antarctic base Palmer
are proposed for the measurement of characteristics waveforms of sferics
associated with upward electrodynamic coupling phenomena such as sprites. Recent
results indicate that such measurements can be unique and used as a proxy
measure for occurrences of intense upward coupling phenomena on a global scale.
The unique location of Palmer station facilitates the measurements of sferics
originating in lightning discharges over large regions of the globe, including
the Americas, Africa, and the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. When used together
with space-borne measurements, the highly accurate determinations of occurrence
time and arrival bearings of sferics as measured at Palmer constitute a powerful
new tool for assessment of global lightning activity. VLF observations at Palmer
will provide crucial support to a separately funded (by the NSF/OPP) program,
operating a VLF beacon transmitter at South Pole. Reception of the beacon signal
at Palmer Station will allow the continuous measurement of relativistic electron
precipitation from the outer radiation belts, an important component of
worldwide efforts to assess "space weather". The proposed program is a part of
the international collaboration with Stanford observations at Palmer (PA),
complemented by and coordinated with observations at the British station
Rothera, the Brazilian base Commandante Ferraz on King George Island (through
the collaboration with the Centro de Radio-Astronomia e Aplicacoes Espaciais of
Brazil), and at Negev Desert in Israel supported by the University of Tel Aviv.
The proposed program complements similar observations carried by Stanford
University in the northern hemisphere under the support from the NSF Atmospheric
Sciences Division. Coordinated measurements in both the northern and southern
hemispheres are needed to study the geomagnetic conjugacy of the phenomena under
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;