* 0233449
* SGER:  Collaborative Research:  Knowledge Networks and Emerging Heterarchies in Rebuilding New York
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Noshir Contractor, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2003
* USD 42,908.00

This collaborative SGER research project brings together two research areas,
heterarchical organizations and knowledge networks, to investigate coordination
among the myriad government agencies, civic associations, architectural and
design firms and academics involved in the redevelopment of Lower Manhatten. The
project will 1) identify the field of actors and stakeholders differentiated by
sector, 2) identify and analyze existing ties among actors and organizations, 3)
analyze existing web sites maintained by the diverse actors, 4) map the network
of existing web sites to discern coalitions within and among sectors, 5) conduct
interviews with individual members identified as key stakeholders, 6) map
existing and potential networks using visual mapping tools, 7) trace the
shifting boundaries of knowledge networks over time, 8) deploy IKNOW, a
community-ware web-based tool that makes knowledge networks visible to
communities of practitioners, so that relevant information and insights are
available when and where they are needed, and 9) track the use of IKNOW by
different stakeholders. This investigation will have practical and theoretical
outcomes. The community participants will benefit from new forms of technology
to help them better understand "Who knows what?" and "Who knows who knows what?"
The researchers will benefit from access to an acute and timely setting for
studying emerging heterarchical structures that involve lateral coordination
across organizational boundaries with multiple performance criteria and diverse
evaluative principles to assess what is worthy and valuable.