* 0233952
* FRG:    Functionally Graded High-Al Mullite Environmental Barrier Coatings
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Soumendra Basu, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 652,000.00

Si-based ceramics such as silicon carbide and silicon nitride require hot-
corrosion and recession resistant environmental barrier coatings (EBCs) when
exposed to corrosive environments containing high-pressure steam at elevated
temperatures. This research will focus on developing a functionally graded Al-
rich mullite (3Al2O3.2SiO2) EBC system for the protection of Si-based ceramics
from such corrosive environments. These coatings will be deposited by chemical
vapor deposition (CVD), which allows for the deposition of dense, uniform
coatings over complex substrates. It is well established that alpha-alumina
coatings, which have excellent hot-corrosion and recession resistance, can fail
due to poor thermal shock resistance. In contrast, mullite coatings, which have
excellent thermal shock resistance and a close CTE match with the Si-based
ceramics, contains silica, which may lead to hot-corrosion and recession attack
of the coatings themselves under long term exposures in corrosive environments.
We propose to grow functionally graded coatings whose composition is varied from
near-stoichiometric mullite at the coating/substrate interface to a highly Al-
rich mullite at the coating surface. It is therefore expected that such coatings
will have the oxidation, corrosion and recession resistance of alpha-alumina
coatings, with the thermal shock resistance of stoichiometric mullite coatings
on Si-based substrates. The proposed research will involve developing a process
to grow compositionally graded CVD mullite coatings and to evaluate their
oxidation, corrosion, and recession resistance. Additionally, mechanical
properties of these the coatings will be evaluated, using among others, novel
non-destructive evaluation (NDE) techniques. This knowledge base will be used to
aid in the systematic design of functionally graded CVD mullite coatings for
optimal performance in specific industrial service
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is projected that the successful
completion of this research will lead to dense, uniform and adherent coatings on
complex surfaces of Si-based ceramics, that are highly resistant to cracking,
spallation, oxidation, hot-corrosion and recession. These coatings will have a
critical impact by enabling gas turbines to operate at higher temperatures
leading to improved fuel efficiency and reduced emissions. This research will
also advance the state-of-the-art in non-destructive evaluation of coating
materials including measurement of elastic properties of the graded coatings as
a function of depth, monitoring coating degradation, and detection of crack
growth at the coating/substrate interface during thermal cycling. The research
program will train 3 graduate students to work as a team in the areas of
processing, structure and property evaluations and will enable them to interact
with researchers from industry, national laboratories, other academic
institutions, as well as with undergraduates from Boston University.&lt;br/&gt;