* 0233712
* Technician Support: Laser Ablation and Inductively Coupled Plasma Laboratories - Phase I
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Andrew Kurtz, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2007
* USD 210,000.00

EAR-0233712&lt;br/&gt;Plank&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a new
technical position for the multi-user laser ablation and inductively coupled
plasma laboratories in the Department of Earth Sciences at Boston University.
These laboratories include a Merchantek 213 nm laser ablation microprobe, a VG
PlasmaQuad ExCell ICP-MS, and a JY Ultima C ICP-ES. The facilities are the
backbone of geochemical research in the Department of Earth Sciences, supporting
the PIs' active research in subduction cycling, melt inclusions, marine
biogeochemistry, marine export production proxies, ultra-high resolution
paleoceanography, and silicate weathering. With over 75 different users during
the past 2.5 years, the ICP laboratories also draw a large external userbase. In
fact, 60% of the userbase is external to Boston University, and involves a wide
range of predominantly NSF-funded research projects. Most of the applications
involve high-precision, multi-element analysis of marine sediments and water
column particulate matter, igneous rocks, volcanic glass, phenocrysts, and
experimental run products. New directions include monazite and zircon
geochronology, and trace element behavior in the weathering environment. The ICP
facilities have a strong record of student involvement, with over 40% of the
userbase being students (including 14 undergraduates). An important activity is
the training of over 20 graduate students (12 internal, 11 external) as the next
generation of analytical geochemists. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;