* 0233811
* Inorganic Deuterium Effects Upon Aggregates Synthesis
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Sergiu Gorun, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

A fundamental, but yet unrecognized property of hydrogen isotopes, namely the
deuterium-induced generation of new and/or morphologically different inorganic
materials will be investigated. This effect manifests itself in the aqueous
assembly of supramolecular structures. An aggregate exhibiting a structurally
rigid, magnetic core, and interacting, hydrated diamagnetic ions at its
periphery will be developed as a model. The initial demonstration of a link
between isotope composition and supramolecular topology will be used to explore
the nature of chemical and physical factors responsible for the deuterium
effect. Technical issues to be investigated will focus on varying independently
the hydrogen isotope, and several parameters viewed as potentially significant
for tuning the assembly of large aggregates. Variable parameters include: (i)
the ionic strength of the solution; (ii) ionic radii of ions linking aggregates
into supramolecular structures; (iii) concentration of sodium chloride in water,
a salt that is incorporated to a higher extent when deuterium is the solvent.
The aggregates formed in water behave magnetically like molecules, while their
deuterium counterparts exhibit solid-state, Neel-like points. This difference
could be due to a bona fide formation of a solid, in case the magnetic ions
oxidation states in the two aggregates are identical, or the deuterium complex
may be a molecular magnet, in case the oxidation states are different. This
question will be answered, inter alia, by x-ray absorption spectroscopy
determinations of valence states. The answer will also shed light, if warranted,
on the sensitivity of oxidation states to an isotope change. The hydrogen
isotopomer - chemical parameters relationships will be used to rationally design
new solids with predictable structural and, perhaps, magnetic features.

Mixing two chemicals in water can give a predictive result, for example,
compound A. Surprisingly, when A is a large molecule, using heavy water results
in a related, but not identical product, B. The structural differences,
especially in the way A and B assemble to form large "supramolecules", also
result in magnetic differences of the type expected to distinguish a molecule
from a solid. Elucidating the chemical factors responsible for these
differences, and ways to rationally design new solids based upon an
understanding of deuterium effects may well give rise to new synthetic paths to
novel materials exhibiting new physical and chemical properties of high interest
to the commercial sector.