* 0233172
* The Structure of Mesoscale Convective Systems as Revealed from Detailed Surface Mesoanalyses during the Bow Echo and Mesoscale Vortex Experiment (BAMEX)
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Lance Bosart, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 09/30/2006
* USD 292,529.00

The Bow Echo and Mesoscale Vortex Experiment (BAMEX) to be held from 20 May to 6
July 2003 will take advantage of multiple state-of-the-art observational
platforms together with a variety of conventional observations to produce
comprehensive integrated datasets to help document the birth, maturation, decay,
and overall life cycles of an important class of mesoscale weather phenomena.
Bow echoes and mesoscale convective vortices (MCVs) occur in conjunction with
mesoscale convective systems (MCSs). Severe weather, including hail, high winds,
and tornadoes, frequently occurs in association with MCSs and embedded MVCs and
bow echoes. Remnant MCVs left behind in the wake of parent MCSs can also act to
spin up new deep convection and reignite new MCSs. Forecasting where and when a
MCS will form, where it will track, and how long it will last remains a vexing
problem. An opportunity exists with BAMEX to capture multiple MCS life cycles
with special datasets out of which can come increased scientific understanding
of the physical mechanisms that govern MCS behavior, a necessary first step to
making improvements in forecasting MCSs.

This research is motivated by the need to prepare comprehensive research quality
mesoanalyses in order to learn more about the often "hidden" surface structure
of bow echoes and MCVs and how surface circulations are linked to circulations
above the surface. The Principal Investigator will: (1) document first, and
subsequent, generation MCS life cycles spatially and temporally through detailed
surface mesoanalyses, (2) determine how surface boundaries (outflow, frontal,
dryline) modulate MCS life cycles, are in turn modulated by the convection, and
then influenced by successive MCSs, (3) evaluate how surface frontogenesis
processes force mesoscale circulations that influence MCS life cycles, and (4)
relate surface features such as wake troughs and lows, bubble highs, and
multiple cyclonic vorticity maxima to low- and mid-level vortices, mid- and
upper-level potential vorticity anomalies, rear-inflow jets, cloud-to-ground
lightning patterns, and radar-, aircraft- and satellite-derived MCS signatures.
The detailed surface mesoanalyses will be prepared using a combination of manual
and automated procedures that take advantage of time-to-space conversion
techniques to better map mesoscale features. The linkage between surface and
free-atmosphere circulations will be explored in cooperation with other BAMEX
investigators.

Successful completion of this research may lead to better forecasts of severe
wind events and convective storms.