* 0233785
* University of Maryland Graduate Rewards Program
* MPS,DMS
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2008
* Daniel Rudolph, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 12/31/2008
* USD 882,425.00

Plan of action: We will work with a collection of affiliated colleges and
universities to create a well-supported pathway to bring students from
underrepresented groups to careers in the mathematical sciences. These
affiliates include ones from which we have recruited students in the past and
who share our philosophy of strong and complete academic and professional
training. Currently Morehouse College, Bowie State Univ., Florida A&amp;M, North
Carolina A&amp;T, Spelman College, Trinity College of DC, and Xavier Univ. are
Affiliates. We are actively recruiting new Affiliates. An annual Affiliates
Workshop will strengthen ties among our institutions and guide and maintain the
effectiveness of this program. Sophomores and juniors will be recruited to
participate in a Summer Institute at the University of Maryland. This Institute
will provide both upper level undergraduate academic classes and research
experiences to reinforce the students' training and maturity for graduate study.
A Graduate Fellowship Program will offer competitive fellowships to graduates
from the Affiliates. As Fellows in this program, students will be provided
complete career training as mentors, educators and scientists. The Summer
Institute will extend to the graduate level, offering academic training in
preparation for qualifying and candidacy exams and integration with the
department's Research Interaction Team (RIT) program. Graduate Assistantships
will be offered to students to support the program. These Graduate Assistants
will provide classroom support, tutoring, mentoring and advising for the Summer
Institute. A supported Peer Mentoring Program will provide peer mentors to
students in the mathematical sciences and will provide supported students with
training for mentorship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding is for: fifteen
undergraduate participants in the Summer Institute, three to four 4-year
graduate fellowships per year, TA support both preceding and during the Summer
Institute, peer mentoring support, and both recruiting and workshop travel
support. &lt;br/&gt;