* 0233697
* Transition Metal Oxides with Correlated Electronic Properties: Synthesis and Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Martha Greenblatt, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 530,424.00

The focus of this research project is a close interaction between the design and
synthesis of new compounds, detailed characterization of the physical properties
and understanding the structure-property relationships. This research project
will provide the basis for discovering interesting new materials leading to
novel phenomena and useful applications. The synthesis and characterization of
transition metal (B) perovskites (ABO3; A = rare earth, alkali earth, alkali
metal ions), double perovskites (AA'BB'O6) and related quasi-low-dimensional
(LD) Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) phases [(AO)(ABO3)n; n = 1, 2, 3], and pyrochlore-
based (A2B2O7) oxides with strongly correlated electronic interactions provide
an opportunity to discover new materials with interesting properties. The
research project is a systematic study of unique synthetic routes for the
stabilization of new transition metal perovskites, LD RP phases and pyrochlore-
type compounds. Crystal growth of new and promising phases whenever possible
will be attempted and the characterization of properties by a battery of
physical measurements will be carried out. A major focus of the research is the
training of postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students in state-of-the-
art reseach methods in solid state chemistry and materials science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synthesis and characterization of novel transition
metal oxides with important electrical and magnetic properties is emphasized for
applications in the electronic and communication industries, for example as
possible computer memory chip components, sensors, and superconducting elements
in imaging devices. Moreover, the results of these investigations will enhance
fundamental understanding of the factors that determine material properties,
which will enable the design and control of new unique materials by chemistry.
The training of Postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students in state-of-
the-art reseach methods in solid state chemistry and materials science will be
emphasized. The next generation of well-trained solid state chemists and
materials scientists is essentail for maintaining the leadership of US
technology in the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;