* 0234565
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Craniofacial Asymmetry, Morphological Integration, and Developmental Instability in the Human Skull
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Joan Richtsmeier, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 04/30/2004
* USD 9,141.00

This project uses craniofacial asymmetry to identify developmentally integrated
characters in the human skull. Understanding the normal range of craniofacial
variation, as well as limitations on the range of variation, is a necessary
foundation for research involving the human skull. Developmental integration of
character traits constrains variability, because these traits grow, adapt, and
evolve together as a single unit. This project will identify characters that are
integrated through direct developmental interactions (developmental "modules")
and test whether they remain integrated under conditions of stress.
Distinguishing patterns of integration that remain consistent under stress is
critical for studies of adaptation, evolutionary change and speciation.

Recent advances in the study of fluctuating asymmetry offer an innovative new
method for identifying developmentally integrated characters. Fluctuating
asymmetry has been defined as a random pattern of between-sides variation in a
sample of individuals. Because of the random nature of morphological fluctuating
asymmetry, significant covariation in the fluctuating asymmetry of two
characters indicates that the characters are developmentally integrated.

This project consists of three separate but related studies. First, the
methodology will be applied to analysis of normal adult skulls to test
predictions from substantial existing literature on integration in the skull.
Second, the maintenance of integration under the stress of biomechanical
constraint will be tested using data from children with prematurely fused
cranial sutures and a normal control group. Finally, the maintenance of
integration under systemic stress is tested using data from two archaeological
samples of humans that lived under conditions differing in adversity. For each
analysis, the Co-PI will collect three-dimensional coordinates from biologically
relevant landmarks on each skull. Fluctuating asymmetry will be quantified using
these coordinate data and established morphometric methods. Patterns of
covariation will be tested to identify developmentally integrated characters.

Project funding permits the Co-PI to visit various museums housing skeletal
collections. In addition, adequate materials will be obtained to support this
project and further related research, advancing the scientific career of this
female Co-PI. Results of this project will include unique information about
development of the human skull and constraints on adaptive responses to stress.