* 0234658
* Living Free Radical Polymerization in Continuous Miniemulsion Reactors
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2002,12/31/2005
* F. Joseph Schork, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2005
* USD 371,794.00

Research:

A large percentage of polymers (plastics and synthetic rubbers) are made via
free radical polymerization. Unfortunately, this technology does not allow for
accurate control of the molecular structure of the polymer produced. Living free
radial polymerization (LRP) is a recent technology that allows for substantially
more control over molecular structure, i.e., it allows for the preparation of
well-defined vinylic polymers with unique architectures. Most research in LRP to
date has involved batch reactors in which all ingredients are added to the
reactor at the beginning of the reaction. In addition, most LRP studies to date
have involved processes that use organic solvents. These solvents are expensive,
and can pose environmental and health threats. The advent of living radical
polymerization (LRP) processes over the last few years

More stringent environmental and health concerns are driving the polymer
industry to benign processing. For free radical polymers this includes systems
in which water is substituted for an organic solvent. Miniemulsion
polymerizations in particular have garnered increasing attention due the absence
of organic solvent, their robust nature and lack of interphase mass transfer.
Recent studies combining miniemulsion techniques with LRP have demonstrated
added benefits such as increased rate of polymerization.

Continuous reactors are associated with high volume, low operating and labor
costs, and most importantly, may be able to provide control of molecular
structure, which can be difficult in a batch or semibatch reactor. With this in
mind, this proposal will carry out a comprehensive study of LRP using the RAFT
technique in continuous miniemulsion reactors. In particular, the ability of
trains of CSTR's with inter-reactor monomer feed to create unique, new block
copolymers will be evaluated. Specific objectives include evaluating: effect of
reactor type, effect of control agent type, polymer composition control, and
reactor-polymer property relationships.

Impact:

If the results are successful, the technology could be the basis for a low-cost,
environmentally clean, commercially viable manufacturing method for paints and
coatings. Development of this new methodology could also be a great boon for the
polymer industry in general.