* 0234137
* RUI: Characterization of Salinity Regulated Genes in the Haloarchaeon, Haloferax Volcanii
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Kelly Bidle, Rider University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 03/31/2007
* USD 268,559.00

This project aims to better understand the genes and molecular processes
necessary for adaptation to high salinities in the halophilic, or irsalt-
lovinglo microbe, Haloferax volcanii. The extreme halophiles belonging to the
domain Archaea require salt concentrations for growth that range from ~1.5 M up
to 5.2 M NaCl, an upper limit in excess of ten times the salinity of seawater.
Halophiles are found in such hostile environments as the Dead Sea and the Great
Salt Lake, where high concentrations of salt preclude the growth of almost all
other known organisms. H. volcanii is a model organism for studying the effects
of changes in environmental salinity on gene expression, as this organism grows
over a wide range of salt concentrations, between approximately 12% to 30% NaCl.
Previous funding by the NSF supported exploratory research to both isolate H.
volcanii salt-sensitive mutants and begin preliminary research to characterize
genes involved in hypersaline regulation using molecular approaches. This
project will continue to build upon previous findings to perform more in-depth
analyses. The major objectives of this research are to: 1) identify genes
involved in causing the salt-sensitive phenotype of the H. volcanii mutant
strains; 2) begin examining the regulatory elements involved in controlling
salinity-mediated gene regulation; and 3) characterize and identify the targets
of a putative regulatory gene found to be expressed under high salt growth
conditions. The broader impacts of this project will both advance discovery
through undergraduate teaching and training and broaden the exposure to science
of underrepresented minorities. It is anticipated that all of the students who
participate in this research will gain valuable experience in the study of
molecular biology, microbiology, and genetics that in turn will better prepare
them for future careers in science.