* 0234441
* Virtual Ecology:  Experimental Tests of Evolution in Predator-Prey Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Alan Kamil, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 04/30/2007
* USD 461,000.00

Virtual Ecology: Experimental Tests of Evolution in Predator-Prey
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alan B. Bond&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the most
profound issues in biological evolution concern the selective effects of
interactions between organisms, particularly the influence of predators on the
color patterning of their prey. The proposed research will study the effects of
predation using a 'virtual ecology', in which predators hunt moth-like virtual
prey whose appearance is controlled by a computer-based genetic algorithm. When
the prey are detected on the computer screen, they are considered to have been
eaten. Only surviving prey can breed to produce the next generation, so the
actions of the predator, over time, influence the appearance of the virtual prey
dynamically, causing it to evolve into new forms. This procedure will be used to
test hypotheses that relate prey appearance to patterns of predation. For
example, most palatable prey are also cryptically colored, difficult to detect,
and highly variable in appearance. In contrast, prey that are poisonous or
distasteful tend to be conspicuously colored and to vary little in appearance.
By establishing populations of virtual moths that vary in coloration and
palatability, several hypotheses that have been proposed to account for
differences in appearance and variability of the prey will be rigorously tested.
The proposed research will advance our understanding of the complex dynamics
involved in predator-prey interactions over evolutionary time. It will also
establish the validity of virtual ecology for studying complex evolutionary
dynamics, potentially adding powerful new techniques to the scientific study of
ecological relationships among organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;------
--------------------------------------------------&lt;br/&gt;Michael D.
Greenfield&lt;br/&gt;Program Director, Animal Behavior&lt;br/&gt;Div.
Integrative Biology &amp; Neuroscience&lt;br/&gt;National Science
Foundation&lt;br/&gt;4201 Wilson Blvd., Rm 685&lt;br/&gt;Arlington, VA 22230
U.S.A.&lt;br/&gt;703-292-8421&lt;br/&gt;