* 0234545
* Collaborative Research:  GLOBEC-01:  Tidal Front Mixing and Exchange on Georges Bank:  Controls on the Production of Phytoplankton, Zooplankton, and Larval Fishes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Chang-Sheng Chen, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 185,000.00

Georges Bank supports a rich fishery because: (1) large portions of the bank
are shallow enough that light-limitation of phytoplankton is usually not
important; (2) deep waters rich in inorganic nutrients are available for mixing
onto the bank; and (3) the Bank's clockwise circulation can retain the
planktonic stages of important fish species. The tidally mixed front (TMF) is
central to the productivity of Georges Bank through the processes of nutrient
injection in the north and retention of larvae on the south flank. These two
regions are connected by a circulation pathway along the front in which
nutrients lead to phytoplankton and zooplankton growth, creating a donut-shaped
region of high production surrounding the crest. It is suggested that the
productivity of this pathway is the result of northern edge nutrient injections
and is susceptible to climatic influences on nutrient supply in that region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The overall objective of this project is to understand
the processes within the TMF that sustain the biological productivity of Georges
Bank and the success of the target species, cod and haddock. This requires
understanding how mixing and circulation within the TMF supplies new nutrients,
supports primary production, and retain larvae. GLOBEC dye tracer experiments
have, for the first time, measured directly the near-bottom Lagrangian
circulation and mixing in the TMF. Results show that vertical mixing in the
front, and the on-bank flow through the base of the TMF, are dynamically
connected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This study is examining the 3-dimensional
dynamics of the TMF based on these measurements. Models will help assess how the
strength of the across- and along-isobath circulation sets time and space scales
compatible with the development of cod and haddock larvae. This project consists
of a mix of data analysis and modeling activities. First, dye dispersion data
and simple shear dispersion models are being used to understand the link between
cross-bank flow and vertical mixing. Second, a finite-volume coastal ocean model
(FVCOM) will be used to calculate the temporal and spatial structure of nutrient
flux into the TMF, contrasting northern and southern flank inputs. A coupled
FVCOM- NPZ (nutrient-phytoplankton-zooplankton) model are being used to test the
following hypotheses: (i) Nutrient injections in the north are advected around
the crest of the bank and lead to a plume of elevated phytoplankton and
zooplankton production. (ii) The plume enriches the area of larval entrainment
on the south flank. If the above statements are true, then production in the
plume can be altered by the nutrient content of source waters in the Northeast
Channel of the Gulf of Maine, and these changes will affect the feeding
environment of larval cod and haddock. Finally, models incorporating the
measured 3-D flow and turbulence fields are being used to examine spatial
patterns of larval retention and define the kinds of environmental transitions
that larvae experience during this process.