* 0234606
* CAREER:  Image Variability Decomposition for Recognition, Reconstruction, and Tracking
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Peter Belhumeur, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Junku Yuh
* 06/30/2004
* USD 92,235.00

This research investigates how changes in illumination, pose, and shape of an
object produce changes in the observed images. The central idea is that the
variability in the images of an object can be decomposed into component parts -
illumination, pose, and shape - each of which, when analyzed separately, is well
behaved. This paradigm, termed ``Image Variability Decomposition,'' differs
substantially from the appearance-based paradigm in that by decomposing the
variability, one is able to uncover generative structures to the set of images
over each source of the variability. Thus, unlike appearance-based methods, it
is not necessary to have seen the object under all of the seemingly infinite
possible permutations of lighting conditions, pose, and shape. Instead, each
component of the image variability is explicitly modeled. This research is
applied to problems in which this variability plays an important role: face
recognition, change detection, structure from motion, and visual tracking. The
education component of this award focuses on laboratory and project intensive
teaching. Students, both graduate and undergraduate, are not only taught about
known unsolved problems, but are encouraged to consider posing new problems in
computer vision, robotics, and pattern recognition. Students are also rewarded
for finding new applications in new domains. The education activities will
center around the construction of a computer vision laboratory within Yale
University's newly formed Center for Computational Vision and Control, the
design of laboratory intensive courses on both computer vision and pattern and
object recognition, and the completion of a textbook on computer vision.