* 0234423
* Translational Patterns During Spermiogenesis in Marsilea
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2008
* Stephen Wolniak, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 04/30/2008
* USD 575,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Marsilea vestita is a water fern that makes motile spermatozoids. The
unique biology of that process has been exploited by the Wolniak lab to develop
a uniquely tractable model system for understanding developmental processes and
organelle biogenesis de novo. This renewal project will continue these efforts,
as well as shed light on aspects of the regulation of gene expression at the
messenger RNA level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spermiogenesis is a rapid,
synchronous process in populations of microspores, initiated by placing the
spores into water. Each gamete possesses ~140 cilia, and a distinctive feature
of gamete formation in this organism is the de novo formation of basal bodies in
cells that lack preexisting centrioles. In each spermatocyte, a discrete
particle known as a blepharoplast forms approximately 4 h after spores are
placed into water, and during the next two hours the blepharoplast splits and
functions as a centrosome for the last mitotic division in the gametophyte.
Then, each blepharoplast matures to produce ~140 basal bodies. Dry microspores
contain large quantities of stored protein and stored mRNA, and development in
the gametophyte is controlled entirely at a post-transcriptional level (no new
mRNA is produced). In this project, Dr. Wolniak will focus on four aspects of
spermiogenesis in M. vestita that will extend his ongoing work and utilize
probes and procedures that he has developed during the past several years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Through RNAi experiments, the Wolniak lab has shown
that the translation of specific mRNAs at particular stages of spermiogenesis is
necessary for gamete maturation, including formation of the blepharoplast and
basal bodies. The first aim of this project tests whether related gene products
are translated at the same stage of spermiogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;2) Mago nashi is a
highly conserved polarity gene that functions during embryogenesis in a variety
of organisms. It is present and essential for proper control of the plane of
cell division in the gametophyte. The second aim of this project is to document
the patterns of altered division planes after RNAi-induced elimination of Mv-
mago, the mago nashi homolog in M. vestita. &lt;br/&gt;3) Cell division planes
are tightly linked to cell fate determination in the gametophyte, where one cell
in the microspore undergoes successive divisions to produce two cell types,
spermatogenous cells and sterile cells. Beyond division control, Mv-mago is also
essential for the localization of specific mRNAs into cytoplasmic domains in the
microspore that later become the spermatogenous cells. The Mv-mago protein
contains two motifs that are identical with those in all other mago nashi
proteins. These domains will be added to microspores as epitope-tagged peptides,
to block specific functions of endogenous Mv-mago protein (in a loss of function
through competition between the peptide and endogenous protein for interacting
components), or to rescue gametophytes that have been depleted of Mv-mago mRNA
by RNAi treatment. The third aim of this project tests how and when highly-
conserved domains in the Mv-mago protein contribute to the control of the plane
of cell division and mRNA localization patterns.&lt;br/&gt;4) The Wolniak lab
has previously shown that centrin translation is essential for mitotic spindle
function and blepharoplast formation in these gametophytes. Epitope-tagged
peptides that represent conserved motifs from MvCen1 (the centrin homolog in M.
vestita) will be added, to see how and when the centrin peptide disrupts spindle
function or blepharoplast formation in normal cells. Then, longer versions of
the peptides will be added to RNAi-treated gametophytes, in experiments designed
to rescue the loss of function brought about by the RNAi-induced null phenocopy.
The fourth aim of this project tests how and when the conserved domains in the
MvCen1 protein contribute to spindle function and blepharoplast
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project will be
manifested through the training of students. The grant budget includes funds to
support a postdoctoral trainee, a graduate student and an undergraduate. These
individuals will be trained in a laboratory where undergraduates and graduate
students work and learn together, as they perform a variety of experiments on a
thoroughly tractable experimental system, to address basic questions about
mechanisms controlling cell fate determination and gamete
differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;