* 0234456
* DIVER:  Distributed Collaborative Analysis of Video Records in the Human Sciences
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Roy Pea, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2003
* USD 97,133.00

This award supports the design and prototype development of a Web-based
application for collaborative analysis of video records in the human sciences.
This application, DIVER (Digital Interactive Video Exploration and Reflection),
addresses a critical need for .collaboratory. functions in the human sciences,
where common tools and a shared corpus of human interaction datasets can be used
for investigating questions of theory and practice. The proposed effort will
leverage an NSF-MRI Award (NSF-0216334) for related work and capitalize on an
NSF-funded Center for Innovative Learning Technologies (CILT) workshop on
Digital Video Inquiry in late November 2002. The CILT workshop will enable the
introduction of the tool to a community of NSF project researchers, graduate
students, and teacher-researchers, and to engage them in the further design and
development of DIVER. This feedback is crucial for an application that is
intended to help constitute and serve a community of users. The DIVER
application will consist of a server holding analyses of video data, consisting
of video sources and a series of annotated selections cropped in both time and
space. Viewers of a DIVER analysis will be able to respond using threaded
discussions attached to particular scenes from the original analysis, and they
can return to the base video clip to create their own selections as their
responses warrant. Several substantial technical issues, primary among them the
manipulation of multimedia records in a web browser environment, and the
storage, indexing, and retrieval of complex annotated multimedia documents need
to be resolved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;