* 0234214
* Maintenance of the Bacillus Genetic Stock Center
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2009
* Daniel Zeigler, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Leita Proctor
* 04/30/2009
* USD 1,033,201.00

This award renews funding of the Bacillus Genetic Stock Center (BGSC) at the
Ohio State University. The BGSC acquires, maintains and distributes pure
cultures of several species of Bacillus, including both mutant and wildtype
strains. The majority of the 1400 strains in the the center's collection consist
of variants or mutants Bacillus subtilis, a species that has served as important
model system in basic research for many years, and whose genome was recently
sequenced. Other species and strains in the collection are useful in a variety
of basic and applied research areas. In addition to its role in research, the
collection promotes science education through distribution of low-cost materials
for secondary school and undergraduate laboratories. Both online and printed
catalogues describing the content of the collection are available. Approximately
1600 cultures are distributed each year to academic, government and industrial
researchers in the US and abroad. Those requesting cultures are charged a small
fee intended to cover a portion of the cost of operation. During the period
funded by this award, online information on the contents of the collection and
methods for use of the collected organisms will be improved, and additional
strains will be added to the collection.