* 0234082
* NIH-NSF BBSI:   Bioengineering Summer Institute in Biomaterials Science and Engineering at Clemson University
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Martine LaBerge, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2006
* USD 719,946.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0234082 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Martine LaBerge INSTITUTION NAME:
Clemson University TITLE: NIH-NSF BBSI in Biomaterials Science and Engineering

ABSTRACT

The Departments of Bioengineering, Physics and Astronomy, and Genetics and
Biochemistry, and the School of Nursing at Clemson University in collaboration
with the Department of Surgery at the Greenville Hospital System will host a
NIH-NSF Bioengineering Summer Institute in Biomaterials Science and Engineering.
This multidisciplinary Institute targets undergraduate students, who have
completed their sophomore year, and graduate students, within the first two
years of entry into their graduate education program, majoring in the life and
applied sciences, nursing, and engineering. The major goal of this Institute is
to offer a unique didactic experience where students will learn the basic
principles necessary for the understanding of medical device development,
clinical applications, and failure assessment, and will apply these principles
in state-of-the-art research projects. Over a period of ten weeks, this unique
interdisciplinary program will integrate education and research in the field of
biomaterials and medical device design from concept to clinical applications,
with a focus on cardiovascular and orthopaedic applications. A follow-up course
will focus on the clinical aspects of biomaterials and medical devices, failure
assessment of implants for cardiovascular and orthopaedic applications, tissue
engineered substitutes and biotechnology, and biomaterials implantology.

Research projects will be conducted in the Laboratory of Vascular Research, the
Cardiovascular Implant Research Laboratory, the Tissue Engineering Laboratory,
the Laboratory of Polymeric Bearing Modeling, the Nanoscale Biointerfaces
Laboratory, and the Laboratory of Biomedical Optical Imaging and Spectroscopy at
Clemson University. A national search will be conducted to recruit participants
in the Institute with a focus on cultural and academic diversity. Selection will
be based on grade point average, a statement of career plans, research
interests, and benefits to be realized by the participation in the Institute, as
well as recommendation letters from two advisors or instructors. Students will
be encouraged to participate in the Institute for up to two consecutive summer
programs; acceptance for a second summer will be based on performance during the
first summer and recommendation by the mentoring team. Following their first
summer, students can apply for stipend support to participate in research
projects at their home institutions during the academic year; funds will be
available on a competitive basis. Funding will be awarded for collaborative
research between a junior faculty in the Institute and the faculty advisor of
the student at the home institution.