* 0234594
* Tapestry of Times Past: A paleontological portal for North America
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* David Lindberg, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 12/31/2006
* USD 409,550.00

Tapestry of Times Past is a joint project of the Society of Vertebrate
Paleontology, the Paleontological Society, and the US Geological Survey, working
together to build a "paleontology portal" for North America. The project is
facilitated by the UC Museum of Paleontology. Its goals are to create a central,
interactive entry point to paleontology resources on the Internet for multiple
audiences: the research community, K-12 education, government and industry, the
general public, and the media. The centerpiece of the portal is the USGS color-
coded geologic map of the contiguous United States draped over a shaded-relief
digital elevation model. This map and associated stratigraphic column will
become interactive, allowing the user to access information about particular
geographic regions, geologic time periods, depositional environments and
representative taxa. By linking together a network of local individual museums
and institutions, the user will also find information specific to the particular
geographic region of exploration, including current research projects and
publications, websites, on-line exhibits and educational materials, information
on collecting fossils in that state, and availability of other resources. In
addition, the site will provide a "Doing Paleontology" section that will contain
practical links to paleontology meetings, careers, academic programs, and other
resources as well as a "Demonstrations and Tours" section that will house site
tours and special interactive exhibits developed to enhance the Paleontology
Portal. The project will be developed using a very simple initial approach
utilizing HTML, Javascript, Perl and PerlDBI. With this approach, anyone with a
Web browser with Javascript enabled can request information from the database
using simple, familiar actions such as clicking on the map or key, or using
buttons and pull-down menus. Responses are delivered as standard HTML pages,
requiring no plug-ins or proprietary software. Later enhancements will include
an alternate multimedia-rich interface, an alternate query form for more
directed, advanced queries, and a GIS visualization tool for working with
collections and research data. Dissemination strategies will include society
publications and websites, conference and workshop presentations to target
audiences in education and geosciences, and working with DLESE and other digital
resource libraries.