* 0234930
* Structure and Evolution of the MHC in a Model Marsupial
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Robert Miller, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* John C. Rogers
* 07/31/2007
* USD 420,000.00

The Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) is a set of genes that controls many
aspects of immune responses including resistance and/or susceptibility to
infectious diseases. The MHC has also been linked to many other biological
phenomena ranging from the success or failure of pregnancy to behavior and kin
recognition by smell. This project will be to study the evolution and function
of the MHC genes in mammals over a larger evolutionary time-scale than has been
done previously. The project will characterize the content and diversity of the
MHC in a model species of marsupial, the short-tailed opossum. Marsupials, such
as opossums and kangaroos, belong to a lineage that separated from placental
mammals, such as humans and mice, approximately 120 million years ago. The
region of the opossum genome containing the MHC will be cloned, its gene content
determined, and ultimately sequenced. The genes present in the opossum MHC will
be analyzed for their expression in different tissues at different stages of
development to gain insight into their functional roles as well.

The MHC is the most gene rich region of the human genome. Understanding its
evolution requires comparisons among distantly related species. The data on
marsupial MHC generated by this project will provide the first opportunity for
comparison between different subclasses of mammals. In a broader context, study
of marsupial immune systems also provides unique opportunities not available
using traditional mammalian models. Marsupials differ from placental mammals
primarily in reproduction and development; they give birth to young that are
less mature and must complete development in a pouch. This creates immunological
problems for the marsupial, such as how to protect the newborn once it is in the
pouch. Understanding how such problems are solved in different species requires
greater knowledge of their immune systems. This research project will be the
first large-scale investigation of one of the major components of the immune
system in a marsupial, the MHC. This project is also part of an ongoing research
program involving international collaborations with investigators in Australia.
This research program has involved a large number of students, both graduate and
undergraduate, in these international collaborations in the past and will
continue to do so.