* 0234132
* NIH-NSF BBSI:    BioMEMS Summer Bioengineering Institute at New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Richard Foulds, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2006
* USD 720,800.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0234132 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: William Hunter INSTITUTION NAME:
NJIT TITLE: NIH-NSF BBSI BioMEMS Summer Bioengineering Institute

ABSTRACT

The Department of Biomedical Engineering at the New Jersey Institute of
Technology (NJIT) proposes to develop a four year BioMEMS Summer Bioengineering
Institute in response to the call for bioengineering/bioinformatics summer
institutes by NSF/NIH (NSF-02-019). The first Institute would be held over 10
weeks in the summer of 2003.

The focus on BioMEMS will be supported by both didactic and research experiences
planned for the students. The capstone research experience will be fabricating a
BioMEMS device in the Class-10 Cleanroom of the Microelectronics Facility at the
New Jersey Institute of Technology. The students will also test the
biological/medical application of their device in a host biomedical research lab
either in the University Heights academic community, the metropolitan New York
community (an easy commute) or at their home university. Prior to testing their
device, students will also have worked extensively during the summer with their
host biomedical research lab, so that they have a thorough understanding of the
biomedical problem for which their device is intended. The students' more
general understanding of the sort of biomedical research questions that are
currently being addressed using BioMEMS will be broadened by weekly state-of-
the-art research seminars given by experts in the field.

The students' research experience will be complemented by four formal courses
that they will complete. One course will survey the field of BioMEMS. The others
will be the three courses that form the core curriculum in biomedical
engineering at NJIT. Two of these provide a general introduction to the field of
biomedical engineering: BME 301 focuses on bioelectrical signals, physiologic
modeling, and imaging; BME 302 focuses on biomechanics, tissue engineering, and
biomaterials. The third core course, BME 303, focuses on the essentials of
biochemistry and cell biology from an engineering point of view. Instead of
being drab lectures, all of these courses use the studio style of presentation
that encourages active student involvement in the learning process