* 0234551
* Collaborative Research: Fungal Genetics Stock Center
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Kevin McCluskey, University of Kansas Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 02/28/2006
* USD 220,999.00

This is one of two awards providing renewed support for the Fungal Genetics
Stock Center (FGSC), which has been located at the University of Kansas Medical
Center (UMKC) since 1985. At the end of the first year of support, the FGSC will
move to the University of Missouri at Kansas City (UMKC) and responsibility for
its operation will shift to a new Director. Funds awarded to the UKMC support
the final year of operation at that institution as well as the cost of moving
the collection to UMKC. The award to UMKC supports operation in the subsequent
four years. The support insures the continued maintenance and improvement of the
collection which includes genetically marked strains of Neurospora, Aspergillus,
Magnaporthe and, to a lesser extent, strains of other filamentous fungi. The
ready availability of more than 16,000 reliable genetic stocks from FGSC has
stimulated the use of these organisms for basic and applied research in fungal
genetics and systematics, as well as molecular biology, biochemistry, and other
related fields. A number of strains in the collection are also used for
educational purposes. In addition to these strains, the FGSC maintains and
distributes individual cloned DNAs and libraries of cloned genomic and cDNAs
from filamentous fungi. A modest fee is charged for strains and DNA clones. The
Fungal Genetics Newsletter (48 issues to date) and a printed catalog of
available cultures and services are also prepared by the FGSC. The collection's
staff maintain a web site (www.fgsc.net) that includes a list of all strains in
the collection as well as other information of interest to fungal geneticists
details of useful methods, recent issues of the Fungal Genetics Newsletter,
abstracts from recent fungal genetics meetings and bibliographies of papers
related to fungal genetics.