* 0234008
* RCN: Molecular and Organismic Research in Plant History
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2010
* William Friedman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/28/2010
* USD 498,128.00

Plants are responsible for over two-thirds of human caloric intake worldwide,
and for the production of most of the oxygen that we consume with every breath.
Yet despite the centrality of plants to human life and most ecosystems on Earth,
their evolutionary history (from single-celled ancestors some 475 million years
ago) has largely been overlooked in the increasingly dynamic field of
developmental biology. Today, a century after Charles Darwin described aspects
of the evolutionary history of plants as an "abominable mystery," much still
remains unknown about how everything from leaves to roots to flowers evolved
(the first plants lacked these structures). In light of the ongoing revolution
in molecular biology, botanists now have the opportunity to decipher the
developmental and evolutionary history of plants in ways that, even twenty years
ago, could never have been imagined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the MORPH
(Molecular and Organismic Research in Plant History) Research Coordination
Network will be to foster cross-disciplinary interactions between organismic,
paleontological and molecular biologists, all intent on solving Darwin's
"abominable mystery" (and other long-standing questions about the evolution of
plants). Major planned networking activities include 1) annual
meetings/workshops, 2) support for cross-disciplinary training opportunities of
students, postdoctorals, and early career faculty between organismic and
molecular labs, 3) outreach activities to underrepresented groups in the
sciences (through mini-symposia to be held at institutions with substantial
minority student populations), and 4) development of a website for the MORPH
RCN. The cross-disciplinary interactions of this RCN will provide a unique
opportunity for students, postdoctorals and faculty to combine historically
diverse fields and in turn develop research programs at the interface of
evolutionary and developmental plant biology. The anticipated impact of the
proposed network is nothing less than the invigoration of the discipline of
plant evolutionary developmental biology and a nationally coordinated effort to
elucidate the underlying developmental principles that have governed the
diversification of plants over the last 500 million years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;