* 0234671
* Development of a Process Control Breadboard System to Attract and Retain Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Jeffrey Mountain, University of Texas at Tyler
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2007
* USD 292,369.00

The project will provide undergraduate engineering students the opportunity to
design build and test small-scale control systems that represent processes
encountered in engineering practice. The proposed instructional system follows
the model of electrical or mechanical breadboard systems, and integrates the two
in novel ways. The approach will be integrated into every level of the
curriculum using hands-on, team based design activities; enhancing the design
education experience for freshmen, and will continue through to the senior
capstone experience. The students will work on real world problems with
industrial mentors. This system is also expected to significantly enhance the
ability of upper level students to design, build and test fully functional
process control systems by reducing the time and effort required for system
assembly. Following initial system development and testing, weeklong summer
camps for Eight and ninth grade students will be conducted. Undergraduate
student mentors, under faculty supervision, will assist attendees in hands-on
design of process control systems. Women and historically underrepresented
minority students will be strongly encouraged to attend the camps. All attendees
will be encouraged to pursue engineering careers. A resource guide, including
vendor lists, sample design activities and a lessons learned summary will be
provided on the WEB. In addition, as the project reaches completion, the guide
will be widely distributed to approximately 150, small, to medium sized,
agricultural, chemical, and mechanical engineering programs on CD-ROM.



