* 0234546
* Collaborative Research: Constraining Late Pleistocene Tropical Climates by Dating and Modeling Former Glaciers
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Michael Prentice, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 01/31/2006
* USD 130,844.00

This award funds collaborative research to reconstruct climate during the Last
Glacial Maximum (LGM) at 21,000 years ago by dating and modeling former late
Pleistocene glaciers from Mauna Kea, Hawaii, and Mt. Giluwe, Papua New Guinea.
The researchers will examine glacial moraines from the Earth's tropics to gain a
greater understanding of the sensitivity of the climate system to radiative
forcing. Excess radiation received at low latitudes is a key driving force of
the Earth's climate system. The overall goal of the research is to examine some
fundamental physical elements of the response of Earth's climate to planetary
radiative forcing that is significantly different from the present.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glacial moraines will be dated using cosmogenic nuclides
measured on samples from surface boulders. For each field area, samples
collected from moraines generally thought to represent the LGM will be dated by
3He (helium) and 36Cl (chlorine). To address questions regarding scaling and
production rates of 3He at low latitudes, the project includes calibrations
using Hawaiian radiocarbon dated lava flows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate
modeling will be guided by the desire to apply improved modeling strategies to
reconstruct the climate change required to sustain late Pleistocene tropical
glaciation. Specifically, modeling efforts will use a physically based mass- and
energy-balance glacier model that has been validated and applied to several
glaciers in different topographic and climatic environments. The glacier model
accounts for topographic shading, time and space varying albedo, explicit
treatment of the radiation budget, and turbulent fluxes. These are important
controls of glacier mass balance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important
because it has the potential for improving our understanding of fundamental
climate processes in the tropics by providing a high-resolution chronology of
glaciation in the region at the LGM, a time of important reorganization of
Earth's climate regime. The research will provide a multidisciplinary
educational experience in paleoclimate research for graduate students at two
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;