* 0234676
* The Involvement of Steroidal Androgens in Sex Differentiation of Prosobranch Neogastropods
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Gerald LeBlanc, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 06/30/2007
* USD 388,056.00

This study will examine the basic endocrine control of sexual differentiation in
a snail species (mud snail: Ilyanassa obsoleta) and also determine the mechanism
by which the biocide tributyltin causes sexual ambiguity in marine snails.
Tributyltin is an antifoulant used in marine paints. The material is ubiquitous
in the marine environment and has been causally associated with the global
occurrence of reproductive system abnormalities in marine snails. Studies will
be performed to identify the hormones that are responsible for the development
of the snail reproductive system. Initially, field surveys will be performed to
establish relationships between hormone or hormone receptor levels and
development of the snail reproductive system over the seasonal reproductive
cycle. These investigations will be followed by laboratory experiments where
levels of tentatively important hormones will be manipulated and consequences to
reproductive system development will be established. Once the relevant hormones
have been conclusively identified, the effect of tributyltin on those hormone
levels and activity will be established. Results from this study will
significantly advance our understanding of basic molluscan endocrinology. Many
Asian and South American countries are developing snail culture as a sustainable
food source for local consumption as well as export. Understanding the
regulation of the reproductive cycle of snails would greatly enhance the
economic feasibility of such operations. In addition, the International Maritime
Organization has implemented a phase-out of tributyltin in marine paints owing
to its adverse effects on marine ecosystems. The economic incentive to minimize
drag on ocean-going vessels through the use of antifoulants will necessitate the
development and use of tributyltin alternatives. Elucidation of the mechanism by
which tributyltin interferes with sexual development of snails will help ensure
that alternative antifoulants do not share this insidious property.