* 0234025
* Collaborative Research:  Workforce Diversity, Coworker Trust, Skin Shade, and Competitiveness:  Wage Determination of Black Americans Reconsidered
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* William Darity, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2005
* USD 131,218.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project extends the knowledge of economists regarding black-
white wage differentials by examining two hypotheses for why the racial wage gap
might be larger for some groups of black workers. First, we postulate that as an
economically subaltern group acquires more competitive labor market attributes
they will face a greater intensity of labor market discrimination so as to
maintain the social hierarchy in favor of the dominant group. We refer to this
hypothesis as the Functionality of Discrimination. We will perform a variety of
tests in which we compare levels of unexplained wage differences, a standard
measure of discrimination, across black workers that have alternative amounts of
desirable labor market attributes. Second, we propose that blacks with lighter
skin shade benefit more from coworker cooperation than darker skinned blacks who
are otherwise comparable, which will lead to a smaller racial wage gap for
lighter skinned blacks. We advance the notion that there is a link between skin
shade and productivity since the work setting is a social environment where
personal interaction influences job performance. In our view, coworkers have
skills they may share with one another that enhance personal productivity and
wages. However, cooperation between coworkers (including the sharing of skills)
is likely to depend on commonalities and we envision phenotype similarity as a
commonality that workers may form coalitions around. Thus, we expect white
workers, who generally are in better jobs than black workers, to be more
cooperative with lighter skinned blacks. If this is the case then lighter
skinned blacks will be more productive than otherwise comparable darker skinned
blacks from working with white coworkers, which will translate into greater
wages for lighter skinned blacks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from the National
Survey of Black Americans (NSBA) collected in 1979 and data from the National
Survey of American Life (NSAL), which resembles the National Survey of Black
Americans but were collected in 2001, are used in this study to estimate wage
equations. The estimated equations will reveal the contribution of skin shade to
wages and the estimates will reveal if unexplained wage differences between
blacks and whites are greater for those blacks considered highly competitive in
the work place. Since the surveys are two decades apart how the relationship
between skin shade and wages has changed over time can be explored. The data
sets used in the study are unique in that they provide data on a person's skin
shade and information on whether an individual works in a group. For work team
members there is information on the size and on the racial composition of their
workgroup. These data sets also provide information on an individual's cognitive
ability and accumulated skills, which can be used to gauge their competitiveness
in the work place. The findings generated by these studies will shed light on
whether the extent of racial wage discrimination varies with workplace context
and with phenotypical attributes. Thus, new insights will be gained on the
appropriate form of policies to redress wage discrimination and on the likely
feasibility of implementing such policy initiatives. Undergraduate students at
Washington and Lee University, who are members of a minority group and who plan
to attend graduate school in the social sciences or humanities, will be part of
the research team conducting these studies. These students will participate in
the Minority Undergraduate Research Assistant Program at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill during the summer. &lt;br/&gt;