* 0234731
* RUI: Effect of Amino Acid Substitutions on the Production, Localization, Processing, Stability and Function of Subunit II of Cytochrome c Oxidase in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Vicki Cameron, Ithaca College
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 03/31/2008
* USD 281,877.00

Cytochrome c oxidase (CcO) is an enzyme complex required for respiration in all
eukaryotes and some prokaryotes. The enzyme complex is the terminal member of
the electron transport chain and is responsible for transferring electrons from
cytochrome c to molecular oxygen. The number of subunits in CcO is variable,
ranging from three or four in bacteria to as many as 13 in the bovine enzyme
complex. The three largest subunits, Cox1p, Cox2p, and Cox3p are encoded on
mitochondrial DNA in eukaryotes and are closely related to the three subunits
found in prokaryotes. Therefore, it is likely that these mitochondrially encoded
subunits represent the catalytically significant subunits of the eukaryotic
enzyme. Cox2p has been shown to carry a binuclear copper center, which is the
initial site of electron entry from cytochrome c. To better understand the
function of Cox2p, yeast strains with defects in cellular respiration due to
mutations in the COX2 gene have been identified or created. For the site-
directed mutations which have been created in this gene, the mutant strains will
be characterized both genotypically and phenotypically. For each mutant strain,
a large collection of revertant strains which have recovered respiratory
function will be identified and characterized, and the nature of the genetic
change which restores function will be determined. The mutant strains which bear
amino acid substitutions will also be analyzed to determine the effect of each
of the mutations on the localization, stability, processing, and assembly of
Cox2p. Some of the mutations may interfere with one of these aspects but not
others. For example, some mutations may produce a stable protein, which is
assembled with the other Cox polypeptides into a complex, which is however,
inactive. Other mutations may affect stability or localization to the correct
cellular compartment.

Because the Cox2p amino acid sequence is so highly conserved, information
deduced about the function of this protein in yeast should help to elucidate the
function of the protein in higher organisms. Such an understanding is of
importance because of the profound effect of the protein on the basic energy
metabolism of a broad range of organisms, from bacteria to primates. In addition
to expanding our knowledge of this important protein, the project will involve
undergraduate collaborators at all stages, including those of carrying out the
actual experiments, drafting manuscripts, and presenting their results at
scientific conferences. The hands-on training provided to students in the course
of the research will help prepare them for graduate and professional school and
will provide them with both technical and critical thinking skills.