* 0234705
* Patchy Nitrogen Redistribution And Food Web Subsidies Caused By Deer Foraging In Multiple-Use Landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Steven Seagle, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Bowers
* 12/31/2004
* USD 450,007.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The invertebrates that comprise the forest-floor
food web use annual leaf fall for energy and nutrients. Thus the amount of
energy and nutrients in leaf litter is believed to determine invertebrate and
possibly vertebrate predator population sizes and reproduction. Where highly
fertilized agricultural crops intermix with forest, large populations of white-
tailed deer often feed on crops during the night and retreat to the forest for
concealment during the day. By excreting nutrients in the forest, deer transport
nutrient "subsidies" to the forest food web. Nitrogen transport is of particular
interest because of its importance for terrestrial food webs and its impacts on
forest health. This research addresses three primary questions: (1) How much
nitrogen do deer transport into forests from agricultural land? (2) What
conditions of land use result in the largest transports of nitrogen? and (3)
What is the effect of nitrogen subsidies on the forest food web and forest-floor
nitrogen cycling? These questions will be addressed by systematic field sampling
of forest patches for nitrogen deposition and by tracking deer movements using
global positioning system technology. A field experiment will be used to
evaluate the impact of energy and nitrogen subsidies created by deer on the
forest food web. Results of the research will aid in understanding the effect of
human land-use on native forest ecosystems, provide new insight to the multi-
faceted impacts of overabundant white-tailed deer on forest ecology, and advance
understanding of the role that food web dynamics play in forest nutrient
cycling&lt;br/&gt;