* 0234006
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Dental Analysis of Classic Period Population Variability in the Maya Region
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2003
* Lori Wright, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/2003
* USD 1,920.00

&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine biological variability among the Classic
period Maya using dental metric and nonmetric data from ancient human skeletal
remains. Analyses of biological distance and variability within physical
anthropology can be classified as model-free and model-bound. In model-free
approaches, low levels of biological variability are treated as evidence for
high levels of related ancestry and gene flow. In contrast, model-bound
approaches take into account the affects of genetic drift and thus provide a
more satisfying model of ancient population dynamics. In this study, both model-
free and model-bound approaches will be utilized. One of the major benefits of
applying model-bound analyses to the study of the Classic Maya is the
availability of large skeletal samples sizes from archaeological sites with
well-known population estimates and well-controlled chronologies; factors that
have been difficult to control in previous model-bound analyses. This study will
address problems both specific to Maya archaeology and will produce a large data
set on Pre-Columbian Central American dental morphology, furthering our
understanding of ancient biological variation in the Americas.&lt;br/&gt; In
this study of ancient Maya biological variation, Scherer will test the
hypothesis that biological distance between Classic period Maya site populations
is correlated with geographic distances between sites. This hypothesis rests on
the assumptions that migration between Maya urban centers was relatively minor
and that increases in population size were largely due to natural population
growth. Current archaeological evidence, however, suggests that these
assumptions are not correct. Recent studies of Maya demography have demonstrated
that numerous sites exhibit fluctuations in population size during the Classic
period. Migration, including movement across major archaeological regions, may
be one explanation for these episodes of growth and decline. Further, the Maya
historical record describes numerous migration events during the Classic period,
including inter-site marriages, the placement of foreign lords at subjugated
sites, and the founding of new sites by splintering dynastic lineages. What is
lacking, however, is an understanding of ancient Maya population history from a
biological perspective. This research will fill that void by providing the first
comprehensive study of biological variation in the Maya lowlands.&lt;br/&gt;If
this research determines that populations were not stable, as posited in the
first hypothesis, it will be necessary to evaluate what segments of ancient Maya
society were mobile. Thus, Scherer will test a second hypothesis that when gene
flow occurred during the Classic period, it was primarily at the elite level of
society. The data for each site will be partitioned into elite and non-elite
segments based on burial context and mortuary variability. If elite migration
was more substantial than non-elite migration, we should expect greater
biological differentiation between sites for commoners than for the elite. As an
additional way to examine population stability during the Classic period, the
samples will be divided by time period to examine the relative degree of genetic
continuity through time for each site. &lt;br/&gt;In order to test these
hypotheses, Scherer will collect dental metric and nonmetric data from 15 sites
representing seven of the archaeological zones in the Maya region. Statistical
analyses will employ both model-free and model-bound approaches. Model-free
statistics will include Mahalanobis D2 (metrics) and the mean measure of
divergence (nonmetrics). Model-bound analyses will follow recent statistical
modifications of the R matrix model of migration for metric and nonmetric data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will have the broader impact of contributing to
the professional development of the student and providing him with an
international experience. &lt;br/&gt;