* 0234576
* Evolution of Novel Ontogenies
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Rudolf Raff, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 03/31/2007
* USD 449,999.00

0234576&lt;br/&gt;Raff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
understand the mechanisms by which development evolves, and how developmental
processes influence or constrain the direction of evolution. Two related species
of sea urchins with highly different modes of early development are being used
in this study. Heliocidaris tuberculata develops in the ancestral indirect mode
via a feeding larva, whereas H. erythrogramma develops directly from embryo to
juvenile adult. Eggs of H. erythrogramma fertilized by H. tuberculata sperm
develop via a novel pathway in which a number of the primitive pluteus features
are restored by the action of dominant factors derived from the paternal genome.
Dr. Raff has exploited the restoration of pluteus-like gene expression in a
restored pluteus tissue, oral ectoderm, to identify candidate regulatory genes
involved in evolution of developmental mode. A hypothesis for evolutionary
change in larval form of H. erythrogramma will be tested, and genes underlying
evolution of both larval and maternal features will be studied through
functional assays. The specific aims are (1) Determine the functional roles of
regulatory genes in indirect, direct, and hybrid embryos. Gain of function
studies will be done with presumptive dominant regulatory genes selected for
known roles in organization of indirect-developers. These will be expressed
in&lt;br/&gt;H. erythrogramma embryos as injected mRNAs to determine which
larval features are restored by transcription factor mRNAs. (2) Determine the
functional roles of genes affecting primary larval axes and their evolution.
Functions of candidate genes will be studied by misexpression of mRNAs that
include those encoding signal system components, transcription factors, and
knockout/knockdown constructs for these components. (3) Use cross-species
hybrids to investigate cell lineage transformations and novel gene expression
patterns. He will use cell lineage tracing in hybrids to define which
blastomeres shift fate to become oral ectoderm, as well as other cell lineage
changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meeting NSF Review Criteria: (1) Intellectual
merit of the proposed activity: The project will advance knowledge by
determining how the function of developmental regulatory genes influences the
evolution of&lt;br/&gt;development. The project will contribute to a new
discipline in biology. The project makes use of unique organisms and resources
in Australia, and includes long-term collaborations with Australian scientists.
(2) Broader impacts of the proposed activity: The main societal impact is to
help create a more integrated view of biological evolution. This is important in
teaching evolution in a realistic way in biology classes at secondary and
college levels. In addition, the work itself has been cited in college text
books, (Freeman and Herron, Evolutionary Analysis, Prentice Hall, 2001; Wilt and
Hake, Principles of Developmental Biology, Norton, 2001, and Gilbert,
Developmental Biology, Sinauer, 2000), and the popular press (Washington Post,
October, 2000, and National Geographic, May 2000), which helps create a greater
public understanding of research in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;