* 0234921
* Microbial Diversity of Yellowstone Hydrocarbon Seeps
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Gregory Colores, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2005
* USD 30,997.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this Minority Research Planning Grant is
to use non-cultivation based methods to&lt;br/&gt;characterize the microbial
populations associated with natural hydrocarbon seeps in
Yellowstone&lt;br/&gt;National Park. In addition to its well-known hot springs,
Yellowstone has a few documented&lt;br/&gt;areas that contain hydrocarbon seeps.
These seeps are typically associated with thermal vents and&lt;br/&gt;the best
characterized ones occur in terrestrial areas. The proposed research will focus
on soil&lt;br/&gt;samples to be taken from the Calcite Springs area, where
several hydrocarbon seeps exist. The&lt;br/&gt;specific objectives of this
planning grant are:&lt;br/&gt;1. Evaluate soil microbial diversity in Calcite
Springs soil containing naturally occurring&lt;br/&gt;hydrocarbons.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Examine functional gene diversity and evolutionary relatedness to characterized
genes&lt;br/&gt;encoding hydrocarbon-degrading enzymes (PAH
dioxygenases).&lt;br/&gt;3. Characterize the abundance and types of hydrocarbons
present in Calcite Springs soil&lt;br/&gt;adjacent to hydrocarbon
seeps.&lt;br/&gt;Clone libraries of 16S rRNA genes and PAH dioxygenase gene
fragments will be constructed&lt;br/&gt;and sequenced to identify microorganisms
and catabolic pathways present in hydrocarbon-&lt;br/&gt;impacted soil. A
thorough chemical analysis of soil samples (GC-MS) will also be performed
to&lt;br/&gt;identify and quantify the major hydrocarbons present. This study
will provide the first&lt;br/&gt;investigation into the phylogenetic diversity
of soil microbial populations associated with&lt;br/&gt;terrestrial hydrocarbon
seeps in Yellowstone National Park. This information is of
interest&lt;br/&gt;primarily due the extended exposure to hydrocarbons that
these microbial populations have&lt;br/&gt;received. As such, novel
microorganisms and/or metabolic pathways may have evolved in
this&lt;br/&gt;setting. As a planning grant targeting underrepresented
minorities in science, this award will help&lt;br/&gt;to increase the
participation of a minority scientist in NSF-funded research. Furthermore,
this&lt;br/&gt;planning grant will be used to generate sufficient preliminary
data for an NSF CAREER proposal&lt;br/&gt;to combine research and teaching
efforts focused on the microbial ecology of hydrocarbon seeps&lt;br/&gt;in
Yellowstone National Park.