* 0234026
* NIH-NSF BBSI: The Penn State Summer Institute (PSSI) for Biomaterials and Bio-nanotechnology
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Cheng Dong, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2006
* USD 718,878.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0234026&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Cheng
Dong&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Pennsylvania State University University
Park&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: The Penn State Summer Institute (PSSI) for Biomaterials
and Bio-nanotechnology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Penn
State proposes to develop a Summer Institute (PSSI) for research and education
for upper-level undergraduate and first-year graduate students to stimulate
interest in bioengineering and bioinformatics in general and to draw on the
strengths of current research at Penn State in biomaterials and bio-
nanotechnology in particular. At Penn State, biomaterials and bio-nanotechnology
programs emphasize the development of novel materials and their biocompatibility
along with nano-scale manipulations and investigations, all with an eye toward
clinical applications. The PSSI will be unique in incorporating laboratories
that emphasize the physical sciences (Department of Chemistry), applied sciences
(Department of Bioengineering), and life and clinical sciences (Hershey Medical
Center).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students will attend an 8-week course entitled
"Biomaterials and Bio-nanotechnology in the Health Sciences". This course will
be augmented by a seminar series to include industry and academic leaders in
biomaterials and bio-nanotechnology (4 outside speakers, 4 Penn State Speakers).
Following completion of the program, student career and academic progress will
be tracked for data on impact assessment to be used for PSSI enhancements and
career counseling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important goal of the PSSI is to draw
talented students and faculty from the physical, life and clinical sciences into
bioengineering. This will be addressed by recruiting students from related
fields, such as physics, chemistry, mathematics, biophysics, biology,
physiology, orthopedics and surgery. Through the students, they also intend to
attract talented faculty working in other areas to apply their skills to
biological and medical problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They aim to: (i) increase
the pool of domestic students considering graduate education in bioengineering,
(ii) provide educational experience to undergraduates and first-year graduate
students to prepare them for careers in these cutting edge fields, (iii) provide
faculty with students and supply monies so students can carry out innovative
research in faculty labs, and (iv) increase the impact of the Penn State
biomaterials and bio-nanotechnology
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;