* 0234166
* GOALI: "Dynamically Responsive Polymeric Additives for Process Improvements an Environmental Compability"
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Maria Santore, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/2003
* USD 47,146.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9817048 Santore, Maria/Lehigh U. This program targets the
generation of rules for the custom design of polymeric additives that will bring
several industrial sectors closer to environmental compatibility: coatings
formulation (replacement of organic formulations with aqueous ones), waste water
treatment (flocculants effective for aggressively aerated low solids sludges),
paper making (increased white water recycle and lower waste stream volume),
aqueous lubrication, and oil recovery (biodegradable additives compatible with
sandstone formations). In these instances environmental compatibilization
depends on a fundamental understanding of the transient dynamic aspects of
polymer adsorption and colloidal phenomena. In particular, the program targets
the questions of how specific polymer chemistry and architecture determine (1)
adsorption rates and (2) interfacial relaxations. The program then addresses (3)
how adsorbed layers in different stages of relaxation mediate colloidal
interactions and cause stabilization or flocculation. The outcome from this
program, in addition to design rules that allow one to tailor molecules that are
dynamically responsive to the timescales of particular processes, includes
information about transient colloidal potentials that will facilitate process-
specific flocculation and stabilization models. The core scientific program at
Lehigh is supplemented with liaison projects involving 4 companies, coop
programs, and 5th year masters programs, for the most effective technology
transfer to bring the fundamentals to the specific industrial situations. An
experimental program employing model narrow molecular standard water soluble
polymers (polyethylene oxide and pullulan - based) and substrates of controlled
chemistry (through the deposition of self assembled monolayers) will allow
systematic variations in the relevant chemical and architectural parameters in
studies of adsorption, interfacial relaxation, and the evolution interfacial
colloidal for ces. Use of these model systems is critical to the development of
theory for dynamic behavior. The issues of adsorption, relaxation, and colloidal
forces will be probed through a unique combination of techniques. Polymer
adsorption and relaxation kinetics will be measured with a synergistic
combination of total internal reflectance fluorescence (TIRF) and near-Brewster
reflectivity, developed in the PI's lab under prior NSF support. Together the
two methods measure the evolving surface mass, the evolving layer thickness and
density, and the kinetic behavior of fluorescently-tagged interfacial
populations. Interfacial relaxations will be further probed through self
exchange studies using TIRF. These studies will establish the evolutionary
timescales of the layers and provide some idea of which layer features evolve.
Models developed under a Research Initiation Award will be modified to give
quantitative explanation of the observed dynamics. The next phase of work
relates this evolving layer structure to colloidal behavior. Dynamic
measurements of colloidal forces will be measured using 'MASIF," similar to the
surface forces apparatus, but designed for dynamic data acquisition. Finally
impinging jet colloidal deposition studies will be employed to measure how
interfacial relaxations and pairwise colloidal force measurements translate to
flocculation or stabilization in situations of strong shear and hydrodynamic
collision forces. The sticking ability, as a function of the transient
interfacial state and hydrodynamic conditions can be used in existing
flocculation models to make them more process-specific for wastewater, paper,
coatings, and oil recovery applications.