* 0234358
* RUI:  Gonadotropin-Induced Gene Transcription Associated with Ovulation
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Lawrence Espey, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 01/31/2007
* USD 350,000.00

This study will examine ovarian genes that are regulated by hormones from the
pituitary gland, and the mechanisms of this regulation. The project focuses on
hormone action that controls the rupture of ovarian follicles-a process called
ovulation. The project is based on state-of-the-art procedures in molecular
biology and recombinant DNA technologies such as "microarray" and "differential
display." In addition, the project will utilize standard methods of Northern
blotting and in situ hybridization to determine the temporal and spatial
patterns of expression of each gene in the ovarian tissues. As a more
comprehensive picture of ovulation-related genes is achieved, the ultimate goal
of this project is to integrate information about the protein products of these
genes into meaningful metabolic pathways that explain how a follicle ruptures.
In broader terms, the scientific potential of the project is significant in
several other respects. First, this ovulation process will serve as a clear cut
experimental model to study the basic mechanisms by which glycoprotein hormones
such as luteinizing hormone (or, its homologue, human chorionic gonadotropin)
brings about its biologically programmed 'target tissue' response-in this case
the rupture of healthy tissue at the surface of the ovary. Second, the project
can provide basic knowledge about mammalian reproduction with potential value
for increasing the productivity of livestock and for regulating human fertility.
Lastly, in view of the similarities that exist between ovulatory and
inflammatory processes, this project also has the potential for providing useful
genetic information about metabolic changes that occur during inflammatory
diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis.