* 0234478
* Vertical and Horizontal Integration of Manufacturing Courses in Engineering Curricula
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Lucy King, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2007
* USD 491,064.00

Vertical and Horizontal Integration of Manufacturing Courses in Engineering
Curicula

The goal is to define a unique, novel model with strategies, processes and
teaching tools and materials, to vertically integrate manufacturing courses and
horizontally integrate mechanical engineering and industrial engineering
courses, and to extend this model to other universities nationally.

Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activity The proposed project will develop a
streamlining process where students move fluidly from one course to another with
continuity, are able to carry with them the knowledge and skills from upstream
courses and visualize what is expected in the downstream classes. Students are
able to interact with each other within manufacturing degree and with mechanical
engineering and industrial engineering degrees. This holistic learning forms the
foundation of a solid multi-disciplinary education. This project will form a
strategy for inter-departmental collaboration, define a process for integration,
and develop teaching tools, hands-on and web-based, for streamlining course
progression and consolidating lecture and laboratory material for beta testing
and later, dissemination.

Broader Impacts Resulting from the Proposed Activity The project will identify
and establish collaboration between manufacturing, industrial engineering and
mechanical engineering disciplines and between Kettering University and other
beta-site universities as well as industry partners. The integration concept,
new equipment and laboratory experiments, and product realization projects will
be used in Kettering summer workshops for pre-college women (21st Century Women)
and minority (Academically Inclined Minorities Program) to encourage and mentor
underrepresented groups to study engineering. The outcomes of the project will
directly impact Kettering's students and faculty, female and minority programs,
beta-site universities and industry partners through developed laboratory
projects, workshops and seminars, and will be published in diverse media such as
Internet websites, CD-ROMs, conferences presentations, papers, laboratory
manuals, and books for dissemination to broader audiences.

