* 0234521
* FRG: Modeling Waves and Sediment Transport in Coastal Zones
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Jerry Bona, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2006
* USD 785,198.00

Proposed here is a study featuring models for the interaction of surface and
internal oceanic waves with sediment-laden bottom topography. The project
includes derivation and mathematical analysis of models, development of
algorithms for the approximation of solutions, implementation of the algorithms
as computer codes, comparisons of the output of numerical simulations with field
data, the use of the models for prediction and their development as a tool for
effective coastal engineering. The basic issue under consideration is
challenging in that it involves the temporal evolution of two free surfaces
whose dynamics are connected in a complex and nonlinear way. The wave motion
involves the deformation of the water's surface, or in the case of internal
waves, the pycnoclines. Even over a fixed bottom, these issues are difficult in
their exact formulation, and consequently model equations are typically used. In
the present conception, the bottom is not fixed, and this added complexity is
what makes the issues proposed here for study scientifically very interesting.
In view are three-dimensional models that are initiated by incoming wave fields
from deep water. These models will allow for long-shore variation and take
account of reflection. It is planned to develop such models and to test them
extensively against both laboratory experiments and field observation.
Comparisons are in view at several sites around the world, including the Field
Research Facility of the US Army Corps of Engineers at Duck, NC, a site of the
Polish Academy of Sciences on the Baltic Sea, the North Coast of the Magdelan
Islands in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, the Gold Coast of Australia, the Island of
Djerba off the Tunisian coast and two regions in Morocco (Alger in the Gibraltar
Strait and Agadir on the Atlantic coast). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation
for carrying out the study outlined above is several-fold. First is the pure
science of the subject. The project involves interesting and substantial issues
from hydrodynamics, partial differential equations, and sediment transport
theory. Secondly, it is an ideal venue in which to acquaint students with
interdisciplinary research. There is a strong practical reason for this study as
well. The erosion and retreat of coastlines is a worldwide phenomenon. Global
warming will increase the activity of storms, raise the sea level, and further
degrade the present, sometimes catastrophic state of many beaches. Fragile
Arctic coasts, beaches on the Great lakes and on many coastal regions already
display the unmistakable signs of deterioration caused by these global changes
and aggravated by social developmental pressure. Severe erosion is likely to
spread to many coastal areas within half a century and thus increase the demand
for effective prevention methods. The present project aims at deepening our
understanding of fundamental wave-bottom interaction processes, especially as
regards sediment dispersal. Going beyond the science, the project also grapples
with the intelligent use of this kind of knowledge in designing coastal
protection strategies. With experience already in hand, it is clear that there
are a variety of protection options and that it is not always smart to simply
build some permanent, often-ugly structure. So-called 'soft' protection methods
are a useful addition to the reperatoire of the coastal engineer. These are much
less expensive when they can be made to work. The assessment of the practicality
of a protection plan, be it 'hard' or 'soft' relies upon the kind of knowledge
investigated under the auspices of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;