* 0234985
* Student Support Services and Impact on Career Outcomes in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM):  A Pilot Study of Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) Programs
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Suzanne Brainard, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 01/31/2006
* USD 410,383.00

The purpose of this project 1) to assess the summative impact of (WISE) Women in
Science &amp; Enginerring programs and other programs on student career
outcomes; 2) to develop a standardized methodology for evaluating student career
outcomes and the relationship to participation in WISE programs and related
support programs; 3) to pilot-test and evaluate the methodology nationally at
selected institutions, to ensure generalizability across institutions, and 4) to
disseminate the model methodology nationally. This unique approach will include
a web-based format that can be used nationally by institutions, with a back-end
database and analysis capability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Six higher education
institutions have been identified to participate as pilot sites. These
institutions include: Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, NJ; University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI; University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez, PR; the
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX; the Florida International University,
Miami, FL; and, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA. These six
institutions are representative of institutions nationwide, broadly reflect the
Carnegie classification of institutions, and provide significant numbers of
Hispanic and African-American students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The products that
will result from this study will include: 1) a template for a user-friendly data
collection method for tracking WISE program and other support program
participation and career outcomes, 2) a web-mediated survey instrument and data
collection method that institutions nationwide can use and which will be
analyzed by CWD and disseminated to participating institutions, 3) an Exit
Survey and a Professional Survey to gather career outcomes information, and 4)
the results of a pilot-test at six institutions.&lt;br/&gt;