* 0234005
* NIRT:   Surface Gradients and the Mechanism of Neuronal Axon Growth
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* David Y.H. Pui, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 09/30/2003
* USD 140,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the announcement NSF
01-157.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They have organized a Nanoscale Interdisciplinary
Research Team (NIRT) motivated by the hypothesis that understanding of the roles
that concentration gradients of signal molecules play in cell dynamics, neuronal
axon growth in particular, with unprecedented spatial resolution
and&lt;br/&gt;chemical control is very important. The team consists of four PIs
from Chemistry, Neuroscience, and Mechanical Engineering, with expertise in
surface functionalization and biomolecule immobilization, neuronal axon growth
mechanisms, and nano-delivery and characterization tools for biomolecules. The
combination of expertise and synergy from this collaboration will allow them to
develop methodology for the generation of chemical and biochemical gradients
that possess the following attributes: (a) the gradients are supported on a
solid surface for precise control and quantification; (b) the gradients possess
cellular (~um) and sub-cellular (~102 nm) spatial resolution; (c) arbitrary or
"designer" gradient profiles, including digital (discrete) or analog
(continuous) gradients, are possible; (d) the method are not molecule-specific
and the gradients may include multiple components. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
method will be based on a precision nano-delivery tool, an electrospray system
capable of 10-18 liter volume resolution, to deliver chemical or biological
samples onto a functionalized solid surface. A "designer" gradient will be
generated by a programmed voltage&lt;br/&gt;pulse-train in combination with
programmed movement of the sample. Monolayer assemblies on&lt;br/&gt;the solid
surface will be designed to confine the nano-droplet for high resolution, to
immobilize&lt;br/&gt;signal molecules in the nano-droplet, and to provide
chemical or biological compatibility for cell&lt;br/&gt;adhesion and growth.
They plan to use neurons as a model biological system to explore the roles of
gradients of extrinsic molecules in guiding neuronal axon
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will provide an excellent
opportunity for participating students to work at&lt;br/&gt;one of the
forefronts of nanoscience/technology, i.e., molecular nano-biology and
nanobiotechnology. In addition to graduate training, the PIs plan to develop and
co-teach a freshman seminar course annually on, "Nanobiology: science and
engineering of neuron growth," to stimulate undergraduates' interest and
participation. It is anticipated that their proposed activities will contribute
to the preparation of future innovators and leaders in nanoscience in
neurobiology and its practical application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;