* 0234766
* Molecular Beam Study of the Surface Reaction Chemistry of Metastable Molecular Nitrogen
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2003,08/31/2008
* R. Bruce Doak, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2008
* USD 380,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CHE-0234766&lt;br/&gt;Doak/Arizona
State&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project, in the laboratory of Professor
Bruce Doak in the Department of Physics at Arizona State University, examines
the reactivity of metastable molecular nitrogen in the growth of nitride
semiconductor thin films. With the support of the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program, fundamental studies of the reaction of excited molecular
nitrogen species to form nitride and oxynitride thin films are being carried
out. A combination of in situ and ex situ methods are used to characterize the
films prepared using the novel supersonic metastable nitrogen beam source
developed for these studies. The fundamental information obtained from this work
is relevant to the development of processing protocols for electronic materials
preparation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Analytical and
Surface Chemistry Program, Professor Doak and his group at Arizona State
University are examining the fundamental reaction dynamics of metastable
molecular nitrogen interacting with semiconductor surfaces. The focus of this
work is on understanding the mechanisms of growth of nitride and oxynitride
semiconductor and insulator thin films. Information from these studies is
relevant to the design of important semiconductor and electronic device
processing methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;