* 0234019
* Dissertation Research:  A Reconsideration of Child Labor in the Contexts of Household Economics and Community Norms
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Mark Nichter, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 03/31/2004
* USD 8,013.00

0234019&lt;br/&gt;Nichter / Wind&lt;br/&gt;The international effort to end child
labor has sometimes been framed as being an ideological battle between Euro-
American universalistic conceptions of child development and human rights on the
one hand and the culturally specific beliefs and practices of developing
countries on the other. Both agencies of the United Nations and child welfare
NGOs have emphasized the negative impact of child labor on the physical, mental,
and moral health of children. This dissertation research by a cultural
anthropologist will examine the health of child workers in Mysore, India within
the context of household livelihood strategies. The student will study a select
group of households for one year to determine whether children's contributions
to household income differentially affect their access to health-related
resources and to identify and compare how a range of work-related variables are
perceived as impacting children's health. Interviews with other community
members and the staff of local child welfare NGOs will serve to situate the
views and practices of individual households within a broader framework of
community norms regarding childhood as a life phase, the human rights of
children, and the age and gender- appropriateness of different types of work.
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research include advancing our
understanding of how communities evaluate the risks associated with child labor,
an understanding crucial to the internationally recognized short-term goal of
quickly removing children from the most hazardous forms of work. It will also
offer important insights into household health and economic logic useful to
those designing child survival and poverty alleviation programs. In addition to
such practical applications, the research will add to recent social science
efforts to discover ways in which universalistic concepts of human rights may
find culturally acceptable interpretations in diverse settings. The project also
contributes to the education of a young social scientist. &lt;br/&gt;