* 0234903
* Phase-Separating Polymer Blend Films Containing Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Russell Composto, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2007
* USD 372,625.00

The proposed research will focus on the dynamics of polymer blend films and
polymer blend films containing nanoparticles. Control of film properties, such
as hardness and permeability, are greatly complicated by the simultaneous
occurrence of phase separation and wetting. Using lateral and depth profiling
techniques, the phase evolution and wetting behavior of blends with a critical
composition will be investigated for films as thin as 10 nm, ca. radius of
gyration. By controlling domain size and spacing, membranes with monodisperse,
submicron pores will be prepared. The phase and wetting dynamics of off-critical
blends will be studied to gain control over film stability, interfacial area
between phases, and wetting structure. New evolutionary pathways are anticipated
yielding better insight into phase separation, wetting and capillary
fluctuations in confined spaces. The second project will investigate how inert
fillers, in particular mobile nanoparticles, modify the rate and morphology of
phase separation in polymer blend films. After evaluating silica nanoparticle
diffusion and wetting, the effect of particle size, concentration and
wettability on domain evolution and morphology will be evaluated using the
experimental techniques developed for the previous study as well as new
techniques for depth and lateral profiling of the nanoparticles within the
film.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is important because thin polymer films
containing multiple components are critical to many technologies including
photolithography, adhesives, and displays. In particular, experimental studies
of polymer blends containing filler greatly lag both theory and commercial
applications. Fundamental studies will be complimented by studies of commercial
filler-polymer films of interest to the automotive coatings industry. Outreach
programs including a second cable TV show on polymers, demonstrations at public
and private elementary schools as well as high school teacher training will
continue as will training of undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;