* 0234558
* Symposium: "Selection and Evolution of Organismal Performance in Nature", to be held January 2003 in Toronto, Canada.
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2003
* Joel Kingsolver, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 12/31/2003
* USD 9,716.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;How the ability of organisms to perform key tasks-to run,
fly, forage, acquire and process nutrients, regulate water and ions-evolves in
response to selection in natural environments is a central issue for
understanding adaptation and organismal diversity. During the past two decades
researchers have developed a theoretical and methodological framework for
addressing this issue, and have applied this framework to a diverse set of
natural systems. We have organized a society-wide symposium, entitled Selection
and evolution of organismal performance in nature, for the January 2003 Annual
Meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology, in Toronto,
Ontario. The symposium brings together leading junior and senior researchers
whose studies integrate analyses of organismal performance, phenotypic
selection, and microevolution in nature. Collectively, these studies consider a
diversity of taxa, habitats, components of performance, and empirical and
theoretical approaches that address the question: What are the mechanisms and
patterns of selection and microevolution of organismal performance in natural
populations? The symposium will identify commonalities and differences in
patterns of selection and evolution among different systems and performance
traits; provide a forum for discussing methodological and conceptual challenges
of studying performance in nature; and suggest new directions for the field. The
proceedings of the symposium will be published in Integrative and Comparative
Biology, the leading journal in the field of Integrative Biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;