* 0234744
* Comparative Microphysical Characteristics of Numerically Simulated Warm-Season Thunderstorms in Diverse Climatic Regimes
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Pao-Kuan Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/2005
* USD 214,932.00

The Principal Investigator will use an existing three-dimensional, time-
dependent quasi-compressible research cloud model to study the bulk
microphysical structure of warm?season deep convective storms for diverse
geographical environments from tropical to mid?latitude. This project will
investigate the effects of the geographical environment on the following volume-
integrated properties relating to the storm-scale water cycle: the total
condensate mass, the production and depletion of the precipitation within this
condensate pool, and especially the partitioning of the mass by hydrometeor
types and of the microphysical transfer rates by the individual processes
contributing to them. A recently completed project by the Principal Investigator
has laid a foundation for the work by simulating and analyzing thunderstorms in
the semi-arid High Plains of North America and the humid subtropics. The
Principal Investigators will extend their approach to substantially more regions
in recognition that: (a) several contrasting North American thunderstorm
climatologies have been documented for regions other than those two, (b) several
other regions of the world from the Tropics through mid?latitudes are subject to
especially frequent or intense convective storms, and (c) in low latitudes, deep
convection has repeatedly been observed to be systematically weaker at sea than
over land, with significantly different microphysical makeup.

The researchers will investigate up to approximately ten locations, subject to
availability of data suitably representative of pre-storm environmental
conditions for the control experiments. Thunderstorm environments under
consideration include the summer monsoon of North America's subtropical desert
southwest, tropical and subtropical Asia and Western Europe. Comparison of model
results among the control experiments for different regions will emphasize the
volume-integrated bulk microphysical properties noted above, and especially the
time-averaged percentage breakdowns of their partitioning during the mature
phase of a storm. The research, if successful, will be significant to the
advancement of knowledge in mesoscale atmospheric dynamics and will increase
fundamental understanding of the nature of convective activity under various
climatic regimes.