* 0234200
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Class and Marriage for Rural Appalachian Women
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Patricia Johnson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 04/30/2005
* USD 0.00

Johnson / Boden&lt;br/&gt;Rural U.S. women tend to have a lower educational
attainment, as well as marry earlier and in higher numbers than urban women.
This is not surprising, since early marriage for women is strongly associated
with early completion of education. Given that in many rural U.S. communities,
lower levels of educational attainment are associated with economic stagnation
or deterioration, a better understanding of why rural women marry early will be
valuable to rural policy-makers. This dissertation research project by a
cultural anthropologist uses ethnographic methods to provide a richly-detailed
study of how rural Appalachian women make their marriage decisions and how these
decisions shape their life course. The researcher, an anthropology-demography
graduate student, examines how women's class positions within the community
influence their social networks, especially the number of ties to people with
more or different resources than the women have, and how both women's class
positions and social ties influence their decisions concerning marriage and
higher education. The study uses multiple measures of class, including a measure
based on the ideas and perceptions of class that characterize the local
community, comparing the explanatory value of the different measures. Thus, this
project provides both a more integrated model of marriage behavior within a
specific context and a better understanding of how people conceptualize and
experience class. The broader impacts of the new knowledge provided by this
study will enhance theory-building efforts among anthropologists and other
scholars interested in rural conditions, women's issues, and marriage behavior,
and will enable rural policy-makers to formulate more effective family and
educational programs. The project also contributes to the training of a young
social scientist. &lt;br/&gt;