* 0234569
* Collaborative Research.  Perception of the Steroid Molting Hormone, 20-Hydroxyecdysone (20-HE) and its Role in Orchestrating Aggressive Interactions in the American Lobster
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,09/30/2007
* G. Kass-Simon, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 09/30/2007
* USD 126,723.00

Perception of the Steroid Molting Hormone, 20-Hydroxyecdysone (20-HE) and its
Role in Orchestrating Aggressive Interactions in the American
Lobster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this research is to identify and
analyze the role of steroid hormones in aggressive behavior. The study will
investigate how the perception of the steroid molting hormone affects aggression
in a model animal, the American lobster. Aggression is a vital component of the
survival strategies of all animals and is used in the acquisition of food,
mates, and territory. The research will contribute significantly to the
understanding of how steroid hormones modulate aggressive behavior. We expect to
show that steroids not only alter the internal aggressive state of an animal,
but are also used as signaling tools to modify the behavior of an opponent in an
aggressive interaction.&lt;br/&gt;A primary goal of the project is to give
undergraduates an intensive research experience in up-to-date methods of
neurobiology. The project is a collaboration between Kass-Simon at the
University of Rhode Island, and Cromarty at Assumption College. It will involve
URI graduate students, Assumption College undergraduates, and under-represented
minority undergraduates from the New England Board of Higher Education's
Excellence Through Diversity Initiative Program. &lt;br/&gt;The following
questions will be addressed:&lt;br/&gt;1. Does smelling the steroid molting
hormone affect fighting behavior? These are behavioral experiments in which
lobsters deprived of their sense of smell fight animals who are exposed to
steroids (or placebos). The experiments stem from earlier work showing that
injected steroids increase lobster aggressiveness. &lt;br/&gt;2. Are there molt-
related differences in the receptor-responses to the molting hormone? These are
electrophysiological experiments designed to show how olfactory cells respond
electrically to the molting hormone as lobsters go from their hard-shelled
(aggressive) to soft-shelled (timid) states. &lt;br/&gt;3. Where are the molting
hormone receptors located? These are microscopy experiments, in which
fluorescent antibodies are used to locate the steroid receptors on the olfactory
nerves. The experiments will augment the electrophysiology
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;