* 0234287
* U.S.- Japan Joint Seminar: "Hybrid" Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 02/28/2007
* USD 33,300.00

0234287&lt;br/&gt;Wynne&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan joint seminar on hybrid
materials to be held in Mishima, Japan from May 11-14, 2003. The co-organizers
are Professor Kenneth Wynne at Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond and
Professor Norio Tsubokawa at Niigata University in Japan. The meeting will bring
together research scientists and engineers from the U.S. and Japan, two
countries where important and exciting progress in hybrid materials has been
made in the last decade. The main objective of the seminar is to address current
critical issues and future opportunities for hybrid materials, focusing on the
unique synergism that results from combinations of organic and inorganic phases.
Presentations will focus on how to design such nanostructures in a controlled
manner and to organize the nonoparticles on larger length scales. A further
objective of the proposed seminar is to bring together researchers in the areas
of polymer synthesis, polymer physics, instrumental methods of polymer
characterization, solid-state polymer properties, and various polymer
applications, who have common and complimentary interests. The goal is to
identify common research priorities and to explore areas of joint research
cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-organizers have complementary
scientific expertise in the field. This enables them to evaluate and attract the
best organic and inorganic chemists, materials scientists and engineers to
participate. The seminar organizers have made a special effort to involve
minorities, postdocs and graduate students as both participants and observers.
The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in the field will enable
U.S. participants to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future
collaborative projects. Following the seminar the organizers plan to establish a
workshop web page. Conference proceedings will be published on this web site.
The proceedings will include the program schedule and abstracts of talks
including key references to the literature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;