* 0234118
* Meristem Identity Genes and the Evolution of Plant Architecture in Brassicaceae
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* David Baum, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 01/31/2007
* USD 363,269.00

0234118&lt;br/&gt;Baum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of plants is
controlled by meristems, areas of organized cell division and differentiation.
Shoot meristems can take on either a floral or vegetative identity depending
upon the activity of a set of meristem identity genes. Because flowers terminate
shoot growth, the distribution of flowers, and hence the regulation of meristem
identity genes, may have a profound affect upon plant architecture. Thus, it has
been hypothesized that the architectural differences between species are largely
driven by changes in meristem identity genes. In the proposed work we will
evaluate the role of three meristem identity genes, LFY, TFL1, and AP1, in
explaining why three species of the mustard/cabbage family (Brassicaceae)
produce flowers from the basal rosette of leaves rather than on an elongated
leafless stem (the inflorescence).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous work the PI
studied LFY genes from three rosette flowering species, Ionopsidium acaule (Ia),
Idahoa scapigera (Is), and Leavenworthia crassa (Lc). They used transformation
to introduce LFY genes from these three species into plants of an inflorescence
flowering species, Arabidopsis thaliana (that lacked a functional endogenous
copy of LFY). They found that whereas Ia-LFY had no affect on plant
architecture, the IsLFY and LcLFY genes tended to induce modifications to plant
architecture reminiscent of rosette flowering, but they did not cause complete
conversion to rosette flowering. This result suggests that evolutionary changes
at the LFY locus contributed to the parallel evolution of rosette flowering in
these species, but point to additional, as yet unidentified, genetic changes.
The proposed work will include follow-up experiments on LFY aimed at determining
whether the important differences between species are located in the protein-
coding region or the adjacent regulatory DNA. Similar experiments with AP1 and
TFL1 will be done to see if they may have contributed to the evolution of
rosette flowering. Specifically, the goal is to clarify the molecular evolution
of the genes and move them from the rosette flowering species into A. thaliana
to see if they can induce rosette-flowering individually or jointly with the
exogenous LFY genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed study will shed light on
how evolutionary changes in DNA translate into difference in the morphology of
living species. In particular, the work will clarify: (1) the extent to which
genetic changes are concentrated in a small set of developmental genes, (2) the
relative importance of protein versus regulatory changes, and (3) the extent to
which parallel evolution in independent lineages uses the same genetic toolbox.
Additionally, the specific understanding of how plant architecture is regulated
could ultimately have significance for efforts to modify crop plants to
facilitate higher productivity and easier harvesting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will contribute to the training of one graduate student and one
postdoctoral scientist.&lt;br/&gt;