* 0234293
* SOFTWARE: ACR: Advanced Code Generation for Digital Signal Processing Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Jose Moura, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 03/31/2007
* USD 463,800.00

The goal of this research is to automatically generate implementations of
digital signal processing (DSP) transform algorithms that are adapted to a given
off-the-shelf computing platform, i.e., the generated code takes full advantage
of architectural features and available instructions sets, including the memory
hierarchy, multiple processors, vector instructions, fused multiply-add
instructions, and prefetching instructions. We refer to this type of code as
"advanced code'' for two reasons: (1) the code uses instructions that
are&lt;br/&gt;significantly beyond standard C or Fortran programming; and (2)
manually writing such code requires a very high level of programming expertise
including assembly level programming and a deep understanding of the platform's
architecture. Our goal is ambitious: automatically generate code that competes
with or outperforms expertly hand-tuned code for DSP
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our approach is based on the following: (1) We
represent each fast DSP&lt;br/&gt;transform algorithm as a formula in a concise
mathematical language. (2) We derive for each transform a very large number of
structurally different fast algorithms or formulas. (3) These different formulas
(i.e., algorithms) are efficiently enumerated and manipulated. (4) We
automatically translate each formula into advanced code. (5) We optimize the
implementation by searching over the space of alternative formulas and code
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Step (4) is the key claim---the automation
step---of our approach. In other words, the applicability of advanced
instructions, including vector instructions, parallel threads, fused multiply-
add instructions, and prefetching instructions, can be related to mathematical
constructs in our formula notation. Step (5) provides the&lt;br/&gt;tuning and
adaptability of the code to the platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will research
the mapping from formulas to advanced code and formalize it in a way suitable
for automatic code generation and optimization. We will develop a compiler that
translates a formula description of a fast DSP algorithm, possibly augmented
with parameters that control coding degrees of freedom, into advanced code.
Finally, we will build an "Advanced Code Generator'' that interfaces our
compiler with a formula generator and a search module to&lt;br/&gt;automatically
explore the space of structurally distinct fast algorithms and the space of
advanced coding degrees of freedom. For a given DSP transform, our Advanced Code
Generator automatically finds the formula, i.e., the algorithm, whose structure
allows the best implementation given the available advanced instructions and
given the computing platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contradistinction to other
approaches to advanced code generation, including approaches using optimizing C
or Fortran compilers or manual coding, our Advanced Code Generator automates and
integrates the optimization at the mathematical level of algorithms and the
optimization at the implementation level of machine-specific instructions. This
way the Advanced Code Generator has access to all structural information
necessary to produce high quality code and&lt;br/&gt;mimics a highly skilled
programmer who understands and exploits the structure of algorithms and the
given architecture to write platform-tuned advanced code. We believe that our
research makes, for the performance-critical class of DSP algorithms, a
pioneering step towards a solution for one of the present fundamental problems
in software development for high performance scientific computing: How to
develop, with reasonable effort, optimal and portable performance on
increasingly complex and diverse off-the-shelf computing
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;