* 0234062
* Plasma Irregularity Sources Associated with Charged Dust in the Polar Summer Mesosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Joseph Wang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra G. Fesen
* 01/31/2007
* USD 269,413.00

The explanation of Polar Mesospheric Summer Echoes (PMSEs) has become one of the
central challenges in near earth space science. These radar echoes are often
observed in conjunction with high altitude noctilucent clouds (NLCs), which
consist of charged dust particles. Since NLCs may provide evidence of global
climate change on earth and are an indicator of the evolution and dynamics of
the near earth space environment, a quantitative understanding of the
relationship between PMSEs and NLCs has also become a forefront issue. PMSEs are
believed to be produced by small-scale electron density irregularities in the
NLC source layer. Recent simultaneous sounding rocket and radar measurements
have produced the most complete picture to date of the plasma configuration
inside NLCs and the relationship to PMSEs. These measurements provide strong
evidence that PMSEs are enhanced in the boundary layer between the charged dust
cloud and the background mesospheric plasma where plasma irregularities are also
observed to be enhanced. Funding is requested to make an important and
substantial advance in the quantitative understanding of the source of electron
density irregularities believed to produce PMSEs. Consistent with the recent
experimental evidence, a new model will be developed to consider the NLC
boundary layer as a primary source region for PMSE generation. This
investigation will provide a new methodology and approach to gaining fundamental
insight into the importance of NLC boundary layers in producing
PMSEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will have broad impact by
establishing infrastructure and collaboration between academic departments at
the principal investigator's home institution. The activity will also sustain
long term collaboration between the principal investigator and government
research laboratories. The activity will allow collaborations to be furthered
between the atmospheric science and international plasma communities. Finally, a
minority PI and graduate student education will be supported by this work.