* 0234555
* Collaborative Research: Perception of the Steroid Molting Hormone, 20-Hydroxyecdysone (20-HE) and its Role in Orchestrating Aggressive Interactions in the American Lobster.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Stuart Cromarty, Assumption College
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2007
* USD 120,856.00

Perception of the Steroid Molting Hormone, 20-Hydroxyecdysone (20-HE) and its
Role in Orchestrating Aggressive Interactions in the American Lobster.

The purpose of this research is to identify and analyze the role of steroid
hormones in aggressive behavior. The study will investigate how the perception
of the steroid molting hormone affects aggression in a model animal, the
American lobster. Aggression is a vital component of the survival strategies of
all animals and is used in the acquisition of food, mates, and territory. The
research will contribute significantly to the understanding of how steroid
hormones modulate aggressive behavior. We expect to show that steroids not only
alter the internal aggressive state of an animal, but are also used as signaling
tools to modify the behavior of an opponent in an aggressive interaction. A
primary goal of the project is to give undergraduates an intensive research
experience in up-to-date methods of neurobiology. The project is a collaboration
between Kass-Simon at the University of Rhode Island, and Cromarty at Assumption
College. It will involve URI graduate students, Assumption College
undergraduates, and under-represented minority undergraduates from the New
England Board of Higher Education's Excellence Through Diversity Initiative
Program. The following questions will be addressed: 1. Does smelling the steroid
molting hormone affect fighting behavior? These are behavioral experiments in
which lobsters deprived of their sense of smell fight animals who are exposed to
steroids (or placebos). The experiments stem from earlier work showing that
injected steroids increase lobster aggressiveness. 2. Are there molt-related
differences in the receptor-responses to the molting hormone? These are
electrophysiological experiments designed to show how olfactory cells respond
electrically to the molting hormone as lobsters go from their hard-shelled
(aggressive) to soft-shelled (timid) states. 3. Where are the molting hormone
receptors located? These are microscopy experiments, in which fluorescent
antibodies are used to locate the steroid receptors on the olfactory nerves. The
experiments will augment the electrophysiology experiments.