* 0234206
* Mechanisms Underlying the Balance of Synaptic Complex Assembly and Disassembly
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Bonnie Firestein, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 08/31/2006
* USD 441,103.00

The brain is an incredibly complex organ. If neurons do not talk to their
partners, the brain does not function. How does the brain manage to allow the
correct communication to occur? One way is to regulate the amount of signaling
proteins that are used by the neurons. The purpose of the proposed research is
to understand how the brain performs this process. Dr. Firestein has cloned a
protein called cypin which is involved in making sure that there is a correct
amount of proteins at sites where neurons communicate. The proposed studies will
first investigate how cypin performs this function by analyzing portions of
cypin and determining which regions are responsible for cypin function. Second,
Dr. Firestein will analyze why cypin regulates the localization of some proteins
better than others. Finally, Dr. Firestein will determine what happens when
cypin levels are increased in neurons. The results of these studies will
increase our understanding of basic mechanisms that underlie brain development.
In addition, the performance of these experiments will be part of a program to
train undergraduate and graduate students in cutting edge-techniques in
neuroscience. Two doctoral students, one of whom is an underrepresented
minority, and two undergraduate students, will be involved in performing the
experiments proposed. In addition, Dr. Firestein will be developing an Advanced
Neurobiology Laboratory to prepare undergraduate students for bench work in
laboratories at Rutgers University. Taken together, the proposed project will
help us to understand how the brain is wired for communication, at the same time
providing opportunities for students to conduct bench science.