* 0234249
* Distribution And Ecology Of Ammonia Oxidizing Bacteria In The Palmer LTER Study Area
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2008
* James Hollibaugh, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 06/30/2008
* USD 636,912.00

This project will investigate the distribution, phylogenetic affinities and
ecological aspects of ammonium-oxidizing bacteria in the Palmer Long-Term
Ecological Research study area. Ammonia oxidation is the first step in the
conversion of regenerated nitrogen to dinitrogen gas via denitrification, a
3-step pathway mediated by three distinct guilds of bacteria. As such, ammonia
oxidation is important to the global nitrogen cycle. Ammonia oxidation and the
overall process of nitrification-denitrification have received little attention
in polar oceans where it is significant and where the effects of climate change
on biogeochemical rates are likely to be pronounced. The goals of the studies
proposed here are A) to obtain more conclusive information concerning
composition of Antarctic ammonia oxidizers; B) to begin characterizing their
ecophysiology and ecology; and C) to obtain cultures of the organism for more
detailed studies. Water column and sea ice AOB assemblages will be characterized
phylogenetically and the different kinds of AOB in various samples will be
quantified. Nitrification rates will be measured across the LTER study area in
water column, sea ice and sediment samples. Grazing rates on AOB will be
determined and their sensitivity to UV light evaluated. In addition, the
significance of urea nitrogen as a source of reduced nitrogen to AOB will be
assessed and the temperature response of nitrification over temperature ranges
appropriate to polar regions will be evaluated. This work will provide insights
into the ecology of AOB and the knowledge needed to model how water column
nitrification will respond to changes in the polar ecosystems accompanying
global climate change.