* 0234524
* Scalable Formal Methods for Multidimensional Components
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Grigore Rosu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2006
* USD 400,000.00

This research investigates scalable formal methods and their combinations as a
way to reduce the gap between formal methods and software practice. These
methods include domain-specific certification and runtime verification and
monitoring. Important subthemes are: exploitation of domain-specific knowledge
to derive efficient and scalable algorithms and decision procedures; strength
through the combined use of several "lightweight" formal methods;
multidimensional components to represent not only code, but also different views
of the system from different perspectives; dependability metrics based on the
notion of multidimensional component, so that increases in dependability along
each dimension are aggregated into measurable overall dependability increases.
Various prototypes are developed: safety policy certifier for units of
measurement; coordinate frame safety certifier; optimality state estimation
certifier; runtime verification and monitoring prototypes. These are
experimentally evaluated using the NASA-HDCP testbed.

This research is expected to lead to advances in software technology and to
benefit advanced education. Novel combinations of software synthesis,
certification and monitoring lead to new, powerful dependable software
development methodologies ensuring safe execution with little or no overhead.
Two graduate courses are planned. Supported graduate students are given a solid
scientific foundation and acquire invaluable experience by working closely with
NASA scientists.

