* 0234647
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Nucleotide Substitution Rate Variation in the Catarrhini (Order Primates)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2004
* Todd Disotell, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 05/31/2004
* USD 9,980.00

This research addresses an open issue in the study of molecular evolution: The
connection between organismal level features (e.g. weight, diet, behavior) and
molecular traits (e.g. rate of DNA evolution, genome size, DNA variation within
and between species). Specifically, how do differences in generation time,
population size, metabolic rate, body size, the activity of natural selection,
and species-specific differences in DNA replication accuracy affect the rate of
DNA evolution? This project will add to scientific understanding by examining
DNA evolutionary rate differences within a well-studied group of species.

The research will focus on the catarrhine primates, the mammalian group which
includes humans, apes, and Old World monkeys, as they have significant and well-
measured differences in life history variables, biology, and ecology.
Furthermore, there is strong evidence for variation in the rate of DNA evolution
within this group as there is evidence suggesting that humans and apes exhibit a
slower rate of DNA evolution than the Old World monkeys.

Previous studies investigating variation in the rate of DNA evolution have
examined a broad sample of DNA sequences, but in a limited set of distantly
related species - for example, human, mouse, and cow. This research differs by
sampling a set of 10 independent loci in an extensive sample of relatively
closely related catarrhine primates. The loci were chosen to represent protein
coding and non-coding (introns, pseudogenes and intergenic) sequences.

Ultimately, this project will contribute to the study of the how, when, and why
of evolution, particularly as it pertains to primate and human evolution. The
results may inform us as to:

-How are the modern day Old World monkey species related? -When did the modern
lineages of apes diverge? -How and when did the colobine monkeys become
anatomically specialized for leaf eating? -When did the ancestors of humans
become differentiated from the lineage ultimately leading to the chimpanzee?

This is a doctoral dissertation improvement project integral to the co-
investigator's graduate training. The research results will be published in a
dissertation and scholarly papers, as well as presented at academic conferences.
The DNA sequences obtained in the course of the study will be deposited in the
publicly accessible GenBank database hosted by the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI).

