* 0234227
* Conference:   Advanced Bioethics Institute, Lisbon, Portugal 2003 and 2004, England 2005
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Gary Comstock, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laurel A. Smith-Doerr
* 08/31/2008
* USD 111,583.00

The Bioethics Institute is a faculty development workshop designed to assist
&lt;br/&gt;participants in learning theoretical and applied ethics and effective
classroom strategies for discussing them. It has educated over 500 life science
faculty during the last decade. In 2000, with funding from the European Union
and FLAD (a private Portuguese foundation) as well as NSF, the Bioethics
Institute became a trans-Atlantic project as three joint US/EU workshops were
held in Lisbon (summers of 2000, '01, and '02). The project is now responding to
Europe's request for assistance in reaching science students in languages other
than English and on line for students unable to access Europe's university
campuses. This advanced institute will 1) Provide &lt;br/&gt;participants with
education in moral philosophy; 2) Enrich participants' classrooms and research,
including US participants' classrooms and research, with diverse international
perspectives; 3) Assist participants in translating the Institute's text, "Life
Science Ethics," and 4) Prepare participants to teach the Institute's on-line
course, "Life Science Ethics." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To attain these goals,
twenty-one participants will gather annually at FLAD (the Foundation for Luso-
American Development) in Lisbon, Portugal for three years. There they will
discuss ethical theory; review the latest developments in ethics pedagogy;
review drafts of translations of the Institute's text they have produced; and
prepare on-line courses. The "translations" of the Institute's text, "Life
Science Ethics," need not be straightforward translations, and may be
modifications of the English text to suit students' particular interests and
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three European languages will be selected, and
working groups will be formed &lt;br/&gt;by invitation. Each group will consist
of seven people. For example, if Portuguese is one of the languages, that team
might consist of two life scientists from Portugal &lt;br/&gt;and one from the
US, one ethicist from Portugal and one from the US, a faculty &lt;br/&gt;member
whose specialty is English/Portuguese translation (either from the US
&lt;br/&gt;or Portugal), and one of the translator's graduate students. The team
will be &lt;br/&gt;responsible for the Portuguese translation of "Life Science
Ethics" and for &lt;br/&gt;offering at least one section of an online course
based on the text.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;