* 0234721
* US-Pakistan Workshop:  Molecular Biology, Gentics, Genomics and Breeding With Focus on Abiotic Stress Tolerace of Cereal Crops, March 2003, Lahore, Pakistan
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Hans Bohnert, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/2005
* USD 37,400.00

0234721&lt;br/&gt;Bohnert&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a U.S.-Pakistan Workshop on Molecular Biology, Genetics, Genomics and
Breeding, with Focus on Abiotic Stress Tolerance of Cereal Crops, to be held in
Lahore, Pakistan in March 2003. The U.S. organizer is Dr. Hans Bohnert,
Department of Biology and Crop Science, University of Illinois, Urbana-
Champaign, Illinois. The Pakistani organizers are Dr. Tayyab Husnain, Center of
Excellence in Molecular Biology, Punjab University, Lahore, Pakistan and Dr.
Kauser Malik, Member/Biology, Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission, Islamabad,
Pakistan. The workshop themes are "the physiological and agronomical parameters
determining stress responses, and the integration of traditional breeding
techniques with molecular marker technology," and "the exchange of information
about genomic type studies directed towards the understanding of stress
tolerance determinants and the application of results from mutational studies in
model plants to cereal crops and their improvement." The subjects to be covered
include: mechanism of stress tolerance, functional genomics related to stress
tolerance, and plant transformation for introduction of stress tolerance traits.
The proceedings will identify selected areas of high priority, as well as a
literature guide for cooperative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The
results of the workshop will include identifying joint research that would
benefit the United States, Pakistan and other countries that must cultivate
cereal crops under stressful plant growth conditions including drought,
excessive heat, and salinity.&lt;br/&gt;