* 0234822
* Structural and Functional Analysis of Sec34 Protein Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Vladimir Lupashin, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2006
* USD 431,768.00

This project is designed to further our understanding of membrane trafficking in
the eukaryotic cell. Vesicular transport is a process by which protein and
lipids move between cellular compartments; it is crucial for the generation and
maintenance of these compartments. Vesicle fusion with specific compartments is
mediated by interaction between integral membrane proteins on vesicular and
target membranes, termed v-SNAREs and t-SNARES , respectively. Interaction of v-
and t-SNARES could not account by itself for the high fidelity of intracellular
trafficking. The tethering factors and small GTP-binding proteins of the Rab
family are thought to ensure the specificity of vesicle targeting. It is
extremely important to understand the interplay among SNAREs, Rabs and tethering
factors in the regulation of vesicle targeting and
fusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies in yeast and mammalian cells have led to
the identification of several multisubunit peripheral membrane protein complexes
that are involved in membrane trafficking, including the Sec6/8, the TRAPP, the
Vps52/53/54, and the Sec34p complexes. The eukaryotic Sec34p complex, named COG
(for conserved oligomeric Golgi complex) has eight subunits, is localized to the
Golgi apparatus, and has been suggested to be involved in anterograde ER to
Golgi, retrograde intra-Golgi, endosome to Golgi traffic, as well as in sorting
of GPI-anchored proteins upon ER exit. Dr. Lupashin's laboratory has recently
demonstrated that mutations in the COG complex subunits result in defects in
basic Golgi functions, including glycosylation of secretory proteins, protein
sorting, and retention of Golgi resident proteins . Furthermore, the COG complex
interacts genetically and physically with the Rab protein Ypt1p, Golgi SNARE
molecules, and with the Golgi vesicle coat complex COPI. Dr. Lupashin's main
hypothesis is that the COG complex acts as a tether that connects cis-Golgi
membranes and COPI-coated, retrogradely targeted intra-Golgi vesicles. There are
three specific aims to this project: 1, a detailed molecular characterization of
the COG complex composition; 2, to investigate molecular interactions of the COG
complex with other components of vesicle trafficking machinery; and 3, to
characterize the role of the COG complex in intra-Golgi vesicle trafficking.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, the long-term goal of this study is to
decipher some of the mechanisms that regulate specific targeting of transport
vesicles in eukaryotic cells. One of the most significant challenges for the
membrane traffic field in the coming years will be to gain an understanding of
the role of tethering factors in membrane transport, and with Dr. Lupashin's
background he should be able to make significant advances in understanding this
process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Lupashin teaches in several graduate courses,
including a new interdisciplinary graduate cell biology course that he
developed. In addition, he interacts with faculty and students at nearby
undergraduate institutions such as the University of Arkansas Little Rock and
the University of Arkansas Community College at Batesville. This grant will
support a graduate student and a postdoctoral trainee. &lt;br/&gt;