* 0234311
* Holomorphic Disks and Low-Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Peter Ozsvath, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2005
* USD 124,614.00

DMS-0234311&lt;br/&gt;Peter Ozsvath&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal deals
invariants for three- and four-dimensional manifolds,&lt;br/&gt;specifically
those which the proposer constructed in collaboration Zoltan&lt;br/&gt;Szabo.
These invariants appear to be closely related to gauge-
theoretic&lt;br/&gt;(Donaldson and Seiberg-Witten) invariants, except that they
have the&lt;br/&gt;advantage of being more combinatorial in nature than their
gauge-theoretic&lt;br/&gt;predecessors, and hence easier to calculate. To
illustrate their strength,&lt;br/&gt;one can reprove some results in four-
dimensional differential topology&lt;br/&gt;which were obtained previously using
gauge theory. These invariants also&lt;br/&gt;have new topological applications
which go beyond gauge theory. For&lt;br/&gt;instance, they can be used to give
new restrictions on knots whose&lt;br/&gt;surgeries give lens spaces. The author
hopes to further extend this&lt;br/&gt;theory, to see what further insight they
may give to topology in&lt;br/&gt;dimensions three and
four.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal deals with studying the intrinsic
structure of three- and&lt;br/&gt;four-dimensional spaces. The study of four-
dimensional spaces was&lt;br/&gt;revolutionized by Simon Donaldson in the early
80's by his introduction of&lt;br/&gt;"gauge-theoretic techniques". These
techniques associate to a space the&lt;br/&gt;space of solutions of certain
partial differential equations (which come&lt;br/&gt;from mathematical physics).
Course properties of these solution spaces are&lt;br/&gt;then used to give
insight into the finer structure of the underlying&lt;br/&gt;spaces on which the
equations are defined. The proposal deals with efforts &lt;br/&gt;at
circumventing these (often difficult to identify) auxiliary spaces of
&lt;br/&gt;solutions, to give more directly combinatorial approaches to
understanding &lt;br/&gt;the way three- and four-dimensional spaces fit
together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;