* 0234302
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  Reverse Micelle Mediated Synthesis of Anisotropic Complex Oxide Particles
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Daniel Shantz, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2006
* USD 16,150.00

0234302&lt;br/&gt;Shantz&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the PI, graduate, and
undergraduate students from Texas A&amp;M University in a collaboration with
Stefan Kaskel of the Max Planck Institute for Carbon Research in Muelheim,
Germany. Together, the US and German groups will develop novel methods for
synthesizing one- and two-dimensional particles of structurally complex oxides.
While numerous approaches have been developed for synthesizing discretely shaped
nanoparticles of simple metal oxides, the ability to synthesize one- and two-
dimensional particles of zeolites and oxides with more complex structures has
not been demonstrated. The ability to synthesize anisotropically shaped zeolites
particles would open up new applications for zeolites where it is crucial for
the zeolites pore system to have a defined orientation with respect to a
substrate. Such applications include sensors, microelectronics components,
templates for fabricating other nanophases, and low-temperature catalysts in
microreactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also has an educational
objective. The project will allow the graduate and undergraduate students
involves to benefit from performing research in another country. They will
develop a heightened appreciation of the world around them while also learning
important new technical skills.&lt;br/&gt;