* 0235165
* Structure-Function of Heavy Metal Transport CPx-ATPases
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Jose Arguello, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2008
* USD 865,148.00

The goal of this project is to understand the functional mechanism of heavy
metal transport CPx-ATPases. These P-type ATPases transport heavy metals (ions
of Cu, Ag, Zn, Co, Cd, Pb) across biomembranes. Found in all life kingdoms,
these key enzymes are involved in micronutrient metal homeostasis. The transport
stoichiometry, the determinants of metal ion specificity, and the regulatory
mechanisms of CPx-ATPases are not known. This project aims to identify key
structural features involved in ion selectivity and activity regulation. Simpler
CPx-ATPases found in procaryotes will be used as models in these studies: Cu-
ATPases from A. fulgidus, a Co-ATPase from A. pernix, and a Zn-ATPase from H.
influenzae. A. fulgidus and A. pernix are extremophilic archaea. Experiments
will be performed to test whether conserved sequences in the transmembrane
region of CPx-ATPases determine ion specificity. CPx-ATPases have cytoplasmic
N-terminal metal-binding domains, in addition to the transmembrane CPx site. The
possible regulatory role of the metal-binding domain in enzyme kinetics will be
studied. This project will also involve testing whether a metal chaperone
molecule delivers the metal to the transport site. The fourth goal of this
project is to determine the structure of a CPx-ATPase using X-ray
crystallography. The structure of CPx-ATPases at atomic resolution would greatly
enhance understanding the mechanism of heavy metal
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project will contribute to
an understanding of heavy metal homeostasis. Insight gained in metal selectivity
might facilitate the design of metal bioremediation processes and the management
of plant and animal mineral nutrition. This research will also contribute to
ongoing educational activities (undergraduate teaching, curriculum development
and summer research). Moreover, undergraduate and graduate students will perform
major parts of this project.&lt;br/&gt;