* 0235206
* Emergent Homeostasis and Mound Morphogenesis in Colonies of Macrotermes Michaelseni (Isoptera: Macrotermitinae)
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Jeffrey Turner, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 05/31/2007
* USD 240,597.00

Emergent homeostasis and mound morphogenesis in colonies of the termite
Macrotermes michaelseni&lt;br/&gt;J Scott Turner&lt;br/&gt;State University of
New York at Syracuse&lt;br/&gt;This research will study how colonies of the
mound-building termites of southern Africa (Macrotermes michaelseni) provide
regulated environments for their nests. These termites, popularly called "white
ants" or rysmeere (Afrikaans), build large mounds that are prominent features of
the savannas of sub-Saharan Africa. These mounds are devices for capturing wind
to power ventilation of the termites' underground nests, which can house as many
as two million individuals. In addition, the termites cultivate fungi to aid in
cellulose digestion. The termites and fungi form a symbiosis whose collective
respiration is similar to a goat's. The viability of this symbiosis depends
crucially on the maintenance of a humid, CO2-rich atmosphere in the
nest.&lt;br/&gt;The atmosphere in the Macrotermes nest is under homeostatic
control, the result of a balance between the colony's respiration and the wind-
powered ventilation of the mound. If the nest atmosphere is regulated, this
implies that the mound itself is a regulated structure, its wind capture for
ventilation adjusted to meet the colony's respiratory demands. How do the
termites in a colony collectively "know" how to build a mound of just the right
structure? How do they collectively "detect" whether their mound's structure is
not correct?&lt;br/&gt;These questions are the basis of this research. Nest
homeostasis follows from coupling the maintenance of the mound structure (mound
morphogenesis) to the colony's physiology (emergent homeostasis). Importantly,
soil transport by termites within the nest is linked to the distribution of
respiratory gases in the mound. Termites translocate soil along gradients of CO2
concentration, effecting a net movement of soil from the nest (high CO2) to
mound surface (low CO2). Soil redistribution thus alters the mound's
ventilation, thereby altering CO2 concentration within it. Homeostasis involves
"tuning" the sensitivity of soil transport to CO2 concentration in the
mound.&lt;br/&gt;When a mound is damaged, the nest atmosphere is disrupted, and
the termites respond with repair of the mound, in which a new network of tunnels
is built, restoring the nest atmosphere to its prior state. In this project, the
mound will be damaged by drilling a shaft, and inserting a large PVC pipe.
Repair will be confined to the pipe, a controlled environment, thereby affording
a way to study all aspects of the regulatory system for nest ventilation, and
the developing architecture of the new tunnel network. Gas exchange in the
tunnels will be assessed via tracer gases. Soil movements will be quantified by
marking the soil with colored plastic beads. &lt;br/&gt;This research has broad
significance both for the biology of social insects and for fundamental
questions in ecology, evolution and physiology. Social insect colonies comprise
a diverse array of semi-autonomous individuals, from which a degree of
homeostasis of the nest environment emerges. This emergent homeostasis is well-
documented: how it actually works is less well-understood. This research, by
quantifying all aspects of the regulatory process, will be a significant advance
in our understanding of emergent homeostasis among social insects. Practically,
these termites are dominant factors in the functioning of tropical savanna
ecosystems, controlling as much as half the total carbon flow. Understanding how
their metabolism works and is controlled therefore has ramifications for our
understanding the functioning of tropical savanna ecosystems. Finally,
homeostasis in social insect colonies provides a provocative glimpse into the
forces that must have driven the emergence of homeostasis in other "proto-
organismal" systems that were the ancestors of multicellular organisms. This
award is co-funded by EEP and the NSF Office of International Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;