* 0235023
* RUI: Cell Wall Associated Protein Kinases and Cell Elongation
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Bruce Kohorn, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 10/31/2006
* USD 363,974.00

&lt;br/&gt;The plant Wall Associated Kinases,WAKs, which were discovered by Dr.
Kohorn, are phosphorylating enzyme proteins that physically link the plasma
membrane to the carbohydrate and protein matrix that comprises the plant cell
wall. WAKs are of importance as they have the potential to directly signal
cellular events through their cytoplasmic kinase domain. There are five
Arabidopsis WAKs that vary primarily in their extracellular domain and that
collectively are expressed in most tissues. WAK mRNA and protein are present in
vegetative meristems, junctions of organ types and areas of cell expansion. They
are also induced by pathogen infection and wounding. Recent experiments indicate
that WAKs are also involved in pollen tube growth in the gynoecium, and may
possibly be involved in pollen tube orientation. WAKs can be found bound to
pectin in the cell wall, and at least one isoform is associated with a secreted
glycine rich protein (GRP). Disruption by antisense and RNAi of WAK expression
in leaves leads to the loss of cell expansion, indicating that WAKs play an
important role in plant growth and development. It remains to be discovered how
WAKs, pectins and GRPs combine to regulate the patterns of cell expansion in
coordination with the complex architecture and mechanical constraints of the
plant cell wall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the role WAKs
play in cell expansion and in pollen tube growth. A set of WAK specific
antibodies will be generated to allow a thorough characterization of the protein
expression of each family member and to serve as tools in the analysis of plants
with mutations in individual WAKs. Arabidopsis lines carrying an insertion
mutation in a WAK gene are unable to produce progeny homozygous for the mutation
because fertilization is affected (mutant pollen grains are able to germinate
but do not reach the egg). The exact nature of the defect will be determined
using microscopy, antibodies and markers specific for the mutant
pollen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pollen mutant phentoype will be complemented
such that the progeny can be made homozygous for the WAK mutation. The resulting
vegetative mutant tissue will be analyzed to understand how WAKs mediate cell
expansion. Tests for altered turgor, cell wall extension and altered expansin
and cell wall enzyme expression will be performed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Application of Gibberellin (GA) rescues plants that are
rendered dwarf by WAK mutations. Therefore, the relationship between the GA and
WAK signaling pathways will be explored through a series of crosses with mutants
in the GA pathway and through the analysis of GA biosynthetic enzyme
expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the interaction of WAKs with both
extracellular glycine rich proteins and with cytoplasmic transcriptional adaptor
proteins will be explored using genetics and biochemical
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project will be
manifested primarily through the teaching and training of undergraduates.
Bowdoin College is a predominantly undergraduate institution, and undergraduate
student researchers will be extensively involved in performing these
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;