* 0235262
* Researching and Creating Cognitive-Based Resources for Effective Application in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Indira Nair, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 03/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project supports preliminary planning work to address the very
large question of the integrating cognitive theory into teaching practice in
undergraduate engineering education. This project proposes to both study and
bridge the gaps among research, application and&lt;br/&gt;dissemination. Its
goal is to facilitate more research-based teaching and curriculum and course
design by making this research more relevant and widely accessible to faculty in
engineering and related disciplines. The first steps are to identify (a) common
problems across courses in engineering and associated fields and (b) the
principles underlying these problems, based on findings from cognitive
psychology. The next phase is to identify teaching strategies that successfully
implement one or more research-based principles of learning. Once successful
teaching strategies have been identified, then the task will be to find the best
mechanisms for supporting faculty access to and implementation of these
strategies. Furthermore, if this tool is to be effective in helping engineering
faculty design their own teaching activities grounded in cognitive theory, then
this mechanism will also need to facilitate the comprehension and implementation
of sound learning principles within engineering and related domains. This
process of developing a dissemination and support mechanism will be an iterative
process, involving design, implementation, assessment and redesign as faculty
feedback and other forms of formative assessment will be used to further improve
the system. The assessment of this prototype will include tracking individual
case studies to determine how faculty use this information in the design or
redesign of their courses and teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;