* 0235364
* Regulation of Cytokinesis by Microtubules in Aspergillus Nidulans
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Bo Liu, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/2006
* USD 276,000.00



Division of one cell into two is one of the key critical functions of life. It
is essential that cell division be precisely regulated, both spatially and
temporally, in order to ensure appropriate distribution of subcellular
components such as organelles and chromosomes to the daughter cells. Cell
division is not always necessarily symmetrical; numerous examples of
assymetrical division can be found among fungi, plants and animals, and these
are often essential for differentiation and organismal morphogenesis. A great
deal has been learned about fungal cell division (also termed cytokinesis or
septation) from studies of various yeasts and filamentous fungi. In such fungi,
septation is regulated by signal transduction pathways such as the septation
initiation network (SIN) in fission yeast. SIN includes a MAP- kinase-like
kinase cascade, and activation of this cascade initiates septation. The
consequence of activation of the SIN network is to activate as-yet-unidentified
components at the contractile medial ring, composed mainly of actin
microfilaments and myosin plus various other proteins including actin-binding
proteins. The ultimate function of this ring is to initiate the assembly of the
septum, composed of long chain polysaccharides (beta-glucan and chitin), at the
right place.

While all SIN molecules localize to the spindle pole body in yeast, the terminal
Sid2p kinase and its associated Mob1p partially translocate to the septation
site to activate septation. This project addresses the question of how these SIN
molecules (Sid2p and Mob1p) travel from the spindle pole body to the septation
site. It is proposed that microtubules play essential roles in the localization
of SIN molecules. This hypothesis will be tested in the filamentous fungus,
Aspergillus nidulans. A. nidulans is a particularly good model organism for
these studies because there exists a substantial armamentarium of experimental
tools, and completion of the full sequence of its genome is anticipated shortly.

In A. nidulans, the AnMOB1 protein localizes not only to the spindle pole body
and the septation site, but also to the central spindle. The localization is
dependent on microtubules. Cytoplamic dynein, a microtubule motor associated
with the spindle during cell division, has been demonstrated to play a role in
septum positioning. Dynein mutants will be used to test whether AnMOB1
localization is dependent on cytoplasmic dynein. Experiments will also be
performed to test whether spindle pole body localization of AnMOB1 is dependent
on minus end-directed kinesin KLPA. The roles of the plus end-directed kinesin
BIMC in AnMOB1 localization to the central spindle will be explored. In
addition, pharmacological and genetic approaches will be used to test whether
microtubule dynamics plays a role in AnMOB1 localization. These studies will
provide insights into the roles played by microtubule dynamics, microtubule
motors, and the microtubule-organizing center in the intracellular movement of
SIN molecules, and ultimately in cytokinesis.

Broader Impacts: Aspergillus nidulans is not only a valuable research model, but
it is also useful as teaching material for undergraduate and high school
students. Dr. Liu uses living Aspergillus to demonstrate cell biological
phenomena (cell division, organelle movement, and microtubule dynamics) to local
Junior High School students and home-schooled students who visit his laboratory.
He also uses Aspergillus as a teaching model in an undergraduate Introductory
Biology course and in a graduate level course, Common Approaches in Plant Cell
and Molecular Biology. Dr. Liu has also mentored several undergraduates who have
performed research in his laboratory; these students have gone on to graduate
school or to careers in biotechnology research.