* 0235106
* Controlling Ionomer Morphologies
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Karen Winey, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2006
* USD 321,000.00

The proposed research will investigate the morphology of ion-containing
polymers, in particular ionomers, using model materials and a variety of
analytical electron microscopy (AEM) methods. Ionomers are random copolymers
with a majority of non-polar monomeric units and a minority (~5-10 mol%) of
polar monomeric units, typically acids such as -COOH. The acid groups can be
neutralized with cations to create ionic species such as -COO-Na+ in the case of
a Na-neutralized carboxylic acid. Because these ionic species are considerably
more polar that the surrounding matrix, there is a driving force for the ionic
species to microphase separate and form ionic aggregates although the resulting
morphologies of ionic aggregates are not well understood. Controlling the
morphologies of ionomers is the primary goal of the proposed research and the
first step to developing both a predictive theoretical model of these materials
and a robust understanding of their structure-property relationships. These
ionic aggregates act as physical crosslinks to toughen the polymer and lead to
both current industrial applications (chemically resistant thermoplastics, tough
coatings, permselective membranes for fuel cells, and food packaging materials)
and a variety of potential technological applications (e.g. protection against
chemical warfare). These complex polymeric materials spur scientific interest,
because (1) these amphiphilic materials have ionic interactions that mimic
biological macromolecules, (2) ionomers are readily available with a wealth of
chemistries that includes amorphous and semicrystalline polymers and a range of
cations, and (3) high-resolution analytical tools are now available to
investigate the interdependencies of chemistry, processing, morphology and
properties. Winey's scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) studies of
ionomers since 1998 provide a valuable foundation to the proposed research in
which Winey endeavors to identify the materials parameters and processing
conditions that have the most substantial influence on the ionomer morphologies.
The proposed work seeks to uncover reliable trends in the ionomer morphology in
order to provide fundamental understanding of these complex materials. As Winey
determines how the various materials and processing parameters influence the
ionomer morphology they will be able to control the ionomer morphology. Two
hallmarks of the proposed experimental plan are (1) the use of model materials,
that is materials designed to address specific scientific questions, and (2) the
use of multiple characterization tools including SAXS, FT-IR, and, in
particular, a range of analytical electron microscopy (AEM) methods.

Industrial, academic and military scientists have scientific interest in both
the proposed research about ion-containing polymers and the development of AEM
characterization tools for polymers. Winey will collaborate with the Lehigh
Microscopy School to ensure that electron microscopists take full advantage of
the AEM methods that are used within the proposed work to investigate complex,
chemically heterogeneous polymeric materials. In addition, Winey will continue
to both serve as a faculty co-advisor to the Society of Women Engineers on
Penn's campus and hold an annual panel about opportunities for graduate studies
and academic careers in engineering.

