* 0235820
* Visual Function in Variable Environments: Mantis Shrimps as Models for the Sensory Biology of Color and Polarization Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Thomas Cronin, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 06/30/2007
* USD 224,076.00

All visual tasks that animals perform in nature occur within the contexts of
specific light environments. General scene properties usually are not as
critical as stimulus signals sent by other animals. Thus, signaling systems must
adapt both to vision of intended receivers and properties of the background.
Furthermore, neither the background nor the organism has constant appearance
because of continuous variations in the patterns of illumination falling upon
them. These changing conditions, which at present are poorly understood,
strongly influence the visual appearances and detection of signals. This project
considers the interrelationships among vision, natural lighting, and visual
signals used by a group of marine invertebrates, the mantis shrimps (stomatopod
crustaceans). Mantis shrimp vision is highly evolved and specialized, capable of
outstanding color and polarization vision, and these animals use signals
constantly in agonistic and mating behavior. Most importantly, many mantis
shrimp species live in diverse habitats where both their vision and their visual
signals, including both color and polarized light, change in ways that seem to
be adaptive to the varied environment. Using mantis shrimps as models, this
project examines (1) how colors (i.e. spectral reflectances) and patterns of
animals are adapted for enhanced conspicuousness, and (2) how visual systems of
animals are specialized or tuned to detect signals. Comparisons are made among a
diverse selection of closely related animals, all of which face identical
sensory challenges: the formation and recognition of biological signals in the
photic constraints of diversity of marine habitats. The research is a pioneering
effort to learn how systems of vision and signaling operate in a diverse,
carefully chosen set of extremely colorful marine species in the specific
contexts of their natural illuminants and backgrounds. Its strengths lie in the
selection of species and habitats and in the consideration of recent major
advances in understanding the properties of signals and natural scenes.
&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research will contribute significantly to the fields of
sensory biology, visual ecology, and sensory evolution, and will be of added
interest to engineers and scientists working in photonics, remote sensing,
machine vision, and artificial systems of object detection and recognition. The
project includes substantial student training, international collaborations, and
has an impact on the general public scientific interest in animal vision, color,
and communication.&lt;br/&gt;