* 0235027
* Evolutionary History of Defense Genes in the Genus Zea and Family Poaceae: Insight from DNA Sequence Data
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Peter Tiffin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2007
* USD 367,881.00

The mechanisms by which plants defend themselves against herbivores and
pathogens have been subject to extensive investigation in contemporary
populations. In comparison, relatively little is known about the long-term
evolutionary dynamics of plant defenses. This research will use the information
contained in DNA sequences to investigate these long-term dynamics. DNA sequence
diversity of defense genes in three Zea species, including the domesticate Z.
mays ssp. mays (corn), and divergence of defense genes among different genera of
grasses will be analyzed. These analyses will provide an unprecedented picture
of the evolutionary history and present day diversity of plant defense
genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to advancing our understanding of plant
evolution, the results from this research may be very valuable to agriculture.
For example, the extensive sampling of defense alleles may identify genetic
resources useful for developing sustainable means of pest control. This research
may identify plant defenses that are evolutionarily stable and, thus, may
provide durable resistance against parasites. Analysis of inter- and intra-
population diversity will provide data necessary for developing efficient
strategies for collecting genetic resources for conservation and crop
improvement. Graduate and undergraduate students will participate in the
proposed research and will have opportunities to learn molecular techniques and
molecular-evolutionary analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;