* 0235979
* Structure, Mechanism, and Physiology of Two Sulfur-Mobilizing Enzymes from Synechocystis 6803
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2006
* Joseph Bollinger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 03/31/2006
* USD 446,000.00

Proteins that contain iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters are essential to all
organisms. Great progress has been made recently in defining the mechanisms by
which these complex clusters are assembled in biology. Components of the so-
called Isc Fe-S assembly system are widespread in all three domains of life. The
central cog in the Isc machine is a pyridoxal phosphate-dependent cysteine
desulfurase, IscS. Multiple accessory proteins interact and cooperate with IscS
in Fe-S synthesis/insertion. A distinct system, designated as Suf, has very
recently been recognized in bacteria and plants and is likely to be the primary
assembly apparatus in plant chloroplasts. A protein (SufS) similar to IscS is
likely to be the equivalent sulfur-trafficker for the Suf assembly system.
Additional accessory proteins that cooperate with SufS have not yet been
identified, and discovery of these factors is one aspect of this research. It
has been presumed that the mechanism of the SufS desulfurase is similar to that
of the more extensively characterized IscS desulfurase, but preliminary data
from the Bollinger lab suggest that there may be important differences. The
project will elucidate the mechanism of the SufS reaction and the extent to
which it differs from that of IscS. Evidence suggests that the Suf system may be
primarily responsible for Fe-S assembly in cyanobacteria. Alternatively, a
similar protein (cyst(e)ine C-S lyase or C-DES) that cleaves sulfur from
cysteine and its S-substituted derivatives by a distinct mechanism may be the
key sulfur-mobilizing Fe-S assembly factor. The project will determine which of
these proteins is of primary importance in cyanobacterial Fe-S synthesis, if
both are important, or if neither is. Mechanistic characterization of cysteine
desulfurases has engendered detailed hypotheses to explain how the desulfurases
avoid catalyzing the sulfur elimination reaction promoted by C-DES and,
conversely, how C-DES achieves specificity against cysteine in favor of
S-substituted derivatives such as cystine and S-(alkyl)cysteines. Predictions
based on these hypotheses will be tested in order to evaluate the molecular
logic underlying the functional divergence of these similar enzymes.
&lt;br/&gt;Two areas of chemistry in which Nature's sophistication far exceeds
our own are (1) the construction of complex inorganic assemblies for use as the
active centers of catalysts and (2) the design of catalysts (enzymes) that
promote only one type of reaction among a range of chemically similar pathways
that may be available with a given substrate. It is expected that a more
profound understanding of Nature's strategies in these two areas would inspire
development of new chemical processes. This research seeks a better
understanding of Nature's multiple strategies for synthesis of one particularly
versatile and important class of complex inorganic assembly, the iron-sulfur
clusters. As iron-sulfur clusters are important in biochemical processes ranging
from nitrogen fixation to respiration to photosynthesis, it is expected that the
results may one day inspire synthetic processes for construction of important
biomimetic catalysts. As part of the effort to understand biological iron-sulfur
cluster assembly, the project will determine how two similar enzymes that may
each have a role in mobilizing the inorganic sulfide needed for the assembly
process can select two chemically distinct reaction pathways for breakdown of a
common substrate, cysteine. The principles relating the structure of each enzyme
to the reaction pathway it promotes will constitute a paradigm for how chemical
specificity may be achieved by subtle tuning of catalyst structure.&lt;br/&gt;