* 0235021
* Characterization of the maize sesquiterpene cyclase genes involved in the defense response to insect damage
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Hugo Dooner, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2006
* USD 350,000.00

Plants possess a variety of mechanisms to protect themselves from attack by
herbivores. One system that is induced upon attack by herbivorous insects is the
production of terpenoids that can serve in either direct or indirect defense
against the herbivore. It has previously been shown that the maize sesquiterpene
cyclase gene stc1, located in 9S, is induced in corn seedlings being foraged by
beet armyworm (BAW) larvae. The product of this gene is a volatile terpenoid
that most likely serves to attract wasps that parasitize the BAW larvae.
Preliminary work leading to this proposal has now shown that stc2, the ortholog
of stc1 in 6L, is induced by a different insect pest, the southwestern corn
borer (SWCB). The P.I.s propose a genetic, molecular, and biochemical dissection
of the two orthologous maize genes involved in this novel type of inducible
plant defense system, as follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Characterization of
the induction of the stc2 gene by the SWCB and other related corn borers. These
experiments will establish the pattern of stc2 induction in response to
regurgitant from the SWCB and whether the plant response is specific to that
insect species or not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Determination of the complete
structure of the stc2 gene by isolating a full-length stc2 cDNA from seedling
sheaths that have been foraged by SWCB. This will enable identification of the
N-terminus of the protein, confirmation of the predicted intron-exon structure
of the transcript, and expression of the STC2 enzyme in a heterologous system
for biochemical characterization of its activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3.
Assessment of the possible role of stc2 as an insect resistance gene by
isolating and sequencing the stc2 gene from the non-inducible, SWCB-susceptible
Ki3 inbred line. This would identify the basis of the noninducibility of stc2 in
Ki3 and provide further evidence that stc2 corresponds to a quantitative trait
locus (QTL) for SWCB resistance that maps very close to the location of stc2 in
6L.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Determination of the nature of the terpenoid product
catalyzed by the heterologously expressed STC1 and STC2 enzymes. These
experiments will identify the nature of the terpenoids made by these enzymes and
confirm whether the product of STC1 is a sesquiterpenoid, as suggested by the
earlier biochemical genetics data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. Identification of the
most likely subcellular localization of the STC proteins with constructs that
fuse their putative chloroplast transit peptides to GFP. This will confirm
whether the predicted N-terminal targeting sequence in each of the three
sequenced stc1 alleles behaves as a chloroplast transit peptide in
vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will have clear broader
impacts. The work combines genetics, molecular biology, and biochemistry to
analyze the response of maize plants to insect pests. It will serve as excellent
training ground for student and postgraduate researchers interested in applying
biochemistry and molecular genetics to address practical problems in plant
biology. Both the P.I and co-P.I. are members of minorities and their labs are
heavily populated by under-represented groups. The project is relevant to long-
term improvement in U.S. agriculture in that it addresses mechanisms by which
maize defends itself from insect attack. The identification of genes involved in
insect resistance will aid breeders in developing naturally resistant crop
species. Understanding natural defense mechanisms in major crops will allow
alternative insect control strategies and reduce our dependence on potentially
toxic pesticides. Thus, the problem to be investigated is of scientific,
economic and environmental significance.&lt;br/&gt;