* 0235028
* CSF-1R Regulation of Type I PIP5K
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2005
* Nathan Davis, LSU Health Sciences Center -Shreveport
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 04/30/2005
* USD 165,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. J. Nathan Davis of Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center in Shreveport for the study of the beta isoform of
phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase (mPIP5K-Ibeta), an enzyme involved in
the metabolism of the membrane lipid, phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns). PtdIns
regulates diverse cellular processes including survival and proliferation,
receptor internalization, membrane trafficking, secretion, and remodeling of
cell structure. Such diversity of function is due to the addition of phosphate
groups at specific sites on the inositol ring by specific PtdIns kinases. Dr.
Davis's studies are designed to define the mechanisms by which hormones and
growth factors regulate the activity of mPIP5K-Ibeta. Previous studies have
shown that mPIP5K-Ibeta is required for the proper internalization of activated
growth factor receptors using both the colony stimulating factor-1 receptor
(CSF-1R) and the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). One aim of this
proposal is to define the molecular interactions between mPIP5K-Ibeta and these
growth factor receptors. A second series of experiments are designed to examine
the role of another membrane lipid, phosphatidic acid (PA), in the regulation of
mPIP5K-Ibeta. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies undertaken by Dr. Davis concern
the basic regulation of an enzyme that is central to cellular PtdIns metabolism.
All nucleated cells (animal, plant and fungal cells) express isoforms of the
type I phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase and PtdIns metabolism is
essential to these cells. The ubiquitous and essential nature of PtdIns
metabolism makes PtdIns synthesis a prime target for generation of cytocidal
agents through the design of chemicals that specifically inhibit or activate
certain classes of these enzymes. The targeting of fungal enzymes could produce
agents useful in food preservation, the agricultural industry to combat fungal
infections of plants and animals or in healthcare for antifungal chemotherapy.
Small molecule inhibitors of plant specific enzymes are potential herbicides
lacking toxicity to other organisms. However, detailed understanding of all the
enzymes involved must be obtained before these goals are realized. &lt;br/&gt;