* 0235358
* RUI:   Mechanisms of Deactivation in Sodium Channels
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2004,05/31/2004
* James Groome, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 05/31/2004
* USD 166,593.00

Action potentials transmit the information of excitable cells. Voltage-sensitive
sodium channels play a major role in cell excitability. Our understanding of the
means by which electrically excitable cells communicate information is enhanced
with a molecular approach to the function of voltage-gated ion channels. Sodium
channels provide the trigger for the upstroke of the action potential by opening
in response to membrane depolarization; open channels permit sodium influx
whereas closed or inactivated channels do not. Excitability is regulated by two
forms of channel deactivation, or closure; channel availability is dependent on
deactivation of inactivated channels, and sodium influx during the falling phase
of the action potential depends on deactivation of open channels. The Groome
laboratory is interested in determining the structural bases of deactivation and
its relation to muscle fiber excitability. In this proposal, the investigator
will test the hypothesis that positively charged residues in voltage-sensing S4
segments in domains III and IV of the hNaV1.4 channel interact with negatively
charged residues in the inactivation linker between those same two domains to
regulate deactivation gating. &lt;br/&gt;Site directed mutagenesis and patch
clamp electrophysiology as complementary approaches described in this proposal
will provide a diversity of research opportunities to undergraduate students
interested in molecular biology and neurobiology. The inter-dependent projects
described in this proposal will provide excellent preparation for junior and
senior students for graduate school or careers in the medical profession. The
experimental plan will draw heavily on the curricular strengths of the Biology
Department and will support recently developed courses in the Biology
curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;