* 0235692
* Demography and Dispersal:  Models for Biological Invasions
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Hal Caswell, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 01/31/2008
* USD 442,000.00

This project will develop and analyze models of biological invasions by
constructing a mathematical theory describing how populations respond upon
arrival in a new area. That theory will provide measures of population
performance that can complement those customarily used to measure population
viability (e.g., rates of increase and extinction probabilities). The theory
will incorporate both demography (i.e., the rates at which individuals move from
one life cycle stage to another) and dispersal (i.e., the propensity to move and
the directions and distances moved by individuals at each stage of the life
cycle).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Invasion is an important problem. First, invasive
pest species have enormous environmental and economic impact. The problem is not
only agricultural; pressures from invasive species are a major impact on
endangered endemic species around the world. Understanding the factors
determining the success and speed of invasions can provide important guidance
for management tactics. Second, a consequence of habitat alteration or climate
change will be the movement of species into areas where they previously could
not survive. This is another form of invasion, and understanding the factors
controlling it is an important part of understanding the effects of climate
change. On a positive note, when conservation efforts are successful, species
previously eliminated from an area expand their ranges at speeds governed by the
same invasion mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;