* 0235624
* CRB: The Role of Seed Limitation, Resource Competition, and Community Complementarity in Invasions and Restorations
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Omer Reichman, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 01/31/2007
* USD 364,197.00

This project would research the efficacy of one particular technique in the
restoration of native perennial California grasslands. Invasions by exotic
species are among the most serious threats to global biodiversity and
restoration is a critical tool to mitigate losses. In California, 9.2 million ha
of native perennial grassland has been invaded by exotic annual plants from the
Mediterranean region with a concomitant loss of native plant biodiversity, and
altered biogeochemical processes including increased nitrate leaching, altered
fire regimes, and decreased carbon storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will utilize experiments that focus on the underlying ecological processes,
particularly seed limitation and altered ecosystem processes, that may have
facilitated and maintained the conversion of native habitat. The generality of
the results will be determined by conducting experiments across a broad range of
latitudes and habitats within California. The results may have broad application
to many other settings where similar alteration of native habitats have
occurred, providing an important tool to promote restoration efforts.
Furthermore, the research sites employ up to 15 undergraduates students a year,
and are visited by hundreds of school children and adults, providing an
opportunity to educate people about important ecological changes and how to
ameliorate them.&lt;br/&gt;