* 0235463
* Mathematical Modeling of Neural Populations
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2003,10/31/2007
* Laurence Abbott, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 10/31/2007
* USD 517,897.00

When we reach toward a visual object, there is a precise and continuous flow
&lt;br/&gt;of information from the visual areas to the motor circuits that
control arm and &lt;br/&gt;hand movements. But a moment later, we may be engaged
in scratching an ear, with &lt;br/&gt;the same motor circuits now guided by
tactile sensation and uncoupled from &lt;br/&gt;vision. This research project
asks fundamental questions about how neural &lt;br/&gt;circuits perform such
complex switching functions to re-route the flow of &lt;br/&gt;information
during controlled and adaptive behaviors. A critical role in
&lt;br/&gt;functional switching may be played by gain modulation, in which a
type of &lt;br/&gt;"volume-control" mechanism at synapses adjusts neural
responses. An important &lt;br/&gt;novel component is a testable hypothesis of a
specific biophysical mechanism for &lt;br/&gt;gain modulation. Mathematical
models of neurons and neural populations will be &lt;br/&gt;constructed based on
detailed anatomical and physiological data, and the results &lt;br/&gt;arising
from these models will be compared with experiments involving visual,
&lt;br/&gt;discrimination, and motor tasks. Results of the proposed research
will shed &lt;br/&gt;light on some of the complex features of neural circuitry
that allow animals and &lt;br/&gt;people to control their actions and modify and
tune their behaviors to specific &lt;br/&gt;conditions. &lt;br/&gt; The
scientific goal is to relate these behavioral aspects of neural circuitry
&lt;br/&gt;to the underlying cellular and biophysical mechanisms that generate
them, using &lt;br/&gt;mathematical modeling to bridge the gaps between our
knowledge at the cellular &lt;br/&gt;and behavioral levels. In addition, the
proposed research will play a critical &lt;br/&gt;role integrating mathematics
and biology into the education and training of &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and
graduate students, through classroom work, honors and rotation
&lt;br/&gt;projects, and thesis research. This project is jointly supported
between &lt;br/&gt;Computational Neuroscience (BIO) and Applied Mathematics
(MPS). &lt;br/&gt;