* 0235332
* Analyses of Germ Cell Migration and Programmed Cell Death in Drosophila melanogaster
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Clark Coffman, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 03/31/2007
* USD 395,583.00

0235332&lt;br/&gt;Coffman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During animal development, many
cells must migrate to their ultimate destinations in order to function. The
regulatory mechanisms that control the elimination of cells that fail to migrate
appropriately, present a danger to the animal, or that are in excess are often
tightly linked to cell migration. However, the mechanisms that regulate how and
where a cell moves and whether it lives or dies are not well
understood.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Germ cell development in the fruit fly,
Drosophila melanogaster, is a genetically tractable system for studying cell
migration and programmed cell death. Successful screens from other labs have
identified zygotically required autosomal genes involved in germ cell migration.
However, those genes identified to date have enigmatic functions, and the
relationships between the various known components are not clear. Programmed
death of Drosophila germ cells was proposed over 50 years ago, but the cellular
and molecular mechanisms regulating this process are virtually unexplored. To
identify additional genes required for germ cell development, a genetic screen
of the X chromosome was performed. This proposal outlines studies of 2 genes
that, when mutated, severely disrupt germ cell migration and/or cell death. When
both the maternal and zygotic functions of scattershot (sctt) are disrupted, the
germ cells form normally and initiate migratory movements, but very few, if any,
reach the gonad. Germ cells ectopic to the gonad, which normally undergo cell
death, fail to die. A paternal wild-type copy of sctt can rescue the migration
defect, but not the cell death defect. The function of the outsiders (out) gene
is required zygotically. In out mutant embryos, a wild-type number of germ cells
migrate to the gonads, but many germ cells ectopic to the gonads fail to undergo
programmed cell death.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Contribute to the emerging germ cell migration and cell death models by
determining the molecular identity and characterizing the mRNA expression
patterns of sctt and out.&lt;br/&gt;2. Test the hypotheses that sctt and out
functions are required in the germ cells.&lt;br/&gt;3. Test specific hypotheses
about interactions between sctt and out with previously identified cell
migration or cell death components.&lt;br/&gt;4. Educate undergraduate and
graduate researchers from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;5. Contribute to
the understanding of the basic biological mechanisms regulating cell migration
and cell death. This will lead to new hypotheses concerning the etiology of
disease conditions including birth defects, autoimmune diseases, and
cancer.&lt;br/&gt;