* 0235217
* Studies of the Interrelationships Among Inbreeding, Resistance to Herbivores, and the Transmission of Pathogens in Wild Gourds
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2009
* James Winsor, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 03/31/2009
* USD 505,000.00

Many plants suffer from diseases spread by insect herbivores. The damage
experienced by plants depends both on their attractiveness to insects and on
their resistance to disease. These, in turn, are influenced by the plants'genes.
These studies investigate interactions among herbivory by beetles and aphids,
infection by bacterial and viral diseases, and the level of genetic inbreeding
in wild gourds, which are free-living forms of cultivated squashes. Field and
greenhouse experiments will be conducted in which inbreeding, herbivory, and
exposure to disease will be controlled. Serological analyses and transmission
bioassays will determine infection levels in the
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies both will shed light on basic
ecological and evolutionary issues such the consequences of inbreeding in
natural populations, the establishment and spread of diseases in natural
populations, and the dynamics of food chains, and will be relevant for the
management and conservation of species with small populations. Moreover, because
the same herbivores and pathogens that attack squashes, melons, and cucumbers
will be studied, the findings will be useful in the development of integrated
pest management programs for cucurbit crop species. Furthermore, knowledge of
the interactions among inbreeding, herbivores and pathogens is especially
relevant now that transgenic squash cultivars with resistance to insect
transmitted viruses are being cultivated. If these genes escape into wild gourd
populations, information on the effects of viral pathogens will assist in
predicting the impact of these transgenes in nature.&lt;br/&gt;