* 0235632
* Nanoscale Switching Phenomena and Size Effects in Ferroelectric Thin Films Studied by Scanning Force Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Angus Kingon, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2007
* USD 610,928.00

This project address fundamental materials science issues associated with
ferroelectric thin films and their potential application as nonvolatile
memories. The approach is to use, and further de-velop, scanning force
microscopy (SFM) to investigate structure/property relationships on the micro-
and nanoscale levels. Salient areas for investigation include: reconstruction of
the 3-D domain structure of ferroelectric films and capacitors at the sub-grain
level; characterization of capacitor domain structures before and after pulse
switching to evaluate the role of pulse charac-teristics and microstructural
features such as film composition, thickness, grain size and orienta-tion, and
defects, on switching and domain stability. It is expected that the combination
of fast pulse switching with domain imaging will allow testing of the
applicability of quantitative switching models. The capability to characterize
domain structure, domain motion and switching at the nanoscale will allow
further insight and understanding of scaling and intrinsic variability issues.
The proposed research links expertise in nanoscale characterization of
ferroelectric mate-rials by SFM (Gruverman) with strength in synthesis of
functional ferroelectric films at NCSU (Kingon). The experimental research in
combination with recently refined phenomenological theory for ferroelectric
films will be undertaken in collaboration with S. Streiffer of Argonne Na-tional
Laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;%%% The project addresses fundamental research issues in
areas of ceramics and electronic ma-terials science having technological
relevance. An important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on
education, and the integration of research and education. The project provides
clas-sic materials science research for graduate student training, linking
processing, local (nanoscale) characterization, device properties, and theory.
Additionally, demonstrator experiments, based on SPM research will be developed
and used to attract future students, including under-represented minorities,
into materials science. The research program provides excellent opportunities
for hands-on experience in the use of sophisticated scientific equipment. The
broad resources, and collaborative aspects, provide special opportunities for
education and training of graduate and undergraduate students involved in
interdisciplinary forefront research. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;