* 0235645
* The role of starch in nectar production
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Robert Thornburg, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2006
* USD 496,000.00

Many plants produce a rich floral nectar to entice animals to their flowers.
This attraction of bats, birds, or insects benefits the plants by increasing
cross-pollination between different individuals and by improving seed
production. The nectar in flowers is produced by a specialized floral organ
termed the nectary gland. The nectaries of ornamental tobacco are simple in
structure and of extremely large size. Further, ornamental tobacco produces
hundreds of flowers per plant, so isolation of nectary tissues for gene cloning
and biochemical analyses is greatly facilitated. Thus, ornamental tobacco is the
ideal system to study nectary development and function. Understanding the
mechanisms of nectary function in tobacco will facilitate interpretation of
nectary function in other plant species that are more difficult to study because
of small nectary size and multiplicity of nectary types. This project will
utilize ornamental tobacco to understand the regulation of nectar production,
which is a critical element of flower function and angiosperm
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it is clear that nectar is rich in sugars,
the metabolic source of the sugars in nectar remains unknown. This project
hypothesizes that starch deposited in the nectary gland during development is
degraded at floral maturity to produce sugars that flow into nectar. The first
goal of the project is to identify specific structural changes in nectary starch
that occur during the transition from developing to secreting nectaries. This
will provide insight into the biochemical processes required for nectary starch
formation and usage. The second goal is to quantify the flow of transported
sugars both into starch and directly into nectar. This will determine whether
starch is the sole source of nectar sugars. Third, this project will identify
starch metabolic genes that are expressed at various stages in the nectary gland
and will finally identify proteins that are actively involved in starch
biosynthesis and catabolism in nectaries. Identification of these proteins and
their genes will provide potential targets for manipulation to improve
pollinator attraction. Together, the results of this project will permit full
evaluation of the role that starch plays in nectar secretion, and provide
insight into the regulatory mechanisms that underlie starch deposition and
catabolism during nectary development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because nectar
sugars are one of the most important factors that attract insect pollinators to
flowers and because increased pollinator visitation results in greater
pollination and higher seed yields, understanding the production of sugars in
nectar will provide new targets for genetic manipulation to increase the
agricultural yield of many fruits, nuts, berries, vegetables, forages, fiber and
oilseed crops as well as flowers. Such increases in food, fiber, and floral
production will be required in the coming decades as the world's population
approaches 10 billion. Furthermore, these studies will determine how nectary
starch metabolism is co-regulated with flower development to allow optimum
timing and flux of carbohydrate into nectar, a process of enormous adaptive
significance to many flowering plant species.&lt;br/&gt;