* 0235464
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Culture Change in the 18th Century Maya Missions of Peten, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2003
* David Webster, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2003
* USD 11,861.00

Under the direction of Dr. David Webster, MA Matthew Rockmore will obtain data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will undertake archaeological excavations at
the dual sites of San Jeronimo, located 2 kilometers apart on the shores of Lake
Peten-Itza in northern Guatemala. The sites constitute a small mission
settlement from the colonial period, initially occupied in 1703 AD, resettled
around 1734 and abandoned near the end of the 18th century. The colonial period
has been understudied in lowland Guatemala and this represents the first attempt
at mission archaeology in the region. These sites are particularly significant
because the resettlement allows for chronological control of the rate and
pattern of social changes in the colonial setting. Where prior studies of Maya
missions in Mexico and Belize have focused on religious conversion and an
earlier time period (the 16th century), this research attempts to examine the
effects of conquest and incorporation into the colonial system on the household
practices of the Maya. The excavation of households and their surrounding
environs in a temporally controlled setting will allow the identification of
changes in the economic structure of the region, as well as changes in
settlement plan, demographic trends, religious practice, and socio-political
organization.&lt;br/&gt;The combination of archaeological and ethnohistoric data
is particularly informative with regards to changes in economic systems, ranging
from alterations in patterns of long-distance exchange to the adoption of Old
World domesticates. One goal is to assess the rate at which changes occur in the
settlement. The area was considered marginal by the Spanish, and was at the
fringes of the Spanish supply system. The lack of direct oversight and limited
availability of imported goods probably slowed changes of all sorts and provided
the Maya greater latitude in negotiating the institution of changes. Material
changes in economic systems at the household level are likely to be the most
obvious and easiest to interpret, but will be accompanied by data concerning the
correlates of religious and political changes. Evidence at the level of
individual households can also be used to cautiously assess changes at higher
levels of social organization.&lt;br/&gt;The observed patterns will be used to
assess the explanatory power of several theoretical models of culture change in
colonial settings. Existing models of indigenous resistance to colonial
domination will be contrasted with practice-based models suggesting less
intentional modes of change. Culture change in colonial settings is typically
highly complex, with changes negotiated between factions (including ones within
larger indigenous and colonial groups), albeit across a distinct power
differential.&lt;br/&gt;This research is enabled by earlier studies of the
preceding Late Postclassic period and is informed by several existing
ethnohistoric studies of the area and through archaeological work at similar
sites in Mexico and Belize. This research is important in part because it fills
a gap in our archaeological knowledge of the region, but the primary
significance is the exploration of how culture change is instituted within
colonial contexts and how it developed over the space of a
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;