* 0235575
* Neuronal Differentiation in the PNS vs. CNS: Role of Nel
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Frances Lefcort, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 03/31/2007
* USD 342,783.00

&lt;br/&gt; For the nervous system to function, neurons must establish their
"correct" identities, meaning, they must express an appropriate set of genes in
order to establish effective synaptic connections with their target(s). The
nervous system is divided up into two parts: neurons in the brain and spinal
cord comprise the central nervous system (CNS) while neurons that reside outside
of the CNS comprise the peripheral nervous system (PNS). The neurons of the PNS
include all the sensory neurons that are activated by touch, pressure, pain and
temperature stimulations on the body. They must transmit their information into
the CNS in order for the organism to make an appropriate response to the
particular stimulus: e.g. when one touches a hot surface, one pulls one 's
finger away. In order for an organism to respond effectively to one's
environment, each neuron in this circuit must function correctly meaning, each
neuron must have established their designated identity. Thus the goal is to
identify the sets of genes that distinct neuronal cell types must express in
order for that particular neuron to establish its correct identity.
&lt;br/&gt;Considering the panoply of neuronal subtypes that exist within the
CNS and PNS, our understanding of the complete sets of genes that drive these
distinct patterns of cellular differentiation is sparse. The goal of our
proposal is twofold: one, to determine the function of one gene, NEL in both a
PNS tissue and a CNS tissue, in order to compare the development of neurons in
these two distinct regions of the nervous system, and two, to conduct a global
comparison of genes expressed during the process of neurogenesis and
differentiation within the CNS and PNS. The data yielded from these experiments
will significantly enhance our understanding of the molecular and cellular
mechanisms that drive the establishment of the diverse spectrum of neurons
within the nervous system. &lt;br/&gt;