* 0235773
* Phenotype Matching and Trophic Complexity in the wild Parsnip-parsnip Webworm Interaction
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2006
* May Berenbaum, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 01/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Coevolution is the process by which interacting organisms act reciprocally as
selective agents on one another. Coevolutionary responses between the parsnip
webworm and its wild parsnip hostplant are dramatically manifested in the
chemistry of the two species. Parsnips defend themselves by producing an array
of toxins called furanocoumarins; webworms disarm these toxins with
detoxification enzymes called cytochrome P450s. Webworms and parsnips were, like
many other invasive weeds and insect pests, introduced from Europe; throughout
their range in the midwestern U.S., the defense profile of the plants matches
the detoxification profile of the insect, suggesting intense reciprocal
responses. This chemical matching may be an artifact of introduction; in Europe,
this two-species interaction is embedded in a more complex community, with
predators, parasites, and alternate hostplants that could reduce the intensity
of the interaction. This project is aimed at comparing the dynamics of
coevolutionary responses in these two introduced species, both in Europe, where
the interaction originally evolved, and in the U.S., where these species have
been interacting in a novel environment. The effects of increasing community
complexity and length of association on the frequency of chemical matching will
be determined, as will the consequences of mismatching for both the herbivore
and the hostplant.