* 0235176
* Molecular Basis of Self-Incompatibility in Petunia
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Teh-hui Kao, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jacqueline Banks
* 12/31/2006
* USD 432,000.00

0235176&lt;br/&gt;Kao &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most flowering plant species produce
bisexual flowers with both male and female reproductive organs located in close
proximity. A number of reproductive strategies have been adopted during the
course of evolution to allow flowering plants to prevent inbreeding and promote
out-crosses. One strategy is self-incompatibility (SI), which allows pistils of
flowering plants to reject self-pollen and accept non-self pollen. Three
families of flowering plants, Solanaceae, Rosaceae and Scrophulariaceae, all use
an RNase-based SI mechanism. Here, the pistil S-RNase gene and the yet
unidentified pollen S-gene located at a genetic locus, the S-locus, control the
outcome of pollination. In any given species, there are many different
S-haplotypes (i.e., variants) of the S-locus, with each S-haplotype carrying a
specific allele of the S-RNase gene and the pollen S-gene. During pollen tube
growth in a pistil, if the S-haplotype carried by the pollen tube matches one of
the two S-haplotypes carried by the pistil, the growth will be inhibited and
thus the pollen tube cannot deliver the sperm cell to the ovary for
fertilization. It is thought that S-RNases produced in the pistil are taken up
by pollen tubes, and that the RNase activity of S-RNases is responsible for
growth inhibition of pollen tubes. Although all S-RNases can enter a pollen
tube, only the self S-RNase (the S-RNase of the same S-haplotype as the pollen
tube) is able to function inside the pollen tube. This raises a question as to
how S-haplotype specific inhibition can be achieved. To address this question,
the pollen S-gene must be identified. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI's group has
been using Petunia inflata, a wild relative of garden petunia, as a model to
study S-RNase based SI, and has recently identified a very likely candidate,
named PiSLF, for the pollen S-gene. It is located near the S-RNase gene,
expressed in pollen, and shows allelic sequence differences, all of which are
properties expected of the pollen S-gene. Moreover, a similar gene has been
found to be located near the S-RNase gene of Antirrhinum hispanicum, a species
in the Scrophulariaceae. PiSLF will be a major focus of this project. In vivo
approaches will be used to confirm whether PiSLF is indeed the pollen S-gene.
Most F-box proteins are components of SCF complexes that are involved in
ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation. Thus, several in vitro approaches will
be used to examine whether PiSLF mediates specific degradation of non-self
S-RNases in the pollen tube. Another focus of the project will be on the
completion of the cloning of a contiguous chromosome region (contig) of the
S-locus. This contig will be used for identifying other S-locus linked genes
and, in the event that PiSLF is found not to be the pollen S-gene, for
identifying additional candidates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accomplishment of this
project will not only significantly advance understanding of the RNase-based
self/non-self recognition mechanism, but also contribute to the understanding of
selective protein degradation mediated by F-box proteins. The latter has
recently emerged as an important regulatory mechanism for a variety of cellular
and developmental processes in diverse organisms. On the practical side, if
PiSLF is confirmed to be the pollen S-gene, one can explore the possibility of
restoring the SI trait to self-compatible cultivated species by transferring the
S-RNase gene and the PiSLF gene to facilitate hybrid seed production. If
successful, this will have a very important agronomic impact. In the United
States, the majority of crops are grown from hybrid seed, because such plants
have greater vigor and produce higher yield than plants grown from seed obtained
from self-pollination. Currently, hybrid seed production requires manual or
mechanical removal of anthers from the plants serving as female parent to
prevent self-fertilization. This is a very labor-intensive, costly, and
inefficient process. Thus, there is a pressing need for more economically
advantageous methods for hybrid seed production. &lt;br/&gt;