* 0235214
* Undergraduate Engineering Education Enhancement via Parallel Participation in the Visual &amp; Performing Arts
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Charles Spielberger, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2006
* USD 343,904.00

This project develop undergraduate engineering pathways which include the visual
and performing arts. For students with definite talents in both engineering and
the visual &amp; performing arts (V&amp;PAs), an environment will be created
that is supportive of the development of both areas will definitely enhance the
educational process and student academic performance of the engineering
component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, engineering students will benefit
from participation in the V&amp;PAs terms of two areas: 1) development of
creativity-related skills (beyond that typically achieved by traditional
engineering students); and 2) stress management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perception
of engineering as a possible academic major will be enhanced by the offering of
such a dual program, leading to additional engineering student
recruitment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A web site and flyer will be created that
contains: a)"Why students should care about the V&amp;PAs; b) opportunities for
engineering students in the V&amp;PAs; and 3) examples of student it success
stories". The impact of these on middle and high school students and teachers
will be explored. The potential impact of such a program on middle and high
school students and teachers attitudes towards engineering will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate Certificates will be created in
the following V&amp;PA areas: dance, theater, music, and
art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;