* 0235915
* RUI: Characterization of Circadian Activity of the Spiny Mouse, Acomys Cahirinus
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Edward Weber, Rider University
* Standard Grant
* John S. de Belle
* 07/31/2007
* USD 276,045.00

Edward Todd Weber&lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal 0235915&lt;br/&gt;"Characterization of
circadian activity of the spiny mouse, Acomys
cahirinus."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Circadian, or "daily", rhythms in physiology
and behavior are an intrinsic property of all animals. In mammals, these rhythms
are generated by a specific site in the brain, and influence patterns of
activity, sleep and wakefulness, eating, drinking, body temperature, hormone
secretion, blood chemistry, etc. Some of the basic properties of this system
have been elucidated using traditional laboratory rodents and other animals, but
there is much to be learned regarding how the system is influenced by the
environment in which the animal lives, and in particular, what happens to the
animal when the system is disrupted. This proposal will examine the circadian
system of the spiny mouse, Acomys cahirinus, a rare rodent with many
characteristics that make it unique in comparison to other rodents, such as its
high degree of maturity at birth, enhanced water regulatory mechanisms, extended
social structure, and potentially unique circadian characteristics. These
studies will be accomplished by monitoring the behavioral activity patterns of
mice over extended periods of time and under varied environmental conditions,
and through analysis of the neurochemical processes and structural development
associated with the "clock" regions of the brain. These comparative studies will
extend our understanding of how the circadian system works in mammals, and are
expected to evolve into a special model system for addressing questions related
to physiology, behavior and development. These comparative studies will be
conducted primarily by undergraduate students who will gain valuable research
experience using cutting edge technology at an RUI-eligible institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;