* 0235686
* RUI: Structure and Function in Enzymes Adapted to Extreme Cold
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Peter Fields, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 03/31/2007
* USD 206,303.00

Enzymes exposed to novel thermal environments undergo selection to maintain
functional parameters, such as catalytic rate and substrate affinity, at
physiologically appropriate levels. The amount of structural modification
necessary to produce these compensatory functional changes is unclear, but it
has been hypothesized that temperature adaptation in enzymes takes place via
changes in flexibility in or near structures that move during catalysis. The
objective of the research is to test this hypothesis, focusing on the following
questions: As the thermal environment changes, how much structural modification
is necessary to maintain optimal enzyme function? Do orthologous enzymes from
different species adapted to the same thermal environment show similar changes
in catalytic function, and in underlying structure? Do unrelated enzymes show
analogous changes in structure in response to temperature change - specifically,
do temperature-adaptive changes occur in areas associated with movement during
catalysis? To answer these questions, three glycolytic enzymes will be examined
- muscle-type lactate dehydrogenase, pyruvate kinase and aldolase - from two
unrelated groups of marine fishes adapted to extreme cold - the Antarctic
notothenioids and the Arctic and Polar cods. The project will be divided into
four segments: First, for each ortholog, the kinetic parameters kcat (catalytic
rate) and Km (substrate affinity) will be determined across a range of
temperatures. Second, the primary structure of each enzyme will be deduced from
complementary DNA sequences. Third, computer models of the three-dimensional
structures of each of the polar orthologs will be created, in order to determine
which amino acid substitutions shared by the polar enzyme orthologs are most
likely to affect enzyme function in a temperature-adaptive manner. Fourth,
representative polar orthologs will be modified through site-directed
mutagenesis to confirm the role of those residues important in cold adaptation.
Km and kcat values of the mutants will be determined to test the hypothesis that
temperature-adaptive structural changes occur in areas undergoing catalytically
important conformational changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organisms adapt to long-
term changes in temperature at a variety of levels, from alterations in body
shape and size to modifications in the functioning of biochemical pathways. This
project is designed to determine how changes in the structure of enzymes -
proteins that act as catalysts in biochemical processes - lead to optimal enzyme
function at extremely cold temperatures. Common metabolic enzymes from Antarctic
and Arctic fishes will be compared to discover whether the same types of
functional adaptation have occurred in these unrelated species. An important
goal of this research is to find those amino acid substitutions (changes in the
basic building blocks of the proteins) responsible for cold adaptation, and to
determine whether similar substitutions have occurred in the enzymes of the
different fish species. The research will help clarify the rate and extent of
molecular evolution as organisms adapt to novel environments.&lt;br/&gt;