* 0235695
* RUI:  Fragmentation of Terrestrial Salamander Populations by Forest Roads: Ecological and Genetic Effects
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Paul Cabe, Washington and Lee University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2006
* USD 379,454.00

Forest habitats are increasingly fragmented by road building. However, little is
known about the effects of roads on animal populations in adjacent forests.
Roads may affect populations by contributing to abiotic edge effects, by causing
direct mortality, or by reducing rates of dispersal. This study will use two
species of terrestrial salamander (Plethodon cinereus and P. glutinosus) to
examine how fragmentation by roads can affect animal populations. Investigators
will use detailed field surveys, field experiments and genetic analysis to
answer the following questions: 1) How do the effects of roads on salamander
densities vary among species, among sites, and among years? 2) What mechanisms
are responsible for the effects of roads on salamander densities? 3) How do
different types of roads affect salamander dispersal ability?, and 4) How do
different types of roads affect patterns of gene flow?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has general implications for the
understanding the persistence of animal populations in fragmented habitats and
has specific applications to the conservation biology of amphibians. Terrestrial
salamanders are an important component of temperate forest ecosystems and have
been proposed as useful indicators of forest health. Although terrestrial
salamanders do not appear to have declined as severely aquatic-breeding
amphibians, habitat fragmentation may threaten their long-term persistence. As
an RUI project, this study also provides numerous research training
opportunities for undergraduate students in genetics, ecology, and conservation
biology. Students will participate in all aspects of the project, from study
design to data collection to presentation of results. &lt;br/&gt;