* 0235238
* Collaborative Research: Physical Limnology for the Parasite Ecologist
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Sally MacIntyre, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/2007
* USD 299,064.00

How infectious diseases influence population dynamics and community interactions
is an understudied aspect of aquatic ecology. This work focuses on the
ecological interaction between a common microparasitic fungus and its Daphnia
host species, and the consequences to coexisting zooplankton and their
phytoplankton prey. The PIs are merging three disciplines (community ecology,
physical limnology and epidemiological modeling) to explain spatial and temporal
patterns of host-parasite dynamics. Comparative and manipulative experiments are
being conducted in parallel with modeling to couple physical mixing with host-
parasite population dynamics in a broad set of lakes. The coupling of ecological
and physical-mixing processes is a generally important goal since most aquatic
microparasites, unlike their animal hosts, do not swim. Hence, sinking and
resuspension of parasite spores from the sediment may limit horizontal
transmission and spread of diseases in lakes and oceans. This work is motivated
by the seasonal timing of disease outbreaks in natural populations of Daphnia
and the substantial variability in the severity of epidemics among lakes
differing in morphometry and potential for wind mixing. The PIs are examining
both the temporal dynamics of host-parasite interactions within single lakes and
broader scale physical-biological processes that govern host-parasite outcome
among multiple lakes. Laboratory and field studies are being used to
parameterize a standard host-parasite model and derive predictions, especially
of threshold effects, and tested in whole water-column manipulative experiments.

Measurements of lake thermal structure, bottom shear stresses and turbulent
velocity scales, in conjunction with changes in spore concentration, are
enabling model development to predict spore suspension and resuspension from
lake sediments. Output from the physical mixing model are coupled to the model
to predict the likelihood of epidemic outbreaks. Multi-generational dynamics of
host and parasite are being explored in large enclosures to examine the indirect
effects of infection within one Daphnia population on competitive interactions
with congeners, and their phytoplankton prey. Broader impacts: Using this
multiple-lake, Daphnia-parasite system, this collaborative research is
addressing the general phenomenon of natural variation in disease prevalence and
its impact on the structure of food webs. This research brings together junior
and senior faculty with combined expertise in population and community ecology,
physical limnology and modeling. Second, the PIs are a poorly studied area of
aquatic ecology, the role of pathogens. Disease ecology is an emerging area of
concern, but despite substantial evidence for pathogens as important components
of food web, freshwater ecologists have largely ignored them. Third, the study
of disease ecology at multiple temporal and spatial scales is being approached
with a combination of descriptive, comparative and manipulative experiments with
modeling. The project emphasizes training of undergraduates, graduates and a
postdoc at the interface of physical limnology, population modeling, and
community ecology. Finally, the work on physical limnology and parasitism is
enhancing the knowledge base for the lakes around KBS (a field station) and
directly benefit the research programs of aquatic ecologists from multiple
institutions who conduct their work in these systems. It is contributing to the
K-12 teacher partnership project at KBS and to other outreach activities.