* 0235011
* Regulation of intestinal fructose transport in neonatal rats
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Ronaldo Ferraris, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 03/31/2007
* USD 465,066.00

This study will examine how intestinal nutrient transport systems adapt to
marked changes in nutrient types and concentrations occurring at birth and at
weaning. At birth, the small intestine abruptly acquires a new function: to
absorb nutrients from milk. During weaning, the intestine has to manufacture
different types or different numbers of transporters. How do intestinal cells
make, and 'know' when to make, these transporters? The long-term objective of
this project is to determine the mechanisms regulating intestinal nutrient
transport during development. The intestinal fructose transporter GLUT5 is
normally not made until after completion of weaning. However, precocious
introduction of its substrate, dietary fructose, dramatically induces the early
appearance of this transporter. This project will determine the genes that
change their expression when fructose stimulates GLUT5 during weaning. It will
then identify which of these factors mediate the effect of dietary fructose by
using cell-permeable, pharmacological agents that stimulate or inhibit their
action. If these agents alter the effect of fructose on GLUT5, then their target
proteins likely play important roles in transducing the dietary signal to the
GLUT5 gene. The location of these factors in the intestine will be determined by
dye-containing probes that specifically recognize them. Thus, the results of
this study will provide important new information to understand the regulation
of nutrient transporters during development. In addition, by examining nutrient-
responsive regulatory mechanisms controlling gut development, this project can
determine the potential of reprogramming normal developmental patterns of
absorption in order to allow the intestine to process nutrients at an earlier
stage of development. This knowledge would increase our understanding of
mechanisms that control intestinal growth and maturation in premature infants.
Fructose is a very common ingredient in American diets, and these studies have
major nutritional significance. Further, this project will also support the
training and education of postdoctoral fellows and students.