* 0235465
* First Farmers in Southeast Europe: Isotopic Evidence for Human Migration
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* T. Douglas Price, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2004
* USD 94,851.00

This archaeological project involves the isotopic investigation of prehistoric
human skeletal remains from the Mesolithic and Early Neolithic sites in the Iron
Gates of the Danube River in southeastern Europe, dating to between 9000 and
6000 B.C. The focus of the study concerns how the initial transition to
prehistoric agriculture took place. Dr Price and colleagues hope to determine if
foreign farming groups moved into this region or if local hunter-gatherers
themselves adopted the practice of agriculture.

Strontium and lead isotopes in prehistoric human tooth enamel will be measured
to determine if individuals buried at these sites were local or foreign. These
ratios are tracers of the geology of the areas where these individuals were
born. Strontium and lead are incorporated into bone and enamel through the food
chain as a substitute for calcium in bone and tooth enamel. Bone is continually
remodeled during the life of an individual, so the chemical composition of the
bone reflects the last years of life. The enamel in teeth, on the other hand,
forms during infancy and early childhood and undergoes almost no subsequent
change. Because strontium and lead isotope ratios vary among geological
substrates, isotope ratios in teeth that do not match those of the local geology
indicate immigrants to an area.

The Iron Gates region, between Serbia and Romania, has been chosen for this
research for several reasons. The area has a rich archaeological record for this
period and samples will be obtained from burials at the sites of Lepenski Vir,
Padina, Vlasac, Hajducka Vodenica, Ajmana, Velesnica, and Kula in Serbia, and
Schela Cladovei in Romania. More than 500 human burials have been collected in
these excavations, comprising the best skeletal archive for this period in all
of Europe. Where temporal placement of a burial is uncertain, radiocarbon dates
will be obtained directly from the skeleton.

Intellectual Merit. This research project provides an opportunity to resolve
major archaeological questions about the transition from hunting to farming and
about how agriculture spread in prehistoric Europe. Specifically, we have a
chance to determine if farmers moved into new areas or if local hunter-gatherers
became farmers. This information will have direct implications for questions
regarding the expansion of agriculture and cultural change in other parts of the
world. The study will also document the utility of isotopic methods for the
investigation of human migration.

Broader Impact. The study will document the application of new scientific
methods to old archaeological questions and involve several young scholars in
the process. The project is a cooperative one among US, Serbian, and Romanian
institutes. Graduate and undergraduate students, both male and female, will be
involved in the laboratory processing of materials and exposure to the research
process. The results should be of interest to a wide range of archaeologists
throughout the world.