* 0235360
* Upgrade of a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer for Research on Solid and Molten Materials in the Earth and Materials Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2005
* Jonathan Stebbins, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2005
* USD 218,534.00

EAR-0235360&lt;br/&gt;Stebbins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy is an analytical tool that provides unique information on
atomic-scale structure and dynamics for solid and molten materials of wide
importance in the earth and materials sciences. This award funds an upgrade of
an instrument that has been used for 15 years to carry out a wide range of
pioneering studies in this field, that had aged to the point of being almost
non-repairable. The research to be continued with this instrument (also funded
by NSF) emphasizes the intriguing and complex problems of disordered crystalline
and glassy solids, and their glass-forming liquid precursors. NMR studies of
such materials have contributed greatly to the fundamental understanding of the
macroscopic properties that are needed to model and predict their behavior in
large-scale processes in nature and in technology. For example, the P.I.'s group
is quantifying the proportions of different types of oxygen linkages between
network cations in geological aluminosilicate glasses and in technological
borosilicate glasses, and is using these data to calculate effects of this
disorder on the energetics of the melts, to predict changes with temperature,
and to relate the resulting thermodynamic properties to free energy, phase
equilibria, and viscous flow. Other ongoing projects include studying the role
of elements such as fluorine and hydrogen in high-tech optical glasses, the
structure of zeolite minerals important in areas as diverse as metamorphic
rocks, radioactive waste sequestration, and catalysis in the oil industry, and
new work on natural biological materials and organic environmental
contaminants.&lt;br/&gt;***