* 0235369
* Theory, Statistics, and Software for the Additive Partitioning of Species Diversity Across Multiple Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Thomas Crist, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2006
* USD 104,978.00

This study will develop the theoretical basis, the statistical methods, and the
computer software needed to partition biodiversity across habitats, landscapes
and regions. As human activities continue to influence biodiversity, there is a
need to assess how species diversity differs among natural and human-altered
habitats, landscapes, and regions. The proposed research will develop older
species diversity concepts in novel ways by providing a new analytical and
statistical framework for understanding patterns of species diversity across
multiple scales. A comprehensive software program (PARTITION) will be developed
to calculate species diversity partitions from field data. Ecological patterns
in species diversity and in species traits will next be used to suggest
explanations for, and to predict, different kinds of diversity partitions.
Finally, several data sets will be analyzed using these methods to demonstrate
the usefulness of diversity partitioning to theoretical and applied ecological
problems. There are several broader impacts of this research. It will provide a
much needed software package to ecologists, conservation biologists and research
managers who make daily decisions to conserve species diversity. From a
theoretical perspective, it will enhance our basic understanding of species
diversity. The study will train students in the theory and the measurement of
species diversity, along with statistical analyses and management of diversity
databases. This training will advance undergraduate teaching at the interface of
theoretical and applied ecology. Finally, the results from this study will
provide a standard measure of how diversity is partitioned across landscapes, to
prevent loss of biodiversity in the face of global environmental change.