* 0235218
* Transition Metal-Catalyzed Nitrogenation of Hydrocarbons
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Kenneth Nicholas, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 03/31/2007
* USD 330,017.00

The importance of amines and N-heterocycles, both as synthetic intermediates and
as end-products, makes the genesis of new, efficient and selective C-N bond-
forming reactions an important objective. Transition metal-mediated reactions
which selectively produce new C-C, C-O and C-H bonds from C-C unsaturation have
dramatically increased the power of organic synthesis, but the potential of
transition metals to facilitate corresponding C-N bond formation (nitrogenation)
is just beginning to be realized. This project responds to a dual need: 1) for
new selective methods for the synthesis of organonitrogen compounds and 2) for
new understanding of the reactivity of organonitrogen fragments coordinated to
metal centers. Two recently discovered reactions are targeted for detailed study
during the project period: 1) organometal-catalyzed allylic aminations by
nitroorganics; and 2) reductive annulation of nitro- and nitrosoarenes with
alkynes to produce indoles and other heterocycles. Mechanistic analysis will
elucidate the nature of the active aminating species involved, while synthetic
studies will provide access to a number of important nitrogen-containing
products, including potential precursors for the indole
alkaloids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous organic compounds of biological or
medicinal importance contain nitrogen atoms. The development of efficient,
selective, and catalytic methods for the introduction of nitrogen into organic
molecules remains a significant research objective. Professor Kenneth M.
Nicholas, of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of
Oklahoma (Norman Campus), is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program for his studies of the nitrogenation of hydrocarbons.
Professor Nicholas has discovered a series of unusual metal-catalyzed reactions,
each of which provides a novel and direct route to valuable nitrogen-containing
organic products. The metal-mediated processes leading to these compounds
proceed from readily available starting materials and are expected to be highly
selective, versatile, and complementary or superior to existing methods. New
efficient, economical, and environmentally-friendly nitrogenation processes for
the chemical and pharmaceutical industries also could result. This project also
will serve as an effective vehicle for the education and technical training of
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students in the fundamentally and
technologically critical areas of chemical synthesis and catalysis.