* 0235531
* Conference: 2003 Gordon Research Conference on  RNA Editing to be held January 19-24, 2003 in Ventura California
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Carlyle Storm, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 12/31/2003
* USD 7,500.00

This project provides partial funding for the 2003 Gordon Research Conference on
RNA Editing, to be held January 19-24 at the Holiday Inn in Ventura, California.
This meeting has occurred in alternate years since 1997 and is the only existing
meeting devoted exclusively to the field of RNA editing. The meeting serves as
the venue where researchers present important and exciting breakthroughs in the
field, and recent meetings have featured reports ranging from the development of
the first in vitro systems for studying RNA editing in plant organelles, to the
first demonstration that RNA editing is crucial for proper neuronal function in
mice, flies, and worms. Because the meeting is the only regularly scheduled
meeting in the field, it is the primary means by which young researchers are
exposed to other scientists in the field. Typically, about 40%of the attendees
at the RNA Editing GRC are postdoctoral trainees and graduate students. As is
typical of Gordon Research Conferences, the 2003 RNA Editing meeting will be
conducted in a relaxed setting that fosters informal discussion between
participants. Speakers will be selected based on the significance and quality of
their recent scientific contributions, as well as with the goal of achieving
diversity among age, gender, and ethnicity. All attendees will be invited to
present a poster and, funds permitting, travel awards will be made to select
graduate students and postdoctoral applicants.