* 0235727
* Interactions of Carbon Cycling, Nitrogen Cycling, and Nitrogen (N) Stable Isotopes in Plants as Affected by Mycorrhizal Fungi, N Availabilty and N Form
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Erik Hobbie, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 02/28/2007
* USD 450,000.00

ABSTRACT: Nitrogen (N) availability often limits plant growth in forestry and
agriculture, while excess N in atmospheric deposition increasingly harms forests
throughout the US. Mycorrhizal fungi are key plant symbionts and directly
influence plant growth and N cycling through the uptake, retention, and transfer
of soil-derived N. At present, mycorrhizal symbioses are poorly understood.
Consequently, they are largely absent from conceptual pictures of forest
functioning and ecosystem models used to predict forest growth and stress
responses. Foliar 15N:14N ratios appear useful markers of carbon and N
allocation in the symbiosis, but we have limited understanding of biochemical
mechanisms regulating 15N:14N distributions. &lt;br/&gt;We will measure complete
carbon and N isotope budgets in mycorrhizal Pinus sylvestris seedlings supplied
with different N forms, at different N availabilities, and with different fungal
symbionts. Photosynthesis, belowground respiration, and aboveground respiration
will also be quantified. We will also investigate the underlying biochemical
mechanisms causing 15N:14N patterns using data from mass spectrometry and
nuclear magnetic resonance measurements. &lt;br/&gt;From these experiments in
culture, we will be poised to (1) measure carbon allocation to mycorrhizal fungi
in ecosystems under different environmental conditions, (2) use foliar 15N:14N
measurements to indicate allocation to mycorrhizal fungi, and (3) explicitly
incorporate mycorrhizal fungi into ecosystem-level models. &lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS: This work will improve understanding of what regulates forest
productivity and the functioning of mycorrhizal symbioses under anthropogenic N
deposition. There will be at least 3 graduate students trained on this
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;