* 0235466
* 2003 Temperature Stress in Plants Gordon Conference, Janury 26 - 30, 2003, Oxnard, California
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Govind Sharma, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Steve R. Rodermel
* 12/31/2003
* USD 15,000.00

A long standing fundamental question is how plants perceive and respond to
changes in their environment. In addition to sensing and signaling,
understanding of the regulatory genes is advancing rapidly. Very important has
been the identification and characterization of many of the 1,500 of these genes
that control plant responses to cold. Many other genes are also important in
plant stress adaptation and they are being characterized at a rapid rate.
Studies of the heat shock response have uncovered unexpected basic cell
functions and united the study of protein folding with the function of several
stress proteins. Biophysical aspects of temperature stress are now better
understood. A number of proteins protect plants from low temperatures and
freezing damage. In short, the field of temperature stress in plants is very
rich with opportunities for agriculture and forestry. Most critical at this time
is bringing together scientists at molecular, cell, whole organism, and field
levels. It will be a diverse gathering and include a union between diverse
academic institutions within the USA and internationally including a union of
academic and industry scientists. Involvement of industry is a founding
principal of the Gordon Research Conferences. The timing of the 2003 Gordon
Conference on Temperature Stress in Plants could not be better!