* 0235401
* The Neuroendocrine Stress Axis in Amphibian Development and Physiology
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Robert Denver, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* J. Steven de Belle
* 03/31/2008
* USD 603,915.00

Animals make critical 'decisions' at all stages of their life cycles. These
decisions are developmental, physiological and behavioral in nature, and
represent a critical assessment of both external and internal factors. For
example, the timing of metamorphosis, hatching, or birth may depend upon the
tradeoffs between growth opportunity and mortality risk in the developmental
habitat. Physiological sensors compute these tradeoffs as a function of energy
balance and environmental stress, and effectors initiate physiological,
developmental and behavioral responses to these determinations. The
neuroendocrine stress axis provides a means for animals to integrate information
from multiple sources (internal and external) and to respond accordingly
(behaviorally, physiologically and developmentally). The objectives of the
proposed studies are to provide a mechanistic basis for understanding signaling
within the neuroendocrine stress system. These experiments will utilize a
powerful model organism, the South African clawed frog Xenopus laevis. The
proposed studies will use neuroanatomical, physiological and molecular
approaches to understand 1) how central corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH)
stress circuits are organized and regulated in response to environmental stress,
and 2) how corticosteroid (adrenal stress hormone) feedback and a CRH binding
protein modulate CRH expression and action. The basic components and
organization of the vertebrate neuroendocrine stress axis arose early in
evolution, and the structure and function of these pathways are conserved. Thus,
findings in the frog are likely to be applicable to other vertebrate species.
Results of these studies should provide a better understanding of how amphibians
respond to environmental stress, and, given recent documented global declines in
amphibian populations, can provide knowledge vital to wildlife conservation
efforts. The broader impacts of these studies include opportunities for high
school and undergraduate students to participate in cutting edge science,
continued international collaborations, and further identification of the
consequences of environmental stress for the health of natural amphibian
populations.