* 0235658
* Embryonic Development of a Tardigrade
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Robert Goldstein, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 12/31/2007
* USD 360,206.00

0235658&lt;br/&gt;Goldstein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tardigrades are a little-
studied phylum of animals whose phylogenetic position makes them an ideal group
for studies of how development evolves. The tardigrades are members of a clade
that includes two of the most well-understood metazoan model organisms,
Drosophila and C. elegans. They also share some of the key features of
Drosophila or C. elegans that are useful to developmental biologists, including
segment-like repeating body units and limbs, a small and reportedly constant
cell number, and optically clear embryos. Despite this, very little is known
about their development. The three most informative studies of tardigrade
development were published before 1930, and there exists almost no developmental
data from live embryos. For example, there is no fate map, nor even a
rudimentary cell lineage. The Goldstein lab has begun to study tardigrade
embryonic development. The goal is to test hypotheses regarding how cell lineage
and cell fate specification have evolved, while providing the basic information
required to make tardigrades a model system for studying evolution of
development. Four-dimensional microscopy is being used to trace cell lineages
and generate a fate map. Methods used for laser-ablation of individual cells in
C. elegans are being extended to tardigrades to identify cell interactions that
play roles in specifying cell fates. The long-term goal of this work is to
contribute toward understanding how the developmental programs elucidated in
model organisms have evolved to produce the morphological diversity found in
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting from the proposed
activity (1) Discovery, understanding, teaching, training, learning: This
research project will include training undergraduate students in scientific
research, and each undergraduate student will attend an annual conference to
present their findings. (2) Underrepresented groups: The principal investigator
is a faculty mentor in UNC Chapel Hill's Research Education Support Program,
which supports students from underrepresented minority groups to gain research
experiences and to enroll in Ph.D. programs. (3) Research and education
infrastructure: Live-embryo microscopy methods will be openly shared with other
labs upon request. (4) Broad dissemination: As well as publishing results in
scientific journals, a web page of films of tardigrade development will be
constructed, similar to the Goldstein lab's widely-used C. elegans movies web
page, for use as a freely-available educational material by others. (5) Benefits
to society: This work will contribute to both the research and education
missions of American universities, and any results of broad interest will also
be disseminated at publication time through UNC Chapel Hill's news
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;