* 0235794
* Exploring Novel Nuclear Protein-Coding Genes for use in Metazoan Molecular Phylogenetic Studies
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2007
* Frank Anderson, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2007
* USD 260,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Frank Anderson at Southern Illinois University
to use information collected from several genes to study the evolutionary
relationships among and within major groups of animals (also known as "phyla",
e.g., mollusks, annelids and arthropods). Despite more than a century of
research, the pattern of evolutionary relationships among and within the animal
phyla remains confused. New molecular biological techniques allow evolutionary
biologists to compare genes from organisms to help them determine patterns of
relationship. Unfortunately, very few genes have been used to study
relationships among the animal phyla. To remedy this situation, Dr. Anderson has
proposed to evaluate thirteen previously unstudied genes that may be useful for
investigations of animal relationships. DNA sequences of each of these genes
will be determined for fifty specimens representing all major animal phyla, and
these sequences will be used to reconstruct relationships among and within these
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will increase the number of genes
that can be used for studies of animal relationships. It will also yield
information on the positions of enigmatic groups in the animal family tree, and
serve as the first step in large-scale collaborative studies of animal evolution
using several genes. The research will enhance the education of two graduate
students and one or more undergraduates, who will receive training in
invertebrate collection methods, specimen identification and molecular
laboratory techniques. The research will also form the basis for at least one
master's thesis. In addition to publications in scientific journals, a website
will be developed to rapidly disseminate protocols and information, serving as a
resource for both students and researchers. Finally, findings from the research
will be incorporated into courses in invertebrate zoology and evolutionary
biology at Southern Illinois University.&lt;br/&gt;