* 0235107
* Neuronal Mechanisms of Feeding Arousal
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2008
* Tigran Norekian, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* john godwin
* 04/30/2008
* USD 500,845.00

&lt;br/&gt;Neuronal Mechanisms of Feeding Arousal&lt;br/&gt;Tigran
Norekian&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important feature for understanding
behavioral responses is the concept of a motivational state. Motivational states
ensure that an animal engages in a specific behavioral activity with maximum
efficiency. Although a basic understanding of a motivational state can be
explored on the behavioral level, little is known about its cellular mechanisms
in any single organism. Such cellular mechanisms are best studies in
preparations in which the underlying neural circuits are relatively simple and
well characterized. One such example is the predatory mollusk Clione - an
extreme food specialist with a very sporadic food supply. When food is
available, Clione demonstrates a very dramatic change in its behavior that can
be described as a feeding arousal motivational state.&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of
this project is to identify specific modifications in the Clione brain, which
create the feeding arousal motivational state. First, we will identify specific
modifications in a number of identified neurons during food-induced arousal. The
primary hypothesis is that during feeding arousal neurons controlling feeding
behavior are activated or their excitability is increased, while neurons
controlling other competing or irrelevant behaviors are inhibited. The second
objective will be to identify the source of these widespread modulatory changes
in the brain. The focus will be on the neurons employing serotonin as their
transmitter. It is suggested that during feeding arousal many serotonergic
neurons are activated in concert. The integrated influence of these neurons
would be the excitation of neurons producing feeding behavior and inhibition of
neurons controlling competing behaviors - in other words, creation of a feeding
arousal motivational state. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will provide important
information about the neural organization of the feeding arousal motivational
state in a simple preparation. Understanding the neurobiology of a motivational
state in one simple system will further advance our understanding of
motivational states in all animals, therefore obtained results should have a
broad impact. The proposed activity will also develop further international
collaboration and partnership with a Russian team of scientists. &lt;br/&gt;