* 0235044
* Physiology of Stress in Wild Animals
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* L Romero, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 04/30/2007
* USD 302,280.00

L. Michael Romero&lt;br/&gt;Physiology of Stress in Wild
Animals&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number 0235044&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; All organisms
are faced with noxious stimuli from the environment (such as predators or
storms). Vertebrates activate a suite of physiological mechanisms to protect
themselves from these stimuli, collectively called the stress response. A vital
part of the stress response is the release of the glucocorticoid steroid
hormones, but even after more than 60 years of studying stress we still have
only a rudimentary idea of how glucocorticoids help wild animals survive.
Earlier work indicated that several free-living bird species seasonally regulate
glucocorticoid release by varying concentrations of the hormone throughout the
year. This proposal builds upon these results to ask the following questions:
why do animals seasonally regulate glucocorticoid levels; is there a
physiological consequence; and does it affect their susceptibility to chronic
stress?&lt;br/&gt; Answering these questions will require an integrated approach
of both laboratory and field studies, such as the one proposed here. We will
capture wild free-living house sparrows (Passer domesticus) and test how
glucocorticoids help regulate blood glucose and triglyceride levels at different
times of the year. We anticipate that glucose and triglyceride regulation will
depend upon seasonal changes in glucocorticoid levels. We will also bring house
sparrows into the laboratory to test whether physiological responses to chronic
stress vary seasonally. We anticipate that the magnitude of the negative
consequences of chronic stress will depend upon the time of year. These results
will help define the physiological consequences of seasonal glucocorticoid
release during stress in wild animals, thus having a far-reaching impact on our
basic knowledge of the ecological validity of stress responses.&lt;br/&gt;This
research will also provide important training for students. Both graduate and
undergraduate students will be exposed to, and learn, many important research
skills in both the laboratory and field. These findings will be valuable to
researchers in diverse fields including Conservation Biology, Endocrinology, and
Population Biology, just to mention a few.&lt;br/&gt;