* 0235826
* Role of Tubulin Post-Translational Modification in Functional Adaptation of Microtubules
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Jacek Gaertig, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 10/31/2007
* USD 502,416.00

The tubulin proteins, which make up the microtubules in cells, are subjected to
several types of post-translational modifications. All of the post-translational
tubulin modifications are highly evolutionarly conserved, from unicellular
organisms to humans. The focus of this project is to uncover the biological
function of one of these modifications, the glycylation of tubulin. Tubulin
glycylation is an enzymatic process that leads to addition of a number of
glycine amino acid residues to specific glutamic acids of the primary peptide
sequence of either alpha- or beta-tubulin. This modification has been so far
found exclusively in cells which have either cilia or flagella, suggesting that
it plays a role in either the formation or function of these organelles. Cilia
and flagella are evolutionarly conserved motile organelles which contain eleven
specialized microtubules that are essential for generating organellar movement.
High speed bending motion of cilia and flagella is responsible for movement of
whole cells and propagates external medium along the surface of stationary
cells. Cilia or flagella are formed on the surface of many respiratory,
reproductive, sensory, neural and embryonic cell types in multicellular
organisms, as well as on many unicellular organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ciliated protozoan, Tetrahymena thermophila, is used as a model to study the
biological role of tubulin glycylation. Tetrahymena assembles about a thousand
cilia on its surface. Tetrahymena tubulins are encoded by a very small number of
genes, which can be manipulated by an extensive array of molecular and genetic
methods. In this organism,it is now possible to either completely eliminate or
mutate alpha- or beta-tubulin genes in vivo. Furthermore, even lethal or highly
deleterious mutations in tubulin genes can be studied, using a unique approach
of "lethal heterokaryons," which allows for maintenance of lethal mutations in
the germline nucleus, and bringing them to expression in the somatic nucleus in
a controlled manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique features of Tetrahymena
have recently allowed the Gaertig laboratory to establish that tubulin
glycylation is essential for survival of this organism. They found that mutating
the domain of beta-tubulin that is subjected to glycylation results in a failure
of the normal organization of ciliary microtubules. Furthermore, the same
mutation also affected the properties of an additional group of microtubules
located near the plasma membrane, known as the cortical microtubules.
Importantly, in Tetrahymena, both ciliary and cortical microtubules are
subjected to glycylation. However, the same mutation of the glycylation domain
of beta-tubulin affected ciliary and cortical microtubules in fundamentally
different ways. While the deficiency in glycylation led to the loss of specific
subtypes of ciliary microtubules, the same mutation caused an abnormal
persistence of cortical MTs, which interfered with the completion of cell
division. To account for the seemingly different effects of the same tubulin
modification on the two different types of microtubules (ciliary and cortical),
Dr. Gaertig offers three non mutually exclusive hypotheses regarding the
function of tubulin glycylation and possibly other types of tubulin
modifications. These are: 1), modification affects intrinsic properties of
microtubules; 2), modification affects binding or activity of microtubule-
associated proteins; and 3), modification affects the tubulin subunit exchange
in assembled microtubules. Specific aims are designed to test predictions
derived from the hypotheses. Experiments will be performed to characterize the
biochemical structure of modification domains in subsets of microtubules.
Several microtubule-associated proteins that localize to the cilia will be
examined to determine whether their localization and activity are affected by
tubulin glycylation. Conditional mutants defective in tubulin glycylation will
be used to analyze the relative distribution and flux of normal and glycylation-
deficient tubulin. The conditional tubulin glycylation mutants will also be used
for discovery of novel proteins whose localization to cilia is dependent on
tubulin glycylation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the anticipated
scientific results, the project will provide a training ground for graduate and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;