* 0235881
* Speciation in Darwin's Finches
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2007
* B. Rosemary Grant, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2007
* USD 337,000.00

Speciation is the fundamental process in evolution that generates biological
diversity. There is much debate on how it occurs and what the responsible
mechanisms are. Most recent advances in understanding have come from genetic
analyses of closely related species in the laboratory. Less is known from
studies in nature about the ecological circumstances and microevolutionary
forces responsible for speciation. The proposed research takes advantage of an
exceptionally favorable situation provided by Darwin's Finches on the Galapagos
islands. They are an intact group living in a largely undisturbed environment.
Four species have been intensively studied on the small island of Daphne Major
for 30 years. Building on this, populations at different stages in the
speciation process will be investigated by a combination of methods; direct
observations of individually marked birds to determine breeding patterns and
survival, and responses to experimental playback of tape-recorded songs to
determine behavioral limits to species recognition. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Results of this research will help to clarify the mechanisms of
speciation under natural circumstances. There are two broader impacts. First,
the research will elucidate factors that influence and maintain genetic
variation in small and potentially endangered populations in need of
conservation. Second, results of the long-term study will serve an educational
function in the media.&lt;br/&gt;