* 0235590
* RUI: Protein Arginine Methylation and Nucleocytoplasmic Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2008
* Anne McBride, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 05/31/2008
* USD 268,460.00

&lt;br/&gt;The transport of messenger RNAs from the site of transcription in the
nucleus to the site of translation in the cytoplasm requires the coordinated
efforts of an eclectic array of RNA-binding proteins and transport factors. The
methylation of arginine-glycine (RG)-rich RNA-binding proteins, which have been
implicated in transport and other steps of RNA metabolism, suggests that this
post-translational modification may play a role in formation, movement, or
dissociation of ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes. Protein arginine methylation
may parallel other processes such as phosphorylation in its complexity and
multifunctional roles in the eukaryotic cell, yet to date there is only a
rudimentary understanding of how methylation affects the molecular interactions
of RG-rich proteins and their function in vivo. The predominant protein arginine
methyltransferase, which is conserved from yeast to human, frequently targets a
subset of RG-rich proteins that contain numerous RGG tripeptides. There are two
possible ways methylation may affect the function of these proteins. First,the
overall methylation state of the RGG domain may influence protein function.
Second, methylation of specific arginine residues within the RGG domain may be
critical for modulation of protein function. The first objective of this work is
to distinguish between these two hypotheses by defining in vivo methylation
sites in a model RGG protein and by testing the&lt;br/&gt;importance of the
targeted arginine residues for protein function. The second objective is to
determine the role of arginine residues and their methylation in modulating RNP
complexes involved in nucleocytoplasmic transport. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
availability of facile genetic, cell biological and biochemical assays for the
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae makes this model eukaryote an excellent system
with which to address these objectives. A major mRNA-binding protein involved in
mRNA export, Npl3 (nuclear protein localization 3), contains numerous RGG motifs
and its nuclear export is facilitated by methylation. Although the molecular
mechanism for this effect is unknown, preliminary data suggest that methylation
of Npl3 modulates its self-association and its interaction with a
protein&lt;br/&gt;involved in transcription
elongation,Tho2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To distinguish between roles of individual
methylarginine residues and overall Npl3 methylation,initially in vivo sites of
Npl3 methylation will be determined by matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization mass pectrometry. Site-directed mutagenesis of methylated
arginine residues combined with genetic tests for mutant Npl3 function will be
used to ascertain the importance of these residues and their methylation in the
cell. Molecular effects on protein function will then be probed by monitoring
mutant Npl3 self-association,nuclear export, and interaction with the Tho2
protein. In addition, an assay will be developed to test the effects of self-
association on Npl3 export. Finally, analysis of genetic interactions between
NPL3 and genes involved in transcription elongation will offer insight into the
functional importance of the Npl3-Tho2 interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
experiments, which combine detailed molecular analysis with in vivo tests for
function, will lead to a greater understanding of the impact of arginine
residues and their methylation on dynamic complexes in the eukaryotic cell. The
recent explosion in the number of putative arginine methyltransferases and the
identification of a plethora of potential substrates has generated extensive
interest in their mechanisms of action . The conservation of arginine
methyltransferases from yeast to human and the ubiquity of RG-rich proteins
suggest that the results of this study will lend insight into the significance
of arginine methylation in RNP complexes and their function in many other
eukaryotic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will be performed at Bowdoin
College as a RUI (Research at Undergraduate Institutions) project. Two
undergraduate students will be supported each summer while they engage in
research projects in the laboratory. In addition, students will present their
work at major national scientific meetings such as the Yeast Genetics and
Molecular Biology meeting and/or the American Society for Microbiology
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;