* 0235680
* Molecular Interactions Modulating Targeting of Procathepsin L
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Ann Erickson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/2007
* USD 423,250.00

&lt;br/&gt;Lysosomal proteases have classically been assumed to function
exclusively in the cooperative mediation of terminal degradation of endocytosed
and endogenous proteins within acidic late endosomes or lysosomes. Recent data,
however, implicate these proteases in additional diverse processes such as
antigen processing, apoptosis and extracellular matrix remodeling, suggesting
the proteases may be targeted to and activated in cellular sites distinct from
the lysosome. In normal cells, the lysosomal cysteine protease cathepsin L is
efficiently targeted to lysosomes through interaction of its phosphorylated
mannose residues with mannose phosphate receptors that recognize the protein in
the TGN and transport it to late endosomes. When transcriptional regulation
increases expression of the protease, whether during a normal developmental
stage, as occurs in Sertoli cells during sperm maturation, or as a consequence
of cell transformation, the additional protease synthesized is predominately
secreted rather than targeted to lysosomes, consistent with a potential role for
this protease in extracellular processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to gain understanding of the mechanism that sifts targeting of a
single protease from the lysosome to the cell exterior as a consequence of
increased expression. The association of cathepsin L with two cellular molecules
will be characterized, and how these molecular interactions modulate
intracellular targeting of the protease will be studied. The hypothesis that
will be tested is that tetraspanins, which are molecular facilitators thought to
comprise a web that stabilizes and facilitates protein interaction, serve as
packaging chaperones or receptors for procathepsin L. In the dense cores of
multivesicular endosomes, procathepsin L colocalizes with the 43-kDa tetraspanin
CD63, as demonstrated by EM immunogold labeling. By yeast two-hybrid assay,
procathepsin L binds CD82, which has been shown to interact with CD63. An
additional hypothesis is that procathepsin L also binds to a mammalian homologue
of RMR, a RING-finger containing plant receptor that recognizes a C-terminal
sorting signal in the vacuolar cysteine protease aleurain to mediate targeting
of this enzyme to protein storage vacuoles in Arabidopsis thaliana. Preliminary
data show that antibodies to the plant receptor recognize a single protein of
correct size in mouse fibroblast microsomes, and that in a pull-down assay, the
ligand-binding domain of the plant receptor binds active two-chain cathepsin L.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By epitope tag addition and introduction of point
mutations, two sequences have beeen identified within procathepsin L that
modulate protease targeting. One mutation causes the enzyme to accumulate in the
Golgi, while the other induces accumulation in perinuclear vesicles, as assayed
by immunofluorescence microscopy. This suggests that two surfaces of the
molecule interact with proteins which mediate targeting. We hypothesize that the
tetraspanins facilitate Golgi export of procathepsin L by interacting with the
N-terminal site, while the plant receptor homologue participates in later
targeting events through recognition of C-terminal sequences. We further
hypothesize that these molecular interactions mediate discrete steps in the
biosynthetic pathway that direct cathepsin L to multivesicular endosomes,
lysosomes and the secretory pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In animal cells,
targeting of lysosomal enzymes to intracellular compartments occurs via at least
two targeting pathways. One of these, which has been very extensively
characterized, involves a specific receptor that recognizes mannose-6-phosphate
(Man-6-P) residues on lysosomal enzymes and binds to them to carry them to
lysosomes. The other targeting process(es) are independent of Man-6-P
recognition and remain largely unknown. In plants and yeast, however, the
Man-6-P pathway does not even exist, so the Man-6-P independent pathway(s) is
obviously important. This project holds the promise of revealing the molecular
mechanism at least one of the Man-6-P independent trafficking pathways that has
eluded investigators for so many years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT OF
PROPOSED PROJECT: The proposed experiments will be utilized as teaching vehicles
for both undergraduate chemistry and biology majors and biochemistry graduate
students. Hands-on research not only teaches students basic technology but
teaches them to think critically. They must not only learn to utilize precedent
and design controls but also to determine which variables could have generated
the results obtained in addition to the one which formed the basis for their
original hypothesis. This critical thinking only comes with time and can't be
learned from a textbook. By participating in research, and being forced to think
critically about data that they have generated, students learn the thinking
processes critical for success in research.&lt;br/&gt;