* 0235736
* Using Leaf Architectural Data for Phenetic Ecological Comparison of Modern and Fossil Forest Stands
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Leo Hickey, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 02/28/2007
* USD 75,336.00

Ecologists study ecosystems that currently appear on the planet and from this
picture, essentially a single slice of geological time, they attempt to explain
patterns like altitudinal and latitudinal gradients in diversity and ecosystem
responses to climatic change. In contrast, paleontologists work with much lower
resolution data but provide a temporal (historical) dimension. This proposal
will develop and test a methodology to combine these two disciplines and examine
the historical, macro-ecological patterns of forest community distribution. The
proposed work would provide an ecological classification of both modern and
fossil forest ecosystems based on the leaf architectural characters of the
floras. This approach is justified by the fact that there is a relationship
between leaf traits and ecological factors such as climate, such that modern
forests ecosystems can be reasonably classified from leaf traits. The P.I.s
propose to extend this approach to fossil assemblages. A substantial data set of
modern and fossil leaf traits will also be created and made publicly available
from this work. The results would provide a quantitative tool through which
ecologists could place their research into a much longer temporal context, and
through which paleontologists could begin to address significant ecological
questions with their research.