* 0235519
* Role of CaMKII in Structural Synaptic Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,10/31/2007
* Gina Turrigiano, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 10/31/2007
* USD 475,616.00

Circuits of neurons in the mammalian cortex are composed of many thousands of
neurons, each of which may receive synaptic contacts from hundreds of other
neurons. A central goal of neuroscience is to understand how such complex
circuits are wired up correctly during development. It is generally believed
that basic cortical circuitry is set up through genetic programming, but that
during development this rough connectivity is refined in an activity-dependent
manner. Synapses that are effective at driving activity in the postsynaptic
neuron are retained, while synapses that are ineffective are lost. Despite the
generality of this observation the molecular machinery that allows patterned
neuronal activity to "reward" and enhance effective synapses and "punish"
ineffective synapses remains unknown. In this project, Dr. Turrigiano's
laboratory will test the role of calcium-calmodulin dependent protein kinase II
(CaMKII) in such synaptic rewiring of cortical circuits. CaMKII is an attractive
candidate to transduce patterned activity into changes in synaptic connectivity
because it is activated when synapses effectively drive the postsynaptic neuron,
and can have a number of important effects on synaptic transmission. In previous
work the PI found that activation of CaMKII has two distinct effects on synaptic
connectivity. In the presence of activated CaMKII, synapses that continue to
effectively drive the postsynaptic neuron are structurally enhanced, while
synapses that do not are eliminated. This suggests that activation of a single
molecule can generate an activity-dependent remodeling of synaptic connectivity.
In this proposal the PI will combine physiological, molecular, and time-lapse
imaging to study the cellular and molecular mechanisms that allow CaMKII to act
as either a "punishment" or a "reward" signal for synapse formation. This
proposal will foster undergraduate education because Brandeis undergraduates
will participate in these experiments in the form of senior honors research
projects. In addition the PI has an excellent track record in training women in
quantitative scientific methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;