* 0235871
* Genetic Analysis of the Regulation of Cytoplasmic Dynein
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Michael Plamann, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 04/30/2007
* USD 440,288.00

Cytoplasmic dynein is a multisubunit complex that functions as a microtubule-
associated motor required for nuclear movement and positioning, assembly of the
spindle, chromosome segregation, organization of Golgi, ER to Golgi trafficking,
and retrograde transport of organelles in axons. An additional multisubunit
complex known as dynactin is required for dynein function and interaction with
various cargoes. The dynein heavy chain is one of the largest proteins in the
cell (&gt;4000 residues) with the C-terminal two-thirds forming the motor domain
and the N-terminal region forming an extended tail that functions in cargo
interaction. Cytoplasmic dynein function is essential in metazoans (e.g., mouse
and Drosophila); however, in filamentous fungi, dynein is not essential for
viability and this has greatly simplified genetic analysis of this enormous
complex. Using the filamentous fungus Neurospora crassa (for which the complete
genome sequence was recently published), &gt;1000 mutants defective for
cytoplasmic dynein or dynactin function have been isolated, including &gt;300
independent dynein heavy chain mutants. Sequence analysis of cloned
dynein/dynactin genes as well as the determination of the entire N. crassa
genome sequence has revealed that this complex is highly conserved in N. crassa
relative to metazoans supporting the use of N. crass as a model system for the
analysis of dynein structure, function and regulation. In the work to be done
under this award, the vast array of N. crassa dynein mutants will be used to
explore the regulation of dynein motor activity. Previous work has shown that N.
crassa cytoplasmic dynein motor ATPase activity is inactivated by
phosphorylation in mutants defective in dynactin function (i.e., cargo
interaction) or function of the LIS1 complex. This inactivation occurs not by
phosphorylation of the dynein heavy chain, but by phosphorylation of small
proteins (8- and 20-kDa) associated with the heavy chain. To determine the
identity of these proteins, dynein heavy chain will be tagged, affinity purified
and the associated proteins will be resolved by 2D gels. The heavy chain-
associated polypeptides will be excised from the 2D gels and their identity
determined by using mass spectrometry analysis in conjunction with the complete
N. crassa genome sequence. The effects of null mutations in the genes encoding
these dynein-associated subunits will be determined by assaying dynein ATPase
activity. Additional work will focus on defining the effects of specific heavy
chain mutations. A minimum of 100 independent dynein heavy chain mutations will
be identified for those mutants that produce full-length polypeptide. These
mutants will be examined for defects in dynein ATPase activity, microtubule
binding and association with other dynein subunits. The information from this
analysis will complement the work described above and will provide insight into
the mechanism by which the dynein motor translocates along microtubules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cytoplasmic dynein is the most complicated motor operating
in the cytoplasm, and N. crassa represents the only model organism in which it
is possible to rapidly isolate hundreds of mutants defective in dynein function.
Completion of this work will be of great benefit in understanding the regulation
of the dynein motor activity, and it will provide the first large-scale genetic
dissection of the dynein heavy chain. Undergraduate students of various minority
groups have played important roles in current and past research activities, and
additional students will be encouraged to participate in these research
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;