* 0235761
* Pattern of Tropical Forest Succession Subsequent to Hurricane Damage
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* John Vandermeer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 01/31/2007
* USD 210,000.00

Hurricane Joan severely damaged an extensive area of tropical rain forest on the
eastern&lt;br/&gt;seaboard of Nicaragua in 1988. This proposal seeks to continue
a twelve-year study on post hurricane forest succession in the damaged area.
Since the hurricane the forest has undergone significant changes and is now
entering a critical as thinning (mortality) stage. At this juncture it is
essential to determine whether individual trees die at random with respect to
their species identity. This question is relevant to recent theories of the
maintenance of species diversity in tropical rain forests and represents a
potentially important contribution to the understanding of how interspecific
tree competition is related to canopy growth in such a forest. It is a crucial
aspect of Neutrality Theory that mortality events in the thinning canopy happen
randomly within guilds of tree species. Part of the theory supposes first, that
recruitment and growth into the thinning canopy is at random and second, that
subsequent mortality from the thinning canopy is also random (with respect to
species identity). According to some analyses, even small deviations from this
critical assumption may have dramatic consequences. Data will be collected by
yearly monitoring of all trees and large saplings in nine permanent plots.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. This research project will help to clarify the
definitions of ecological species guilds based on successional status. "Niche-
based" models, alternative to the neutrality models, suggest that as thinning
proceeds, some species will be more likely to die at the beginning of the
thinning process and others will do so at the end of that process. Recent theory
emphasizes the probable colonization-competition tradeoff, in which species are
placed on a continuum between poor competitors/good colonizers and good
competitors/poor colonizers. Most proponents of neutrality theory would argue
that it is within tree species guilds (pioneers, primary forest species and
intermediates), not among such guilds, that neutrality applies, and since there
are only a few guilds, some form of neutrality is likely to be a dominant force.
Alternatively, proponents of niche-based theory would argue that the faint
division into pioneers and non-pioneers is only an initial rough cut and that
finer divisions are not only possible, but also explain much of species
coexistence. While theory has been developed to treat a more complete division
of these successional niches, thus far the data on which these ideas are based
are not quite fully satisfying.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Approximately 100
Nicaraguan, four Costa Rican, and 30 North American (mainly from the University
of Michigan, Hood College, and University of Guelph) graduate and undergraduate
students have participated in data gathering for this project. In addition to
the direct field work on the project, all students are encouraged to develop
their own individual projects related to the general subject matter. Prior to
field campaigns, participating students are provided with an intensive one-week
classroom and lab course in biodiversity, forest natural history, basic
ecological theory, and field research methods, taught by PI, co-PI and
participating collaborators (including graduate students at Michigan) through
the University of the Autonomous Regions of the Nicaraguan Caribbean Coast
(URACCAN). Partly as a result of this research project and its teaching value,
URACCAN developed their Institute of Natural Resources, Environment and
Sustainable Development (IRENMADES)which now sponsors these yearly field course,
and which includes the two sites at which this research continues. In 1996 the
group received the Nicaraguan Sempervirens Award for the best research project
on natural resources in the country. Various field guides and illustrated
popular pamphlets have been produced in local languages for use in environmental
education.&lt;br/&gt;