* 0235907
* Soil Pathogen-Mediated Coexistence of Tree Species
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Richard Kobe, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John G. Blake
* 12/31/2006
* USD 297,126.00

Intellectual merit: As an explanation for the maintenance of tropical tree
diversity, Janzen (1970) and Connell (1971) proposed that natural enemies reduce
seedling recruitment in the vicinity of conspecific adults and/or at high
conspecific seedling density while allowing for heterospecific recruitment to
occur. Numerous studies have documented mortality patterns consistent with the
Janzen-Connell (J-C) hypothesis, without identifying particular causes. Soil
fungal pathogens are likely causal factors of density- and distance-dependent
mortality because of strong host specialization, short generation times, long
persistence in soil as spores, and high fecundity. Furthermore, the potential
importance of disease in structuring plant communities is only now becoming more
widely appreciated. The proposed experiments, with a focus on soil fungal
pathogens as the mortality agent, will test fundamental assumptions of J-C,
including: 1) if host-specific soil-borne fungal pathogens cause distance and
density-dependent mortality in seedlings in both temperate and tropical systems;
2) the effects of light availability in mediating pathogen effects through
compensation in growth and/or more rapid lignification; 3) differential pathogen
sensitivity among species varying in shade tolerance; 4) differential pathogen
sensitivity among species varying in local abundance, with the possibility that
pathogens keep common species in check and promote diversity or alternatively
that rare species are&lt;br/&gt;kept rare because they are more susceptible to
pathogens; 5) differential pathogen sensitivity between tropical and temperate
species.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The proposed research is highly relevant to
managing conservation reserves if diseases play a role in the population
dynamics of their hosts and the structure and diversity of communities that they
inhabit. Also, without adequate knowledge of plant-soil pathogen interactions in
'natural' systems it is more difficult to combat the spread of exotic, invasive
pathogens. The research enhances participation of underrepresented groups in
science (a female doctoral candidate and a minority female student intern),
provides opportunities for undergraduate internships in Costa Rica and
employment in Michigan, and provides training to Costa Rican field
assistants.&lt;br/&gt;