* 0236567
* CAREER:    Mining Archived Intelligent Transportation Systems Data:    A Validation Framework for Improved Performance Assessment and Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2011
* Robert Bertini, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 05/31/2011
* USD 445,000.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Mining Archived Intelligent Transportation Systems
Data: A Validation Framework For Improved Performance Assessment And
Modeling&lt;br/&gt;Robert L. Bertini, Portland State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The performance of our transportation
infrastructure critically affects our nation's economy, security, environment
and quality of life. Intelligent transportation systems (ITS) are one means for
improving the efficiency, safety and sustainability of our transportation
system. The mission of this career proposal is to develop and evaluate methods
to archive, mine and analyze real-time ITS data, using infrastructure-based
sensors, video and dynamic floating probes. Using these resources, we will
develop partnerships with local transportation agencies to develop a data
archive; implement and test an improved performance measurement platform; expand
our understanding of basic traffic flow principles underlying models of traffic
flow through systematic assessment of freeway bottleneck behavior; and develop
improved traffic flow models and model components. In turn, we will enhance
these tools with a greater understanding of model uncertainty propagation. The
research agenda will guide the enhancement of required and elective
undergraduate transportation courses, incorporating information technology and
projects using real transportation data. Further, we will develop new graduate
courses focused on the use of real transportation data, involve undergraduates
in multidisciplinary research teams and expand our undergraduate civil
engineering profession seminar and campus-wide seminar series. These activities
will support the proposed outreach program which includes a summer
transportation academy for underrepresented high school students, partnership
with the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry including construction of a
bilingual transportation data exhibit in the new Technology Hall and outreach to
attract more Portland/Oregon high school students to science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of these integrated activities will play a
pivotal role in improving our capabilities for monitoring, modeling and
evaluating our transportation system. This is significant because over the past
decade, we have deployed traffic surveillance and management systems, but have
not included systematic archiving or mining of the remotely sensed data that
continuously stream into traffic management centers. In fact, some agencies
discard these rich resources. This project aims to exploit the still-untapped
data for accurate assessment of system operation by developing and testing
performance measures. It is hoped that this will lead to a better understanding
of fundamental traffic flow phenomena, leading to improved traffic flow
modeling. This is necessary for forecasting the future system state so true
control measures can be applied and evaluated. The research agenda will provide
guidance and tools for enhancing existing courses, developing new courses and
course modules to support the education and training of new and current members
of the transportation workforce, both practitioners and researchers. This is
significant given the current challenges in meeting workforce needs and
developing engineers and planners who have multi-disciplinary backgrounds. The
research and education activities will support and enhance the proposed outreach
activities, which are aimed toward increasing enrollment, quality and diversity
in the transportation program, and attracting and retaining students from
diverse backgrounds and with diverse learning styles to science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;