* 0236171
* Conservation and Non-Conservation of Engrailed Gene Regulation in Metazoan Evolution: Amphioxus as a Model for the Ancestral Vertebrate
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Linda Holland, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 01/31/2007
* USD 366,050.00

0236171&lt;br/&gt;Holland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term goal of this
research is to elucidate the evolutionary origins of the patterning mechanisms
that led to the vertebrate body plan. This proposal focuses on the evolution of
cis-regulatory elements of the engrailed gene in relation to the evolution of
body plans using amphioxus (Branchiostoma) as a proxy for the ancestral
vertebrate. Amphioxus is vertebrate-like but lacks the extensive gene
duplications characteristic of vertebrates. Thus, developmental gene cascades in
amphioxus are proving to be similar to those in vertebrates, but less complex
and easier to study. Evolutionary changes in developmental gene regulation are
one important way to effect large-scale changes in animal body plans. An
understanding of the evolution of cis-regulation of the engrailed gene can give
insights into the ancestral roles of engrailed in development, in particular,
and the evolutionary conservation of the roles of developmental genes versus
their co-option for new roles in newly evolved structures, in general. Theories
regarding the ancestral role(s) of engrailed include functions in (1) boundary
formation, (2) specification of particular nerve cells, (3) specification of
subsets of muscle cells and (4) segmentation. The last is particularly
controversial. To test these ypotheses, expression of lacZ reporter constructs
of cis-regulatory DNA from amphioxus engrailed will be compared in amphioxus,
the zebrafish, a tunicate (Ciona), Drosophila and the lamprey. In preliminary
work, a construct including 8.5 kb of amphioxus engrailed regulatory DNA, which
shares many transcription factor binding sites with the mouse engrailed-2 region
that directs expression to jaw muscle precursors, was expressed in the first 4
of these organisms. Initial results suggest that (1) engrailed regulation may be
conserved during evolution of the vertebrate jaw muscles from the anterior
somites of an amphioxus-like ancestor and (2) a role for engrailed in
specification of muscle cell identity and/or properties may be conserved in
Drosophila, amphioxus and the vertebrates. In the present research, smaller
constructs will be expressed in the 5 organisms to determine if the same
constellation of transcription factor binding sites directs expression to muscle
and the nerve cord in all organisms. Comparative experiments will be done with
the mouse engrailed-2 regulatory regions known to direct expression to the
vertebrate jaw muscles. Finally, by overexpressing and blocking expression of
amphioxus engrailed in amphioxus embryos, it will be determined if engrailed
really does function in segmentation of the amphioxus mesoderm as its expression
suggests. The combined results from these experiments will give insights into
the evolution of regulation of the engrailed gene in particular, and the
evolution of cis-regulation of genes in general. An understanding of the
evolution of gene regulation is central to an understanding of how life evolved
on earth. This research will continue a history of training undergraduate
students, including woman, under-represented minorities and those with physical
disabilities, in basic techniques of molecular biology and embryology. It will
also provide advanced training for a postdoctoral fellow in experimental
embryology and molecular biology. The results will be published in peer-reviewed
journals and presented at scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;