* 0236631
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  An EST Approach to Understanding Endosymbiotic Gene Transfer
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Marcelo Soares, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 789,987.00

Debashish Bhattacharya of the University of Iowa has been awarded a grant to
create a genomic resource of expressed genes (ESTs) from the toxic
dinoflagellate alga Alexandrium tamarense and the haptophyte alga Emiliana
huxleyi. The EST data will be used to understand the role of endosymbiosis in
driving nuclear genome evolution. Endosymbiosis, in which a single-celled
protist engulfs and "enslaves" the photosynthetic organelle (plastid) of another
cell, explains the origin of most algae. Plastid endosymbiosis necessarily
changes the "host" lineage because of the large scale movement of foreign genes
from the captured endosymbiont to the host nucleus. This process, known as
endosymbiotic gene transfer, is required for plastid function. Despite its
importance to cellular evolution, the understanding of endosymbiotic gene
transfer is in its infancy. To gain fundamental insights into this process, a
genomics approach is used in this research through the sequencing of 30,000 ESTs
from Alexandrium and Emiliania. High-quality libraries of expressed genes are
used in an efficient "gene discovery" strategy to generate a comprehensive
collection of algal ESTs. Using these techniques, about 10,000 unique ESTs from
each algal species will be produced. &lt;br/&gt;These data will be the basis for
understanding endosymbiotic gene transfer and will provide a broad community of
scientists interested in topics such as algal evolution, toxin production in
harmful algal blooms (HABs), carbon cycling, and genetics with an invaluable
resource for studying the biology of two taxa that are of high economic and
ecological importance. Alexandrium causes HABs in coastal areas resulting in
paralytic shellfish poisoning, whereas Emiliania is dominant in oceanic open
waters where its coccolithophore phase acts as a major carbon sink on the
planet. This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award funded through a
collaborative program between the National Science Foundation and the Department
of Agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;