* 0236519
* 4th World Congress of African Linguistics
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2004
* Akinbiyi Akinlabi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2004
* USD 29,130.00

The National Science Foundation will support the Fourth World Congress in
African Linguistics, to be held at Rutgers University in New Brunswick on June
17-23, 2003. This meeting aims to bring scholars based in Africa in direct
intellectual contact with scholars doing research on African languages in North
America, Europe, and other regions. To accomplish this, the conference will
sponsor about 20 participants from Africa who would otherwise find it
financially impossible to come. Some of these will be established senior figures
who can serve as role models; others will be promising junior researchers chosen
by anonymous abstracts for their cutting-edge work. In all, meeting organizers
expect about 300 participants and close to 150 presentations. These will cover
every facet of linguistics and present data from all the major groups of African
languages. The meeting will also include symposia designed to encourage research
and documentation of the many endangered languages of Africa, and workshops that
address major analytical problems that arise in the study of African languages.
This will be the first time that the World Congress of African Linguistics has
come to North America. The proceedings of the Congress will be published by
Rudiger Kopp Verlag of Koln, giving a permanent record of the
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately one third of the languages spoken in
the world today are African languages (an estimated 2035), and African languages
have had a large impact on the development of linguistic theory. But less than
1% of these languages have been thoroughly documented. The difficulty is that
most of these languages can only be studied adequately by people who are
physically present in Africa, and these scholars tend to become isolated from
the centers of theoretical and analytical innovation. This meeting will be a
step toward improving this situation by creating contacts between Africans and
non-Africans that can lead to productive long term collaborations that fertilize
both communities. It will also bring a taste of the excitement of working on
African languages to North America, encouraging more scholars to take up this
important area.&lt;br/&gt;