* 0236399
* Molecular Mechanism of EMF1-Mediated Floral Repression in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Z. Renee Sung, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 01/31/2007
* USD 387,000.00

0236399 Sung

The EMBRYONIC FLOWER (EMF) genes, EMF1 and EMF2, are required for vegetative
development and involved in reproductive development. Fourteen loss-of-function
mutants were isolated and most were characterized in our laboratory. The mutants
flower upon germination and modulation of EMF activities generated fertile
plants that flower early and plants that show altered inflorescence
architecture. Cloning the EMF genes revealed that EMF1 encodes a putative
transcriptional regulator and EMF2 a Polycomb Group (PcG) protein homolog. Gene
expression studies suggest that EMF proteins exert global repression of the
flower and seed program, thereby allowing vegetative development upon
germination. The proposed research aims to investigate the molecular mechanism
of EMF1-mediated floral repression. The long-term goal of the proposed research
is to elucidate the epigenetic mechanism underlying plant development. The
objectives are to further characterize the function of EMF1 and several proteins
that interact with EMF1, and identify the target genes of EMF1. Immunological or
tagged-protein detection will be employed to study possible posttranscriptional
regulation of EMF1 and develop tools for EMF1 protein detection and isolation.
The regions of EMF1 responsible for protein-protein interaction with the
EMF1-interacting proteins will be characterized. An inducible system will be
used to activate EMF1 in emf1 mutants and identify early targets of EMF1.
Finding a protein complex that inactivates the floral organ identity or other
early target genes will provide insights into the mechanism of floral repression
during vegetative development. Understanding of the molecular mechanism of
EMF1-mediated floral repression would enable the design of crops that flower at
specific time, thereby increasing the geographical range of their cultivation. A
postdoctoral fellow and a graduate student will be involved in the proposed
research. While the postdoctoral fellow has the necessary skills to carry out
most of the experiments proposed, he will also learn new concepts and techniques
during the course of the proposed research. The graduate student will be trained
in a variety of molecular and immunological techniques. Both will be involved in
the design of the experiments and articulation of experimental findings through
oral and written presentations. Typically, undergraduate students of diverse
backgrounds are involved in our research projects. Underrepresented students
have access to our research projects through the campus-wide Summer Research
Opportunity Programs and Undergraduate Research Opportunity Programs.

