* 0236897
* Forest Response to the Decline of a Dominant Species: Ecosystem to Regional Analyses of the Impact of the Hemlock Woolly Adelgid on Northeastern Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* David Foster, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 02/28/2007
* USD 430,000.00

The introduction of exotic pathogens and pests to forest ecosystems represents
a&lt;br/&gt;powerful agent of ecological change that may selectively remove
dominant tree species and&lt;br/&gt;simultaneously stimulate widespread human
disturbance in the form of pre-emptive and salvage&lt;br/&gt;logging. Due to the
increasing global movement of organisms and materials, the
selective&lt;br/&gt;decline and elimination of tree species is an increasingly
important ecosystem disturbance that&lt;br/&gt;warrants intensive study at stand
to regional scales.&lt;br/&gt;The recent unimpeded infestation of the hemlock
woolly adelgid (HWA) across the&lt;br/&gt;northeastern U.S. provides an unusual
opportunity and critical imperative to examine the&lt;br/&gt;ecological
consequences of the removal of a keystone tree species, eastern hemlock, on
forest&lt;br/&gt;composition, structure, and function. HWA is generating
widespread mortality and initiating&lt;br/&gt;intensive logging of hemlock from
North Carolina to Massachusetts and threatens to produce a&lt;br/&gt;range-wide
decline or elimination of this ecologically, culturally, and economically
important&lt;br/&gt;species. Specifically, mortality of hemlock stands with
sparse understories may lead to&lt;br/&gt;a lengthy period of forest ecosystem
reorganization resulting in new, distinct forest types and&lt;br/&gt;major
changes in ecosystem function including disruption of decomposition, nitrogen
cycling and&lt;br/&gt;nitrate leaching.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts from this
study include: 1) incorporation of new ecological findings
into&lt;br/&gt;scientific publications, presentations, and public outreach; 2)
informing the public and land&lt;br/&gt;managers by distributing findings to the
HWA working group and other web-based products; 3)&lt;br/&gt;integration of data
into existing collaborative efforts with regional experts and professionals;
and&lt;br/&gt;4) strong educational training in research design, field
techniques, and data and laboratory&lt;br/&gt;analyses for students in the
graduate and Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU)&lt;br/&gt;programs at
the Harvard Forest.&lt;br/&gt;