* 0236886
* Role of Intermediate Filaments in Early Neuronal Process Outgrowth
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Ben Szaro, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 07/31/2007
* USD 327,883.00

A full understanding of axon development requires knowing the contributions made
by each structural component of the axonal cytoskeleton, since the cytoskeleton
is what most directly controls axonal morphology. The most abundant of these
components is the neurofilaments, which are the intermediate filaments of
neurons. Because neurofilament composition changes with each successive phase of
axonal outgrowth, it must somehow influence the evolving structure and growth
dynamics of developing axons; but the precise role of these changes is poorly
understood. This project studies how such changes in neurofilament composition
influence both the dynamics of axon outgrowth and the structure of the
cytoskeleton by perturbing the molecular composition of neurofilaments in
developing spinal cord neurons of frog embryos. It focuses on two specific
transitions in neurofilament composition: first, axon initiation and early
outgrowth, which are marked by expression of a single neurofilament protein,
peripherin; and second, rapid axon elongation, which is marked by expression of
two additional neurofilament proteins, NF-M and XNIF. Previous studies from this
lab showed that loss of NF-M and XNIF from developing axons inhibits them from
elongating efficiently. The specific objectives of this project are to
determine: 1) the involvement of peripherin in axonal outgrowth; and 2) the
further involvement of XNIF and NF-M in promoting axon elongation. The broader
impact of this work on society is that a better understanding of the basic
mechanisms underlying axonal outgrowth may help work aimed at improving the
capacity of neurons to repair injury and resist disease. In addition, frog
embryos provide an ideal model system for these studies as experimental
manipulations can be learned quickly, permits direct access to the earliest
stages of neural development, and is less expensive than working with mammals.
This is an effective system for training students at all levels in the
application of cell and molecular biology techniques to important problems in
early neural development.

