* 0236700
* Using Temporal Markers in Standard American English:  Second Language Learners, Bilingual and Bidialectal Speakers
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Virginia Valian, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2009
* USD 190,916.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Virginia Valian, Dr. Elaine C.
Klein, and Dr. Gita Martohardjono will conduct three years of research on
language acquisition. The project investigates the comprehension and production
of temporal markers in Standard American English (SAE), varying second language
learners' first language (Spanish or Chinese) and the age when learners begin
acquisition (6-8 years or 20-30 years). The project will emphasize comparisons
of monolingual SAE speakers and fluent SAE-Chinese speakers. Multiple tasks will
be used for all participants, and identical tasks will be used with child and
adult participants. The research addresses questions about the mechanisms
underlying the comprehension and production of temporal markers, such as whether
syntactic similarity between the learner's first and second languages affects
learning of the second language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will serve
immigrant and other underrepresented groups. The teaching of SAE in urban
schools and community language programs suffers from inadequate knowledge about
second language. Errors with temporal markers are common in the speech of non-
native SAE speakers, and they are resistant to change. But the source of these
errors remains a puzzle to scientists and educators alike. This project asks to
what extent mastery of temporal markers depends on specific features of a
learner's first language. The knowledge gained from this project will also help
improve instructional materials that target specific areas of difficulty, such
as the separation between tense and aspect. It will also help pedagogy by giving
teachers an understanding of the specific types of difficulty that learners
have.&lt;br/&gt;