* 0236818
* Brain Systems for Regulating Responses to Cognitive and Affective Conflict
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Diane Swick, East Bay Institute for Research and Education Inc
* Continuing grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 05/31/2007
* USD 350,650.00

Brain Systems for Regulating Responses to Cognitive and Affective Conflict
Abstract With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Swick will conduct a
three-year study using psychological and ERP studies of neurological patients
and healthy controls to investigate the roles of lateral preprefrontal, anterior
cingulate, and orbitofrontal cortices in regulating responses to cognitive and
affective conflict. Attentional control over behavior or executive control, is
an important theoretical issue in cognitive neuroscience. Goal-directed behavior
requires flexible adjustments of performance tailored to the current context.
Our real world environment is saturated with stimuli varying in emotional
significance, each associated with different courses of action. One important
executive function is control over the response selection process in the face of
conflicts among competing alternatives. Another crucial executive function is
the ability to inhibit responses when they are no longer appropriate. Separate
control systems for cognitive and affective processing can be distinguished,
with the former mediated by lateral prefrontal cortex (LAT) and dorsal anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC), and the latter by ventromedial prefrontal cortex
(orbitofrontal cortex, or OFC, and ventral ACC). Although these systems may be
relatively dissociable in the frontal lobes, cognitive and affective control
processes typically interact to influence behavior under normal circumstances.
This proposal is guided by four major hypotheses: (1) LAT is essential for
detecting response conflicts in cognitive tasks that involve either neutral or
emotionally salient stimuli. (2) LAT signals dorsal ACC regions, which are
implicated in the resolution (but not detection) of response conflicts. (3) OFC
and ventral ACC are recruited only when the cognitive task contains emotional
stimuli. (4) LAT is not critical for the regulation of affective conflict in the
absence of response conflict. The proposed experiments will use a combined
electrophysiological (event-related potential, or ERP) and neuropsychological
approach. Patients with focal lesions in either AT, dorsal ACC, or OFC will be
tested in a series of attentionally demanding tasks with words and faces that
are emotional or neutral in valence. A set of six experiments is proposed to
address the three Specific Aims of this project: (1) To examine whether separate
regions of the frontal lobes are specialized for the selection of different
classes of stimuli. Exps. 1A-1C will examine different levels of conflict
(lexical, semantic, emotional, or response-level) in color word and emotional
Stroop interference tasks to ask the following questions: (A) Are separate
regions of the frontal lobes specialized for the inhibition of different
irrelevant stimulus dimensions, or do the same regions mediate selection
regardless of stimulus type? (B) Is the left inferior frontal gyrus critical for
suppressing irrelevant semantic input? (C) Is the dorsal ACC specifically
associated with response conflict, and the OFC and ventral ACC with emotional
conflict? (D) Do OFC patients have an enhanced attentional bias towards
threatening faces? (E) Are there any left/right asymmetries of function in
patients with unilateral lesions? (2) To examine the neural substrates of
interference effects in response selection tasks, and how these processes may be
modulated by the emotional significance of the stimuli. Exps. 2A & 2B will use
the flanker interference task with letters, neutral faces, or emotional faces as
stimuli to address the following questions: (A) Do response conflicts with non-
emotional stimuli engage executive control mechanisms in LAT, but not OFC? (B)
Will executive control mechanisms in OFC be recruited when emotionally salient
stimuli are used? (C) How does valence exert an influence on cognitive task
performance? (D) The relative timing of conflict detection processes will be
measured by the N450 ERP component. (3) To examine the neural substrates of
response inhibition and how it may be modulated by the emotional significance of
the stimuli. Exp. 3 is a response inhibition (Go/NoGo) task using emotional and
neutral words as stimuli that is designed to (A) measure the
electrophysiological changes associated with response inhibition; (B) use the
NoGo N2 ERP component as a sensitive measure for the time at which valence
information is accessed; (C) determine whether separable regions are recruited
for the selection (Go) and inhibition (NoGo) of responses to emotional vs. non-
emotional stimuli; and (D) assess the effects of focal frontal lesions on the
NoGo N2 component. The broader impacts of this work on society are threefold:
(1) The results have the potential to improve rehabilitation techniques in
patients with frontal lobe injury. (2) Every effort will be made to include
underrepresented minority students as participants in research with rare
neurological populations. (3) Community-based talks at hospitals and senior
centers will describe, in an accessible way, recent research on human brain
function and how strokes and head injuries can affect these processes.