* 0236859
* High Performance Fiber Reinforced Cement Composites - International Workshop
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Antoine Naaman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 02/29/2004
* USD 20,500.00

Summary: Fiber reinforced cement composites (FRCs or FRCCs) have made striking
advances in recent years, due, on one hand, to several technological
developments (involving the matrix, the fiber, the interface, and the composite
production process) and, on the other hand, to a better understanding of the
fundamental mechanisms controlling their particular behavior. The definition of
"high performance" fiber reinforced cement composites (HPFRCC) is now well
understood by researchers and implies a stress-strain response in tension that
exhibits strain hardening accompanied by multiple cracking. High performance
behavior at low fiber content, that is, lower cost is one of the objective of
many research studies; it opens the way to large scale structural applications
not only in evident areas such as seismic and impact resistant structures, but
also in helping conceive innovative structural systems with strain hardening
cement-based composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The main objective of the
proposed workshop is to lay out the latest developments in the field, provide a
forum for discussion and exchange of information among top specialists, record
up-to-date advances in the state of knowledge, set a reference benchmark to
surpass in the future, and inspire directions to follow in near-future research.
Special topics selected for this workshop include: 1) characterization and
modeling; 2) interface properties; 3) impact resistance; 4) fire resistance; 5)
scale effects; 6) self-compacting properties; 7) properties and modeling under
reverse cyclic loading; and 8) hybrid composites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will: 1) provide ideas and
solutions at the forefront of research in the field; 2) foster a better
understanding of the behavior, mechanics and applications of cement-based
composites; 3) help strengthen the technical background of participants allowing
them to address more challenging technical issues in the future; 4) engage and
train younger researchers; 5) help in knowledge transfer to the classroom; 6)
set a reference benchmark to surpass; 7) inspire directions to follow in near-
future research; and 8) nurture international
cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The applications of HPFRCC in thin sheet
products such as cladding, pipes, poles, and housing, as well as in seismic and
blast resistant structures, will have an immense impact on the serviceability
and durability of the infrastructure leading to broad benefits to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;