* 0236541
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  The Cenarchaeum Symbiosum Genome Project: Genome Sequence from a Psychrophilic Archaeon, the Ocean's Single-most Abundant Microbes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Gary Olsen, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 03/31/2005
* USD 759,642.00

Edward F. DeLong of the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute has been
awarded a grant to sequence the genome of the marine microbe, Cenarchaeum
symbiosum. This microbe belongs to a divergent lineage of microorganisms known
as Archaea, and is a member of one of the most abundant microbial groups in the
ocean. Despite their high abundance however, these microbes have never been
cultivated, so their biological properties and ecological significance remain
unknown. Genome sequencing technology can now address this problem, allowing
genetic characterization of even uncultivated microbes. In this project,
contemporary genome sequencing strategies will be developed and applied to
determine and analyze the whole genome sequence of Cenarchaeum symbiosum.

This project will be among the first to determine a whole genome sequence from
an uncultivated, undomesticated microbe. The methods and techniques developed
will have broad applications for many other studies. The technologies developed
will enable the study of naturally occurring microorganisms in the environment
in many different contexts. Due to its evolutionary origin, the Cenarchaeum
symbiosum genome sequence will provide new insight into the mechanisms of
thermal adaptation in microorganisms. This information will be useful for
studies aiming to modify or isolate active, thermostable enzymes used in
industry, biotechnology, or commercial products. Additionally, Cenarchaeum
symbiosum belongs to a group of microbes that represent the most abundant cell
types in the ocean. The genome sequence of this microbe should also yield
important clues about the function of these widespread and abundant oceanic
microorganisms. The data will be made available to the entire scientific
community, adding to the growing database of whole microbial genome sequences.
The data will also provide a starting point for future studies of ocean ecology.
This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award funded through a collaborative
program between the National Science Foundation and the Department of
Agriculture.