* 0236882
* Three Projects in Choice Theory: Random Choice, Interdependent Preferences and Changing Tastes
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Wolfgang Pesendorfer, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 195,247.00

This proposal contains three related research projects on choice theory. All
these projects will be undertaken jointly with Faruk Gul of Princeton
University.&lt;br/&gt;Often, observed choice behavior will not be consistent
with a single, deterministic choice criterion (i.e., utility function). That is,
the decision-maker will make different choices in virtually identical
situations. Such behavior is best modeled as random choice. The first project
entitled "Random Choice," addresses the following question: when can a random
choice be interpreted as the consequence of maximizing a randomly chosen
criterion for ranking the alternatives. Hence, we investigate the consequences
of behavior that is derived from a fixed, probabilistic rule for selecting a
utility function. After the utility function is selected, the agent chooses the
alternative that maximizes it among the available options. This way of
interpreting behavior is important for the analysis of aggregate data, boundedly
rational behavior and situations with asymmetric information. In our work, we
study choice over risk prospects and randomly selected expected utility
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project entitled "The Revealed
Preference Theory of Changing Tastes" studies dynamic inconsistency. Dynamic
inconsistency refers to the tendency of agents to make different choices from
the same set of alternatives depending on when they are asked to choose. For
example, an individual who prefers a larger later reward to a smaller earlier
reward may reverse his preference, as the date of the smaller earlier reward
gets closer. Many decision problems require the agent to make choices at various
moments in time. In such problems, the key is how the decision-maker forms
expectations about his own future behavior. This research takes the position
that the agent's beliefs regarding his future behavior can best be analyzed
through his current behavior and seeks to identify these beliefs through choice
experiments. That is, we wish to identify methods for determining the agent's
expectations about his future behavior from actual choices made in the current
period. The advantage of the revealed preference approach is that preferences
over choice problems are - at least in principal -
observable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final part of the project proposes to
develop and analyze a "model of interdependent preferences" and to use
interdependent preferences to define notions such as empathy, spitefulness,
fairness and reciprocity.&lt;br/&gt;