* 0236494
* Hypoxia-inducible gene expression in estuarine fish
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2007
* Bernard Rees, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 12/31/2007
* USD 360,787.00

&lt;br/&gt;Many aquatic environments are characterized by episodes of low oxygen
availability, or hypoxia. In some cases, hypoxia is part of natural cycles in
oxygen; in other cases, the decrease in oxygen is a result of human activities.
The effects of hypoxia on biological organisms are diverse and frequently
dramatic. Severe hypoxia can lead to mass mortality of hypoxia-sensitive species
or cause them to migrate to areas of higher oxygen. Other species are capable of
surviving hypoxia due to a suite of morphological, behavioral, or physiological
adaptations. At the biochemical level, one potential response is a change in
gene expression that increases the organism's tolerance to
hypoxia.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to examine hypoxia-inducible
gene expression in the Gulf Killifish, Fundulus grandis, a common inhabitant of
the estuaries along the Gulf of Mexico. The proposed research will identify
targets of hypoxia-inducible gene expression and examine possible mechanisms
that account for compensatory changes in gene expression. These measures are
expected to reveal novel targets of hypoxia-inducible gene expression, thereby
providing greater insight into the hypoxic response of fish and other organisms.
By elucidating the biochemical and cellular response to low oxygen through basic
research, it may be possible to better predict, and potentially mitigate, the
adverse effects of hypoxia on aquatic organisms.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its
scientific contributions, the proposed work will provide research training for
students at all levels, from undergraduate through post-doctoral, including
students from groups traditionally under-represented in the sciences. Such
training will better position these individuals for careers in a variety of
disciplines, including science education, biotechnology, and medicine. This
award will also will help to build the educational capacity and research
infrastructure at a major urban university (University of New Orleans), and
synergies between the lead institution and collaborators may lead to unexpected
advances in integrative biology.&lt;br/&gt;