* 0236193
* Collaborative Research: The Evolution of Patterning Mechanisms Within Arthropod Limbs
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Lisa Nagy, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 01/31/2006
* USD 282,000.00

0236193&lt;br/&gt;Nagy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arthropods can be found in virtually
every habitat on earth - a radiation driven in large part by the diverse
specializations of their limbs. In spite of the enormous variability in limb
structures, the initial comparative studies of genes that pattern limbs have
emphasized conserved patterns of gene expression. Perhaps this is because
similarities to the model system (Drosophila) are more easily explicable than
differences. However, Drs. Nagy and Williams seek to understand the
morphological diversification of arthropod limbs. To this end, they propose a
series of experiments to dissect the function of both genes whose expression
varies from the known Drosophila pattern and ones whose expression is conserved.
They use the insect- crustacean clade for this analysis since crustaceans have
extremely diverse limb morphologies, while insects have the best studied
molecular mechanisms of limb formation. Their goal is to uncover mechanisms
underlying the generation of morphological diversity among insect-crustacean
limbs. They approach this goal using both descriptive, genetic and experimental
studies on a variety of species. Because these studies involve a number of both
insect and crustacean species, they provide a framework for inferences as to the
ancestral patterning circuitry for the insect/crustacean lineage. In addition,
because they evaluate function in both conserved and varying genes, these
studies will be informative about how a similar set of genes has been redeployed
throughout evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This project promotes
education at multiple levels of inquiry. Some of the proposed work forms the
basis of graduate training; other aspects will form undergraduate research
projects. Continued analysis of results from the previously funded project will
become an online lesson plan in genetics and development, created in a high
school teacher education program. The results of our research will be published
in scientific journals and regularly presented at local, national and
international meetings and discussed in undergraduate classes, seminars, and
online discussion sections. The arthropods maintained in laboratory culture
provide a much needed resource to local pre- and elementary schools and high
school science classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;