* 0236492
* CAREER:  Cellulose biosynthesis in aspen trees
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2010
* Chandrashekhar Joshi, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 02/28/2010
* USD 583,883.00

Cellulose biosynthesis is one of the most important biological processes on
earth. Although we use several cellulose products every day, molecular details
of how trees synthesize cellulose are still shrouded in mystery. Dr. Joshi's
long-term CAREER goal is to advance a comprehensive understanding of cellulose
biosynthesis in trees. Recent molecular genetic evidence suggests that plant
genomes host a rather large cellulose synthase (CesA) gene family and multiple
but distinct CesAs are involved in primary and secondary cell wall formation in
Arabidopsis. Dr. Joshi's lab has isolated three secondary wall-related CesA
genes from aspen namely, PtrCesA1, PtrCesA2 and PtrCesA3 that are coordinately
expressed during the secondary cell wall formation. Here further research will
be carried out to examine whether these three CesA genes are functionally
associated with better quality cellulose production in trees. The four main
objectives of this proposal are: 1) to examine expression of PtrCesA1, PtrCesA2
and PtrCesA3 proteins in developing xylem tissues of aspen; 2) to delineate the
spatial and temporal regulation of PtrCesA1, PtrCesA2 and PtrCesA3 genes; 3) to
inhibit the expression of a specific PtrCesA gene in transgenic aspen trees
through RNAi technology for functional analysis; and 4) to perform sense over-
expression of three secondary CesAs to study the impact of such genetic
manipulations on growth and wood characteristics of transgenic trees. This
research will establish a firm experimental basis for metabolic engineering of
secondary cell wall associated cellulose biosynthesis in trees that has many
fundamental and commercial implications.

The educational goals of this CAREER project include: 1) graduate program
development in Bioinformatics and Biotechnology; 2) establishment of a lecture
series in Plant Molecular Genetics; 3) integration of research activities into
undergraduate and graduate teaching and educational outreach activities; and 4)
providing research training opportunities for at least two undergraduate
students, two Ph. D graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher in the field
of cellulose biogenesis in trees.

