* 0236431
* fMRI of the Medial Temporal Lobe Memory System
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Craig Stark, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 04/30/2007
* USD 559,521.00

FMRI of Medial Temporal Lobe Memory System Abstract With National Science
Foundation support, Dr. Stark will conduct a three-year study using eight
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiments are proposed to explore
the contributions to declarative memory that are made by the hippocampal region
(the hippocampus proper, dentate gyrus, and subiculum) and the entorhinal,
perirhinal, and parahippocampal cortices. The project is divided into three sub-
projects, with each aimed at addressing a specific set of questions. In the
first subproject, the relationship between the neural substrates for encoding
and retrieval is investigated. The experiments here attempt to determine whether
incidental, automatic encoding can be observed during a recognition memory task.
These experiments make use of the finding that the level of activity during an
intentional encoding task can predict participants' subsequent memory (Brewer et
al., 1998; Wagner et al., 1998). Experiments 1 and 2 assess whether activity
associated with the novel foil items during a recognition memory task can
predict whether participants will be able to remember those items when a second
recognition memory task is administered outside the scanner. The observation of
encoding-related activity during memory retrieval would help explain several
null results in the literature, including several recent studies that
demonstrated activity in the hippocampal region under some conditions, but not
others. The second sub-project (Experiments 3-5) asks whether the hippocampus is
particularly involved in declarative memory tasks that require the formation and
use of associations. Several variations of this hypothesis are represented
strongly in the literature, but the current data are inconclusive as to whether
an associative / non-associative distinction adequately captures the division
between the role of the hippocampal region and the role of the adjacent cortical
structures. Experiment 3 uses the Remember / Know procedure to explore this
hypothesis. Experiment 4 is an fMRI version of a continuous recognition memory
task that has been previously used to explore single-item and associative memory
in amnesic patients. Finally, Experiment 5 seeks to determine whether medial
temporal lobe activity during retrieval is affected by the number of
associations that constitute a memory. In the third sub-project, the neural
substrates of false memories are explored, with the hypothesis that
understanding how memories fail, and understanding how true and false memories
might differ, will further our understanding of how the declarative memory
system operates. Experiment 6 is an fMRI extension of a recent ERP study of
reality monitoring errors (misattributing a memory as originating from a real
rather than an imagined event). Experiments 7a and 7b use a "misinformation"
paradigm also to study distortions of memory source. Here, we propose to trace
the activity associated with a memory from its original encoding, through the
encoding of subsequent contradictory misinformation, and to relate activity at
both stages to the likelihood of retrieval of either the original or the
subsequent misinformation. These studies will help address a central issue in
the field: whether misinformation impairs or interferes with the actual memory
of the original event, or whether it has no effect on the memory for the
original event. Using fMRI to address questions about the medial temporal lobe
poses an array of significant challenges. Signals are noisy and weak, there is
significant distortion due to magnetic field inhomogeneity, simple techniques to
anatomically normalize participants often perform poorly, and the medial
temporal lobe often appears to be active, despite our best attempts to make it
otherwise. However, the techniques in the proposed projects are specifically
designed to alleviate these concerns and to make fMRI of declarative memory in
the medial temporal lobes more viable. By focusing on the medial temporal lobes,
scanning parameters, alignment techniques, baseline tasks, and other aspects of
experimental design can be tuned to optimize the quality of the data, and
therefore the impact of the results.

