* 0236338
* Experience and the Development of Folk Biological Reasoning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* John Coley, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2009
* USD 365,876.00

This project examines how informal experiences with plants and animals may
enhance the development of biological reasoning in children between the ages of
5 and 10. Research on folk biology -- commonsense, everyday understanding of
plants and animals -- suggests that by age 5 children already organize
informally-acquired biological knowledge and use it to reason about the natural
world. Further, children growing up in rural areas, who presumably have more
informal experience with relatively intact natural ecosystems, exhibit
relatively sophisticated folk biological reasoning. However, research has yet to
identify specific experiences associated with rural versus urban environments
that contribute to differences in cognitive performance among these children.
This project will investigate how experience influences the development of folk
biological reasoning by comparing how the different experiences with nature
available to rural and urban children may lead to differences in how they think
about nature. The project focuses on children from urban schools in Boston and
from rural schools in Western Massachusetts. Children and their parents will be
interviewed about how they spend their time and what kinds of nature-related
activities they regularly engage in. Children will also be given structured
interviews and experimental tasks designed to assess different aspects of folk
biological thinking. Relations among these measures promise to shed light on how
different environments lead to differences in thinking, and more general links
between experience and cognitive development

Results will advance what we know about how specific differences in experience
lead to differences in thinking, and provide a picture of precisely which kinds
of experiences lead to more sophisticated folk biological reasoning. This
research may serve as the basis for developing experiences for children growing
up in other environments that will support their conceptual development in the
area of biology. Findings are potentially valuable to educators by clarifying
how activities outside of the classroom may impact knowledge relevant to science
education, and by elucidating the informal biological understanding that
children bring to the classroom.