* 0236861
* Phylogenetic Relationships of the Lacewings (Insecta:Neuroptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Shaun Winterton, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 03/31/2006
* USD 200,000.00

Insects represent one of the most diverse and species-rich groups of organisms
inhabiting the earth. One of the largest radiations of insects is the
Holometabola, or insects that undergo metamorphosis, and includes familiar
insects such as butterflies, beetles, flies, and lacewings. Closely related to
beetles, lacewings are considered one of the most primitive groups of
Holometabola. Lacewings represent a wide diversity of strange and unique life
histories, but their evolutionary relationships to each other and the
development of these unique life histories are poorly understood. We are
examining the historical relationships of the 17 family-groups of lacewings
using DNA sequence data from multiple genes, as well as detailed investigations
of morphological characteristics. These two sources of information will be
analysed using cladistic methodology to develop a phylogenetic or 'family tree'
of evolutionary relationships.&lt;br/&gt;The phylogenetic tree proposed from the
analysis of both molecular and morphological data will then form the template
for developing a natural classification of the groups of lacewings. This tree
will further be used to test hypotheses of development of various life histories
under different scenarios, including whether the first ancestors of lacewings
were aquatic or terrestrial in origin. The results of this research can be used
to further our understanding of the processes of insect evolution. Molecular and
morphological character systems and genes explored in this project will be
useful in resolving similar-aged radiations in other insects, especially for
holometabolan relatives such as Megaloptera (dobsonflies), Raphidioptera
(snakeflies) and Coleoptera (beetles). This project will also provide
opportunities for education and career development of a postdoctoral scientist
and undergraduate students, as well as foster cross-instituional collaborations
between scientists.&lt;br/&gt;