* 0236320
* Target-Dependent Feedback Regulation of Neural Activity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Michael Goy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 07/31/2007
* USD 338,000.00

The brain innervates all the organs in the body, and controls and coordinates
their activities. However, the brain can only do this effectively if it has
accurate information about the status of its targets. The Goy laboratory is
interested in learning how target organs communicate with neural circuits. They
have begun to investigate feedback regulation of a simple neural circuit (the
crustacean cardiac ganglion), which controls the contractions of the heart
musculature. Their preliminary data show that this system uses a novel form of
muscle-to-nerve feedback, based on a paracrine signaling factor known as nitric
oxide (NO). &lt;br/&gt;The feedback scheme is simple. Nitric oxide synthase
(NOS), the enzyme that makes NO, is present in crustacean heart muscle fibers at
very high levels. Cardiac NOS is stimulated by calcium. Heart muscle
contractions are also triggered by calcium. Thus, with each heartbeat, the
muscle is thought to produce a burst of NO whose amplitude and timing encode
information about the performance of the heart. The NO can diffuse quickly to
the ganglion, which lies within the chamber of the heart (completely surrounded
by the muscle). The effect of NO is to strongly suppress the output of the
ganglion. Taken in a physiological context, this actually makes very good sense:
if the heart is beating too fast or too hard it will make disproportionate
amounts of NO, which will inhibit the ganglion, and -- because the ganglion
provides the stimuli that drive the muscle -- will ultimately bring muscle
contractions back into a more satisfactory range. The experiments outlined in
Dr. Goy's proposal are designed to test these ideas, and to learn more about the
mechanisms that underlie this unusual feedback pathway.&lt;br/&gt; Dr. Goy is a
mentor in the UNC Research Apprenticeship Program, which provides academically
gifted Minority high school students with a 3-month summer research experience.
He is also a UNC undergraduate research mentor. Over the last 10 years he has
provided 11 UNC biology and chemistry students with intensive research training
in his laboratory. A portion of the supply budget will be used to support the
efforts of a high school or college student each summer for the duration of the
award.&lt;br/&gt;