* 0236333
* Mechanisms of Species Loss and Biotic Homogenization in Forest Herb Communities II.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Donald Waller, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2007
* USD 307,494.00

Mechanisms of Species Loss and Biotic Homogenization in Forest Herb Communities
II. Waller, Donald M. University of Wisconsin-Madison

Historical data for northern forests and southern prairies of Wisconsin reveal
systematic declines over the past 50 years in rare species and species richness.
Several mechanisms might account for these losses including shifts in
disturbance regimes, invading weedy exotics, overabundant herbivores, stress
from acid deposition and climate change. This project will test these potential
mechanisms by examining detailed patterns of change in understory plant
communities. This project exploits a unique data set compiled by Curtis and
colleagues in the early 1950's that provides accurate baseline data on species
occurrences and abundances across hundreds of sites. More than 70 forest sites
in southern Wisconsin will be resurveyed to determine the nature, rates, and
causes of ecological change in these communities. These results will be compared
to the historical Curtis data to chart changes in over-story and under-story
composition, invasions by exotics, and rates of species loss and biotic
homogenization. Overall, 11 alternative mechanisms of species loss (succession,
fire suppression, invasion by exotics, climate change, grazing by deer, etc.)
will be tested. Detailed site histories and GIS analyses of some sites will
allow an assessment of local disturbance history and landscape context. This
project exploits a unique historical data set to identify the mechanisms causing
plant community changes. It will pinpoint declining species and greatly expand
understanding of how overall community composition responds to local and
regional conditions. Such results are of broad significance to forest and
wildlife managers charged with managing forests, exotics, and keystone
herbivores like deer. Finally, the project would support outreach efforts to
natural resource managers, educators, and the public to ensure that these
results gain broad attention and appropriate responses.