* 0236462
* Direct Compositionality:  A Workshop
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Pauline Jacobson, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2004
* USD 25,583.00

The National Science Foundation supports the Workshop on Direct
Compositionality, to be held at Brown University, June 19-22, 2003. The workshop
will feature 13 invited speakers. There will also be slots for papers submitted
by anonymously reviewed abstracts. The workshop will be open to the public. Each
speaker will be the discussant for one other paper, encouraging a full debate on
the issues. The results of the workshop will be published as a book or special
issue of a journal. The focus of the workshop is the interaction of the
syntactic and semantic systems. The syntactic system is a system of rules
regarding the well-formedness of various linguistic expressions; the semantic
system must relate each such expression to some meaning. Two main hypotheses
regarding this interaction have been studied in recent years. One is "direct
compositionality", which posits that the two systems work together. Each
syntactic rule (sometimes stated in a very generalized and schematic form) is
paired with a syntactic semantic rule. On this view, larger expressions are
based on smaller ones in the syntax, and the meaning of the larger expression is
simultaneously composed from the meanings of its constituent parts. A competing
hypothesis is that semantic interpretation follows syntactic representation. In
the 1970's and 1980's, the former view dominated formal semantic theory, but the
latter view has become increasingly accepted. Many of the reasons for abandoning
the earlier (and arguably simpler) view depend on a particular set of analytic
tools. The development of new tools of compositional semantics makes it time to
reopen the question of the feasibility of direct compositionality. The relevant
tools include techniques from logic and techniques borrowed from the semantics
of programming languages. This workshop will bring together researchers who
approach direct compositionality from multiple perspectives and researchers with
expertise in a variety of analytic techniques.

The speakers include senior faculty, junior faculty, and advanced graduate
students. This is designed to foster in junior scholars and graduate students a
sense of full participation in the scientific community. Undergraduates will
participate in the conference and help with its organization, enabling them to
experience first-hand the excitement of scientific research. The question of how
syntax and semantics interact has implications both for models of how humans
compute meanings of sentences as they process them and for the design of
efficient systems of natural language understanding.