* 0236821
* Fallible Counters and Time
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Peter Killeen, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 01/31/2008
* USD 414,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt; When we judge the magnitude of a stimulus-the brightness of
a light, heaviness of a weight, or duration of a sound-we are mapping that
aspect onto another dimension, typically a numerical one. Even when comparing
two stimuli directly, that comparison may be mediated by a neural representation
akin to counting. A counter is a neural device that adds sensory action
potentials, or, in the case of time, pacemaker pulses. Inaccuracies reveal the
structure of the counter: Proportional error in sensory discriminations -
Weber's law or scalar timing - is the most general laws of psychophysics; All
models of counters must yield it. Minuscule deviations from it and from linear
timing further strongly constrain candidates. Models of failure modes of
counters will be developed and tested. Examples are: Failing to set a higher
bank (e.g., 10's) when a lower one resets (the Y2K glitch); failing to reset;
conditioning of weights in other than a power series. These will be compared to
data collected on the discriminative and productive abilities of rats and
pigeons, in particular: (1) mean performances in discriminating and producing
temporal intervals; (2) Weber functions; (3) count distributions and hitting-
times. Alternate weighting schemes for the accumulator that arise from
conditioning will be studied. These schematic models will be integrated with
realistic neural networks. The likelihood of this theory will compared with
those of other current timing theories given these data. Results will be applied
to information transmission and signal detection theories. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;