* 0236856
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Genome Sequencing and Comparative Analysis of the Chemolithoautotrophic Thermophile, Persephonella Marina and it's Terrestrial Relative, AZ-Fu1
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Anna-Louise Reysenbach, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 05/31/2006
* USD 500,000.00

Dr. Anna-Louise Reysenbach of Portland State University and Dr. John Heidelberg
of The Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR) have been awarded a grant to
sequence the entire genomes of two new heat-loving (thermophilic)
microorganisms. The project will be completed in 1 year and serve as an
educational template for a K-12 teachers workshop. The data will be publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;These two microbes are of interest as they are closely
related but one (Persephonella marina) was isolated from a deep-sea hydrothermal
vent in the Pacific Ocean and the other (strain Az-Fu1) from a terrestrial hot
spring on the island of Sao Miguel, Azores. They both use inorganic chemicals
for their energy and their source of carbon. In their natural environment,
members of this group are often associated with mineral precipitates such as
iron sulfides, pointing to their potential role in removal of contaminating
metals from the environment. Furthermore, the deep position of these isolates
within the eubacterial domain on the universal tree of life suggests that they
may be good models for studying the features of early evolution of life on
Earth. This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award funded through a
collaborative program between the National Science Foundation and the Department
of Agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;