* 0236173
* Callose Synthases:  What do they do in the Arabidopsis root?
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Keiko Torii, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 01/31/2008
* USD 217,711.00

Callose, a b-1,3-glucan, is an important polysaccharide in higher plants. it is
produced in response to wounding, and is part of the plant's defenses against
pathogens. But callose is also a constituent of intact plants, where its role is
far from clear. It may be essential for the formation of cross walls during
plant cell division, and it may be required for pollen tube growth. But beyond
this, little is known. It is known that callose can cause the closure of
plasmodesmata, the protoplasmic bridges that interconnect plant cells. This will
isolate cells from each other. It is known that there are groups of cells in
plants that are isolated from other groups of cells; we call such a group of
cells a "symplasmic domain". We have proposed that a major role of callose is to
generate and maintain these symplasmic domains. Synthesis of callose is mediated
by a large multisubunit complex, of which callose synthase (CalS) is the
catalytic subunit. The "model" plant Arabidopsis thaliana contains 17 putative
CalS genes. We have shown that 8 of these are expressed in intact Arabidopsis
roots. The goal of this research is to determine the role of each of these CalS
genes, and to determine whether one or more of these CalS proteins is involved
in the production of callose that closes plasmodesmata. We will use two
approaches to determine this. First, we are preparing a series of single-amino
acid substitution mutants in each of these genes, using the TILLING procedure.
These should be weak mutants that will affect the phenotype of the plants
without being lethal. We have T-DNA insertion mutants for 5 of these genes, and
as expected, some of these strong mutants are lethal. The ones that are not
lethal will be used, along with the TILLING mutants, to study the role of each
of these genes in the root. The second approach will be to generate
promoter::Green Fluorescent Protein fusions for each of the 8 CalS genes, and
then introduced them into Arabidopsis plants. This will allow us to determine in
which cells each of these genes is expressed, and to study the conditions that
activate each gene. Together, these studies should show us where and when each
of the callose synthase genes is active, and should demonstrate the effects on
the root when any particular callose synthase gene is reduced in activity. It
should provide a starting place for future work on the role of callose in all
parts of Arabidopsis, and in other plant species.