* 0236150
* Evaluating the Effect of a Unique Maize Cysteine Proteinase on Caterpillar Midgut Structure
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Tibor Pechan, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Winner
* 02/28/2006
* USD 471,500.00

The focus of this research is a unique protein-degrading enzyme, a cysteine
protease called Mir1-CP that rapidly accumulates in insect resistant corn lines
in response to caterpillar attack. The insect resistant corn lines were
developed by conventional plant breeding from plant material that originated in
Antigua. Mir1-CP is unique because the sequence of the enzyme's last 25 amino
acids has no matches in the currently available databases. Mir1-CP appears to be
mobilized within one hour of caterpillar feeding and accumulates at the wound
site. When caterpillars feed on plant tissues containing Mir1-CP, their growth
is reduced approximately 50% to 80%. This growth reduction is due to impaired
nutrient utilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate the effect of Mir1-CP
on caterpillars, the investigators examined the insect's first line of defense
against potentially toxic components in food, the peritrophic matrix (PM). The
PM is a membrane-like structure that consists of proteins and chitin. It
surrounds the food bolus, protects the insect midgut from chemical and physical
damage and plays an active role in digestion and nutrient absorption. Scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) revealed that PMs of insects that feed on plant
material containing Mir1-CP were severely damaged with numerous perforations,
cracks, and holes. Damage to the PM is likely to disrupt the digestive system
and stunt caterpillar growth. Consequently, the smaller caterpillars have longer
life-cycles and are more susceptible to parasites and predators in the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major goal of this research project is to
determine how Mir1-CP damages the caterpillar midgut structure. Does it degrade
PM proteins? Does it attack specific PM proteins? Does it prevent PM formation
by binding to chitin or other PM components? The investigators will use two
different strategies for testing Mir1-CP's effect on the PM. First, caterpillars
will be fed transgenic plant material that expresses either normal Mir1-CP,
Mir1-CP that has been mutated and has no enzyme activity, or Mir1-CP that is
missing the last 25 amino acids. The appearance and permeability of the midgut
and PM structure of caterpillars that eat these transgenic lines will be
examined. The results will reveal whether protease activity or the presence of
the last 25 amino acids is needed to damage the caterpillar midgut and PM.
Second, the investigators will express Mir1-CP and the mutated forms in a
heterologous system that will permit purification of large amounts of each
Mir1-CP form. The purified proteins will be fed to caterpillars to see if they
result in the same effects as those expressed in plants. In addition, PMs that
have been dissected from caterpillars will be incubated with the three Mir1-CP
forms to determine if they have a direct effect on PM structure, or degrade PM
proteins. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, this research will permit
determination of whether Mir1-CP can be used as an environmentally friendly
insect control agent. Insect herbivory is responsible for 15% of the world's
crop losses each year. These losses are major economic and ecological problems
that decrease the supply of food to a growing world population. US farmers have
been controlling caterpillar pests by planting transgenic crops that express
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) toxin. Currently, Bt-toxin is highly effective, but
scientists predict that insects will eventually become resistant to the toxin.
By understanding how Mir1-CP stunts caterpillar growth, scientists may be able
to use Mir1-CP as an alternative to Bt-toxin in the future.&lt;br/&gt;