* 0236871
* Systematics, Biogeography and Evolutionary Radiations of the Cyphophthalmi (Arachnida, Opiliones)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Gonzalo Giribet, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 02/28/2007
* USD 299,809.00

Cyphophthalmi constitutes a suborder of the arachnid order Opiliones (daddy-
long-legs). Of ancient origin and widespread distribution, they live in the leaf
litter of undisturbed temperate to tropical humid forests. Cyphophthalmids have
been found in all continents, except Antarctica, and in most islands of
continental origin, such as New Zealand, New Caledonia, Sumatra, and Madagascar.
Many of the places they inhabit qualify as biodiversity hotspots, areas
collectively comprising only 1.4% of the land surface area of the Earth and
recommended for preferential conservation policies for having high diversity.
Due to their localized distribution and scant dispersal ability, cyphophthalmids
have been chosen as a model to study evolutionary radiations in islands of
continental origin, biogeography, and potential issues of conservation biology.
To do so, the taxonomy and evolutionary relationships among its species need to
be worked out. We will use scanning electron microscopy to study the morphology
of the cyphophthalmids and will generate lists of characters to be analyzed with
standard phylogenetic algorithms. Other specimens will be used for genetic
studies in order to generate DNA sequence data also to be analyzed
phylogenetically. Both sets of information (morphology and DNA) will be used to
propose the evolutionary relationships of the members of the group and to
establish a classification. The evolutionary trees will also aid studies of
biogeographic patterns and earth history. Evolutionary analyses will be aided
with the use of software written to work in parallel on a large multiprocessor
computer cluster. Extensive field work in New Zealand, South Africa, Madagascar,
tropical West Africa and southeast Asia is required to obtain material suitable
for laboratory work and to document undescribed diversity.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Systematics, biogeography, and the study of evolutionary radiations
have contributed to a better understanding of the patterns observed in nature.
Optimizing the knowledge of diversity across geographic areas, cladogenesis, and
speciation may benefit from the use of model systems. The potential use of
Cyphophthalmi as a new model in evolutionary biology has driven a dual study of
the higher systematics of the group and the exploration of one of their most
spectacular adaptive radiations, the one undergone in New Zealand. The research
will develop a new model system to integrate phylogenetic and biogeographic
patterns with evolutionary studies of explosive radiations, and will form the
basis for future studies on biodiversity estimates and conservation biology.
Global knowledge of the Cyphophthalmi, with a database containing geographical
information and illustrations for all the estimated 180 species of the group,
will be made available. During the process, one undergraduate and one graduate
student will be fully trained in arachnid evolutionary biology. The value of the
research project thus has both scientific and social interests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;