* 0236913
* Phase IV: Improvement of the Academic Research Infrastructure
* O/D,EPS
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Kristin Bowman-James, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Karen L. Sandberg
* 09/30/2006
* USD 9,000,000.00

The Kansas EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Award focuses on living
systems to leverage existing research strengths in ecology, genetics, and
biochemistry. Two new thrust areas are targeted: one at the interface of ecology
and genetics and the other in the emerging field of lipid profiling
(lipidomics). The University of Kansas (KU), Kansas State University (KSU), and
Wichita State University (WSU) will participate. The first new area focuses on
functional genomic approaches to study organismal response to environmental
change, and builds on the new emphasis on developmental genetics and genomics at
KU and KSU. Kansas EPSCoR will expand existing and launch new interdisciplinary
projects, recruit new faculty members focusing on ecological genomics, hire
bioinformatics specialists to develop methods to mesh gene expression and
ecological data, and develop a training program in ecological genomics. The
second new area involves the establishment of a lipidomics research center for
systematic studies of the role of lipids and lipid composition of membranes in
living systems. Researchers in plant, animal, and microbial sciences at KSU, KU,
WSU, and other institutions will use the center's capability. Enhancements in
the bioinformatics infrastructure will assist in the development of the two
thrust areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty hires in ecological genomics will
complement existing expertise in the state. In conjunction with the research
infrastructure enhancement, Kansas EPSCoR plans a range of education and
outreach activities, from elementary school to postdoctoral and early career
faculty training. In collaboration with Emporia State University, Kansas EPSCoR
will help to plan and implement conferences and workshops for young women
considering careers in science, technology, engineering, or math (STEM). Haskell
Indian Nations University will place students in summer research programs at
KSU, KU, and WSU, with the support of Kansas EPSCoR. Additional collaborations
are planned with community colleges and the McNair program. Kansas EPSCoR will
support graduate research assistants, post-doctoral fellows, and early career
faculty in living systems research. Finally, a series of symposia, seminars, and
workshops will build an integrated education and research program in ecological
genomics and lipidomics.&lt;br/&gt;