* 0236383
* Acquisition of a Sensitive Magnetic Susceptibility System and a Reflected Light Microscope for Studies of Self-Reversal in Titanomaghemite
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2006
* John Tarduno, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2006
* USD 50,899.00

0236383&lt;br/&gt;Tarduno&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The remarkable ability of some
rocks to acquire a magnetization in a direction antiparallel to the Earth's
geomagnetic field, or self-reversal of natural remanent magnetization, is
thought to be rare; it has been established only in a few igneous rocks bearing
hemoilmenite. The paleomagnetism lab at Rochester has reported on two, nearly
antipodal components of magnetization, revealed through detailed thermal
demagnetization studies, from pillow basalts in which hemoilmenite is absent.
Application of laboratory partial thermoremanent magnetizations have shown that
the component isolated at lower temperatures represents a partial self-reversal
of the primary magnetization. Because maghemitization of oceanic crust is
ubiquitous, partial self-reversals may make an important contribution to the
decrease in marine magnetic anomaly amplitudes with age observed for crust
formed during the last 30 million years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from this
grant will be used to acquire two equipment systems to assist in further
investigations of the extent and mechanism of self-reversal carried by
titanomaghemite in oceanic basalt: (1) a magnetic susceptibility system with a
furnace apparatus for Curie point determinations and (2) a reflected light
microscope system for basic characterization of magnetic phases. The equipment
will support a Ph.D. thesis and the thesis studies of several undergraduate
students. The equipment will also support the continuing work of other graduate
students, undergraduates and postdoctoral researchers conducting studies in
geomagnetism, tectonics, rock magnetism and environmental magnetism, and in
formal course instruction at the University of
Rochester.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;