* 0236429
* Functional Dissection of Glutamatergic Synapses: From Contact to Evoked Neurotransmission
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Gong Chen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 08/31/2006
* USD 358,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies have made remarkable progress
toward understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms of synapse formation
in the central nervous system. It has been demonstrated that presynaptic
vesicles and proteins are preassembled into packets and transported along axons
to newly formed axon-dendritic sites. Similarly, postsynaptic glutamate receptor
subunits have also been found in mobile transport packets and recruited to
nascent axon-dendritic sites. Although these imaging studies suggest a rapid
time course for the formation of a new synapse (minutes to hours rather than
days to weeks), it is unknown whether active neurotransmission is occurring
across these nascent synapses. This proposal takes a novel approach by using a
single-synapse-recording system to monitor the functional appearance of evoked
synaptic transmission at individual glutamatergic synapses in rat hippocampal
culture. Local signaling pathways during synaptic remodeling of nascent synapses
will be explored by a combination of patch clamp recording, fluorescence
imaging, and molecular biology techniques. These studies should provide a clear
view of the functional time course of synaptogenesis at central synapses. It
will improve our understanding about how neural networks are built and remodeled
during brain development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's long-term career goal
is to explore the cellular and molecular mechanisms of learning and memory,
focusing on synaptogenesis and synaptic plasticity. This proposal aims at a
better understanding of functional formation of synapses, the fundamental units
of our brain. Synaptogenesis at early developmental stages helps wire and
integrate individual neurons into functional circuits. At later stages, new
synapses form continuously while others are eliminated from the synaptic
network. This plasticity of synaptic connections is believed to be important
during learning and memory. Therefore, the Chen laboratory's research on
functional synapse formation and synaptic remodeling will broadly enhance the
understanding of neural development and learning and memory. One important
element of this proposal involves training of graduate and undergraduate
students, as well as postdoctoral researchers. Insight gained through this
research will also be integrated into the PI's teaching of Developmental
Neurobiology course offering to graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;