* 0236027
* Structural and Functional Analysis of the Plant Phenylpropanoid Biosynthetic Pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Joseph Noel, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 02/29/2008
* USD 777,284.00

Plant phenylpropanoids including flavonoids and stilbenes comprise a
structurally diverse group of secondary metabolites that play vital roles in the
interaction of plants with their surrounding environment. The utility of these
compounds in plants varies widely and includes roles as structural polymers,
defense barriers, defense chemicals synthesized in response to microbial,
insect, and herbivore predation, signaling molecules for nitrogen-fixing
rhizobia bacteria, UV-protective agents, and pigments. In addition to their role
in plant physiology, phenylpropanoids possess a number of properties that have
proven useful to the pharmaceutical, food, agricultural, and nutritional
industries. A major goal of this project is to understand the molecular
mechanisms underlying the biosynthesis of plant phenylpropanoids. The current
objectives of this research are to examine the functional diversity of the
chalcone synthase (CHS) / stilbene synthase (STS) superfamily of plant
polyketide synthases involved in the initial stages of flavonoid biosynthesis
using both x-ray crystallography and enzymological studies, the mechanism,
stereochemistry, and selectivity of chalcone isomerase (CHI)-mediated flavanone
formation in both chalcone and deoxychalcone biosynthetic pathways, the
structure and mechanism of chalcone reductase (CHR), and the energetic and
architectural features of multienzyme complex formation involving CHS, CHI,
and/or CHR during flavonoid and isoflavonoid biosynthesis using surface plasmon
resonance and TROSY-NMR. These studies will elucidate the mechanisms governing
phenylpropanoid production in plants and in particularly will relate the
biosynthetic diversity of these pathways to on-going evolutionary change that
leads to this biologically important form of chemical diversity. Significantly,
the broader impacts resulting from the proposed research activities include a
significant training component that involves the exclusive participation of both
graduate (PhD) and undergraduate (BS) students in groups under represented in
scientific research. In addition, key scientific findings generated by this
research will be disseminated to the public principally through annual lectures
organized through an evening seminar series for the general public that
discusses in lay terms the science and significance of the on-going publicly
supported work at the Salk Institute. Recently, key findings obtained during the
initial stages of this project described the benefits of understanding plant
secondary metabolism for mankind with regard to agriculture, disease prevention,
and drug discovery.&lt;br/&gt; A number of plant-derived phenylpropanoids are
valuable medicinal agents. Moreover, the regular dietary consumption of
phenylpropanoid-derived compounds including lignans, stilbenes, and
(iso)flavonoids has considerable health benefits including lowered risk factors
for both cancer and coronary artery disease. The enzyme scaffolds that are used
by plants to create these small molecules serve as novel and useful starting
points to create new molecular entities for drug discovery using a novel
approach that includes structural biology and genomics. Most importantly, all
organisms utilize chemical diversity to live and prosper in harsh and
challenging environments. While an organism's protein and gene diversity have
captured the public's attention over the last several years, ultimately,
chemical diversity and an organism's adapting metabolism create "endogenous
drugs" that all species exploit for survival. This project will generate
information with which to better understand the molecular basis for this on-
going process of evolutionary change at the chemical level. In turn, such
information not only provides mankind with an understanding of organismal
evolution at the molecular and metabolic level, but also provides a framework
for manipulating this framework for the creation of new chemicals for drug
discovery, improvements in nutrition, and ultimately, a healthier
life.&lt;br/&gt;