* 0236409
* Incorporating Active Real-Time Objects and Control Into Semantic Webs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Phillip Sheu, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/28/2006
* USD 39,949.00

As more real-world data are included in the Web, requirements to capture more
meaning of the data have rapidly increased. Semantic Web has been proposed by
W3C to be the next generation of web by representing the metadata using RDF
(Resource Description Framework). Even though the metadata encoded in RDF have
rich semantics and high potential for providing lots of intelligent features,
there have not been enough efforts to utilize them in practical Web application
areas.&lt;br/&gt;A real-time Semantic Web is modeled as an active environment
that consists of a set of real-time objects each consisting of a set of
attributes, functions, and active rules. A real-time object can be changed
spontaneously or triggered by demands (via messages) in real-time. The semantics
of such a distributed, real-time object system can be described by a formal
logical foundation called Active Real-Time Semantic Web (ARTSW) that is the
ordinary first order language (that is time-invariant) plus a set of time-
varying constructs. &lt;br/&gt;The ARTSW can be used to describe the constraints
on top of a real-time Semantic Web, or it can be used as a specification
language that defines the semantics of a dynamic environment. The declarative
ness and inference capability of formal logic are coupled with real-time
distributed objects in order to enable the users to encode easily the domain
knowledge into rules. Our research is aimed at providing a software engineering
framework that covers specification, execution, and management of an active
real-time semantic web. Because several technical subjects (i.e., real-time
objects, distributed systems, logic, and Web) are involved, this research will
focus on the explorative investigation of the technical soundness of the
proposed framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;