* 0236782
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Temporal Organization of Emotion Responses to Stress
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Holly Arrow, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 04/30/2005
* USD 16,355.00

Never let them see you sweat. Despite the reverence given to this popular adage,
when the pressure mounts, sometimes our emotions get the better of us. Emotional
reactions to stress sometimes interfere with tasks we must accomplish, including
tasks that rely on memory. A speaker may become too anxious to remember the
details of the speech, or a parent may become too upset to remember where the
car keys were left. However, sometimes, memory is enhanced under stress and
other times there is no apparent effect. People differ in personality,
experience, and physiology, and they have very different emotional reactions to
stressful events. In fact, differences in emotional response to stress more
strongly affect memory than the stressors themselves

With NSF support and under the supervision of Dr. Holly Arrow, Ms. Stacey
Pederson will conduct a comprehensive study of physiological, psychological, and
contextual factors that relate emotion to stress and memory. Using portable
computers, participants track their moods and emotional events over a two-week
period. Concurrent with the computer diary study, participants' emotional,
physiological, and neurological responses will be measured in the laboratory as
they complete memory tasks under various stressful conditions. The combination
of laboratory experiments and evaluations of everyday emotional experiences is a
noteworthy feature of Ms. Pederson's project. The broader impacts of her work
may include the development of more effective and efficient strategies for
coping with stressful experiences.