* 0236402
* CAREER:  Mechanisms and tradeoffs of dietary specialization in mammalian herbivores
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2010
* Maria Denise Dearing, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 02/28/2010
* USD 587,095.00

Limitations of the detoxification system in processing plant toxins are
implicated as the mechanism explaining the paucity of dietary specialization
among mammalian herbivores. In fact, little is known about how wild herbivores
metabolize plant toxins and how detoxification restricts dietary specialization.
Detoxification constraints are of current interest given that the toxin
concentrations of many plants will double within the next century due to rising
atmospheric CO2 levels. The overarching goals of the research are to understand
the mechanisms that permit and tradeoffs associated with dietary specialization
in herbivorous woodrats (Neotoma). Specialist woodrats are predicted to absorb
lower concentrations of plant toxins compared to generalists. The research
examines 3 mechanisms that may decrease toxin absorption: 1) tannin-binding
proteins 2) p-glycoproteins and 3) intestinal detoxification. Specialists and
generalists will be compared to determine how they differ with respect to these
mechanisms. Biochemical and pharmacological methods will be employed. In
addition, theory predicts that specialists have detoxification systems that are
more efficient in processing plant toxins in their diet compared to generalist
herbivores processing the same compounds. However, the superior ability that
specialists have in processing toxins from their diet is predicted to compromise
their efficiency to biotransform novel toxins, which are not contained in their
normal diet. The potential tradeoffs of dietary specialization will be addressed
by comparing 1) maximal levels of novel toxins that specialists and generalists
can ingest; 2) capacities of detoxification pathways (functionalization and
glucuronidation) using probe drugs; and 3) surveying the detoxification systems
of generalists and specialists with DNA microarrays. For the education
component, an intensive course is proposed for mid-level students (sophomore-
junior) to train them in various aspects of research by using this research
project as the example and opportunity. This course, "Scientific Immersion",
will be offered in the fall semester each year to a maximum of five students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;