* 0236204
* LTREB:   Rapid Ecotonal Shifts, Pest Outbreaks, and Mortality of a Dominant Tree Species in Response to Record Drought
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2009
* Thomas Whitham, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 03/31/2009
* USD 329,547.00

This LTREB research will examine four key predictions. First, plant resistance
to herbivory affects community and ecosystem-level processes. Beginning in 1982
genetically resistant and susceptible trees were identified, and on 1/2 of the
susceptible trees, 2 species of common insect have been removed each year.
Studies involve tree fitness responses to chronic herbivory, mycorrhizal
community responses, the community consequences of a cryptic keystone herbivore,
and the use of resistant and susceptible trees in reconstructing past climates.
Ongoing studies of soil bacteria, nutrient cycling, and costs of resistance make
these long-term experiments very important to&lt;br/&gt;continue. Second,
drought results in rapid ecotonal shifts, which alter community structure and
ecosystem dynamics. In 1996 a record drought occurred that resulted in 60 sites
that suffered 30-70% tree mortality and killed an estimated 75,000 mature trees.
These sites underwent a rapid ecotonal shift from pinyon-juniper woodland to
juniper woodland or grassland. Eleven of these&lt;br/&gt;sites, paired with
adjacent low mortality sites, represent a valuable resource because they are the
direct result of a climate change event. These sites are crucial for studying
the causes and consequences of climate change on mycorrhizal mutualists,
microbial decomposers, arthropod and vertebrate communities, and how
environmental stress differentially affects biodiversity and&lt;br/&gt;ecosystem
function. Third, repeated drought events have different effects than single
drought events. This year, 2002, is already identified as the driest year in
recorded history. This new drought following the 1996 drought allows us to
determine if the same sites suffer repeated mortality and selection, which is
likely to have very different long-term consequences than a single mortality
event. Four, herbivore x environmental interactions affect insect outbreaks to
alter community structure and ecosystem processes. Since 1982 we have been
monitoring the distribution of moth and scale insects that were restricted to
sites of chronic stress. However, in response to the record drought of 1996,
scales have expanded from these epicenters to become the largest outbreak in the
southwest. We have mapped their expansion and are studying how resistant and
susceptible trees are affected by drought. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
southwestern US is in the midst of a drought similar to those predicted to
increase throughout much of the US by many climate change models. The principles
learned by studying pinyon pine and its associated community can be used to make
informed decisions regarding the consequences of these predicted climate
changes. In addition, because NAU is located in an area with a diverse
population including 42 Native American tribes, we propose to&lt;br/&gt;train
and mentor students drawn from a diversity of under-represented groups. Our
ability to do so will be enhanced by programs already in place, including an
NSF-sponsored University Mentoring in Environmental Biology grant targeting
under-represented groups and an NAU grants program that promotes undergraduate
research.&lt;br/&gt;