* 0236363
* The Molecular Basis of Coadaptation and Hybrid Breakdown
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Ronald Burton, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/2007
* USD 468,000.00

When animals or plants from genetically divergent populations interbreed, the
resulting hybrids often show reduced performance (hybrid breakdown) relative to
their parents. This is especially true in second generation (F2) hybrids, where
incompatible genotypes may arise via recombination. The proposed work uses the
marine copepod Tigriopus californicus as a model system for analyses of the
molecular mechanisms underlying hybrid breakdown. This project has two parts. In
the first, experiments focus on interactions between nuclear and mitochondrial
genes, testing the hypothesis that hybridization disrupts energy production in
mitochondria. The second part of the study tests the hypothesis that
hybridization disrupts transcription of rRNA genes and this results in reduced
rates of protein synthesis (and reduced performance) in hybrids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid breakdown is widespread in nature and has important
ramifications in medicine, agriculture and conservation biology. Results from
this project may aid in understanding: (1) the growing number of human diseases
known to be associated with mtDNA and nuclear gene mutations which disrupt
mitochondrial function, (2) the role of gene interactions in agriculture, where
vigorous F1 hybrid strains often give rise to poor-performing F2 hybrids, and
(3) the extent to which wildlife management and conservation practices should
restrict movement of organisms among geographic locales. The project will also
provide excellent training opportunities for undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral researchers. &lt;br/&gt;