* 0236637
* Undergraduate Summer Research Program in Mathematical Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Joseph Previte, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 05/31/2006
* USD 107,967.00

Penn State Erie's REU Program in Mathematical Biology will involve
undergraduates in one of the richest and fastest growing fields of mathematics.
It gives the six participants research training in mathematical biology and
introduces them to several areas of current interest: population dynamics,
pattern formation in active media, the modeling of electrically excitable cells,
and limb growth of plants and trees. The only prerequisites are the successful
completion of a course in ordinary differential equations and an interest in
&lt;br/&gt;biology. The goal of the program is two-fold. First, the students
receive an introduction to the theory and methods of nonlinear dynamical
systems, including phase plane analysis and bifurcation theory. These techniques
are then used to answer questions about mathematical models of biological
phenomena. This is of great value since dynamical systems arise in many areas in
addition to biology, such as physics, engineering, and chemistry. Second, the
students are exposed to current topics of research in mathematical biology. Many
of the topics discussed during the program are at the early stages of
development, and offer many opportunities for future research. Students will
have access to Pentium computers running the Linux operating system and will
learn the mathematical software package XPP, a powerful tool for phase plane and
bifurcation analysis. Seminars will be given throughout the program by both
faculty and student &lt;br/&gt;participants along with discussion groups at the
end of each day. &lt;br/&gt;