* 0236957
* Collaborative Research: Nested Events and Embedded Phylogeographic Structure within the Southern Regional Deserts of North America
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2003,06/30/2007
* David Hafner, New Mexico Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 06/30/2007
* USD 132,213.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. David Hafner at the New Mexico Museum of Natural
History (NMMNH) to study the evolution of arid regions in the southwestern
United States and northern Mexico. This is collaborative research being
conducted with scientists at the University of Nevada Las Vegas and the Centro
de Investigaciones Biologicas del Noroeste (CIBNOR) in Baja California Sur,
Mexico. The NMMNH's portion of the project ($135,000 over 3 years) will support
fieldwork in Mexico and the U.S., and resulting specimens will become part of
the permanent research collections of NMMNH and CIBNOR. By comparing genetic
differences among populations of selected arid-adapted rodents, the scientists
will reconstruct in detail the complex history of these diverse desert regions
over the last 5.5 million years, including episodes of inundation by seaways,
origin of mountain ranges, and cyclical climatic changes during the last "Ice
Ages." The study will be based on sequence data of mitochondrial DNA from over
1600 specimens collected from throughout the desert regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs a new and powerful analytical
approach that should greatly improve efforts to provide realistic
reconstructions of complicated biotic histories. By identifying regional centers
of distinct biodiversity, the study will provide insight into the ecology and
conservation of North America's regional deserts. This is a continuing
collaboration between U.S. and Mexican scientists, building on a previous NSF
grant (1996-1999), and involves graduate and undergraduate students from both
countries in field and laboratory aspects. Results of the project will be
disseminated through academic channels (publication and scientific meetings) and
through public programs and exhibits at the NMMNH. In addition to the Museum's
350,000 annual visitors, the project will reach targeted school groups through
Proyecto Futuro (an NSF-funded program for Spanish-speaking students) and Way
Out West, a NMMNH-produced video program carried nationally on public
television. &lt;br/&gt;