* 0236526
* Phenotypic Plasticity, Parental Effects, and Parental Care in Plants: An Examination of Spike Reflectance in Plantago lanceolata
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Elizabeth Lacey, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 02/28/2009
* USD 496,938.00

Dr. Lacey will address fundamental questions about plant reflectance patterns.
Previous experiments with Plantago lanceolata show that during the flowering
season, 1) warm temperatures produce higher quality offspring than do cool
temperatures and 2) the reproductive structures in P. lanceolata adjust the
amount of incoming solar radiation that they reflect (and conversely absorb) in
response to prevailing temperature. For example, when temperatures are low,
developing flowers and fruits produce pigments that reduce reflectance and
increase absorption. Dr. Lacey will measure the effects of this plastic response
in reflectance pattern on seed quantity and offspring quality, and she will test
the hypothesis that this plasticity in reflectance is adaptive, in other words,
that by adjusting reflectance, parents thermoregulate fertilization and early
offspring development to enhance seed production and offspring quality. Dr.
Lacey will also test the hypothesis that populations from different latitudes
and altitudes differ genetically in overall reflectance pattern.

There are two practical aspects of the experiments. First, experiments will
explicitly examine how reflectance helps plants thermoregulate seed production
and quality, which are of agronomic as well as evolutionary importance. Because
current knowledge about thermoregulation in plants is negligible, P. lanceolata
will serve as a model organism for collecting data that can later be applied to
crop species. Second, the data will improve our understanding of how seed
production and quality in natural and crop populations will respond to global
warming.