* 0236500
* SGER: DMSP-Lyase Activity and CO2 Limitation in Marine Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Giacomo DiTullio, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2004
* USD 69,174.00

Bicarbonate (HCO3) dominates the dissolved inorganic carbon pool in the surface
waters of the ocean. While some algal species can utilize HCO3 directly, the
major source of inorganic carbon driving phytoplankton photosynthesis in the
marine environment is CO2. Recent work indicates that the availability Of CO2 is
a potential limit on the growth of large marine diatoms. Diffusion of CO2 across
the cell membrane occurs directly in some phytoplankton species while others
utilize a transporter for HCO?3 uptake, with the HCO3 converted to CO2 by
carbonic anhydrase (CA). Extracellular CA activity is found in some species
while others have intracellular CA activity. Algal species such as diatoms
are"CO2-users" and do not take up HC03 ions directly, requiring high ambient
levels of CO2. Conversely, other species such as haptophytes can proliferate
under conditions of low CO2. This difference in carbon acquisition strategy
suggests a mechanism whereby the composition of phytoplankton species within a
community may be controlled by carbon limitation. In general, diatoms are also
poor producers of dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) and contain little or no
DMSP?lyase. On the other hand, haptophytes are important producers of DMSP and
have high DMSP lyase activity. The cellular function of DMSP and the lyase
enzyme in algae is controversial. Breakdown of DMSP via the DMSP?lyase enzyme
liberates dimethylsulfide (DMS), acrylic acid and protons. Dr. DiTullio
hypothesizes that the release of protons via the lyase?mediated reaction allows
those species with the DMSP?lyase enzyme to effectively utilize HCO3 under
conditions of low CO2 by forcing the equilibria of the carbonate/bicarbonate
system toward CO2. This allows these species to alleviate carbon limitation and
dominate over non?DMSP?producing species in low CO2 environments. This
laboratory?based project will test the hypothesis that DMSP production in
haptophytes is positively correlated to carbon limitation.

