* 0236965
* CAREER: Innovative (U-Th)/He Chronometry and Integration with Student Teaching and Research
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Peter Reiners, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 10/31/2006
* USD 362,316.00

Reiners&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0236965 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent developments in
methods and interpretational bases of (U-Th)/He chronometry have demonstrated
that this technique poses significant potential for advancing understanding of a
wide variety of processes, many of which have been difficult to address with
other geochronometric approaches. This project will integrate (U-Th)/He
chronometric research in technique development, innovative applications, and
undergraduate student research. Work will focus in particular on development of
single-crystal He-Pb dating, geomorphologic investigations using ancient coal-
fires, tectonic applications that constrain timing, rate, and styles of
exhumation and landscape development, and analytical and methodological
improvements. To facilitate integration of (U-Th)/He chronometry in
undergraduate research, a series of summer workshops for students outside of
Yale will be conducted. Students will perform a suite of (U-Th)/He chronometric
measurements with modeling and interpretation, over three weeks at Yale, to
complement their individual senior theses or other types of projects; faculty
mentors will also participate in the latter stages of the workshops. The topical
and regional diversity of projects will serve as an introduction to a wide range
of research (and the general importance of chronometric constraints) for the
students, as well as to test and broaden the range of geologic problems that can
be addressed by He dating. This work will facilitate broader impacts in
research, learning, and infrastructure by: 1) providing access to, and training
and experience in (U-Th)/He chronometry for a wide range of investigators both
at Yale and beyond, 2) emphasizing integration of innovative (U-Th)/He
chronometric approaches into a wide range of studies besides typical
tectonogeomorphic applications, 3) integrating He dating into student research
and teaching efforts at Yale, 4) establishing structured annual summer workshops
for research by undergraduates and faculty mentors, and helping faculty at
primarily undergraduate institutions get plugged-in to analytical facilities for
future projects, and 5) creating an opportunity to involve students (including
members of underrepresented groups) in a positive research-oriented experience
at critical junctures in their educations. &lt;br/&gt;