* 0236692
* CAREER:    Polymeric Optical Band Gap Composites - A Study of Multifunctional Photonic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Stephen Foulger, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 02/28/2009
* USD 568,613.00

This CAREER project aims to expand the fundamental scope of crystalline
colloidal array de-rived photonic band gap materials, and extend photonic
crystal research into functional polymeric composites. The project takes an
interdisciplinary experimental approach including polymer synthesis, materials
science, polymer physics, and applied fabrication. In addition, theoretical
calculations are coupled with experimental activities to guide material
modifications and relate their effects on observed optical properties of PBG
composites. Five complementary objectives are being pursued in parallel: (1)
development of materials and methods for the stabilization of self-assembled
colloidal arrays and minimization of lattice imperfections; (2) development of
materials and methods for the enhancement of the optical performance of PBG
composites, coupled with added photonic functionalities; (4) development of PBG
composites which exhibit thermo- and electromechanically actuated band stop
tuning; and (5) development of PBG com-posites which exhibit intrinsic array-
based chemical sensing characteristics. The overall research goal is to enable
interdependent control of the primary structure of PBG composites and observed
optical and mechanical properties. Resulting technological implications will be
investigated to highlight multifunctional characteristics of these materials.
&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental materials science
research issues having technological relevance. An important feature of the
project is the strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research and
education. The research objectives are being approached by integrating education
into the research process through student involvement at various levels: (1)
development of graduate-level courses focused on the fundamentals of polymer
science; (2) active mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students through
direct participation of senior personnel in labora-tory research; and (3) the
development of a summer research exposure program for high school students. The
development of graduate-level courses focusing on the atomistic simulation of
polymers and polymer physics will foster the creation of a College-wide
interdisciplinary polymer science curriculum. To that end, these courses will be
offered in both the School of Materials Science &amp; Engineering and the Center
for Advanced Engineering Fibers and Films (CAEFF), an NSF Engineering Research
Center. The addition of these courses to the polymer science curriculum will
assist students in developing a firm foundation in polymer science and,
specifically, assist those graduate students involved in the proposed research
to successfully carry out the research objectives. To assist with regional
educational opportunities in South Carolina, a summer research exposure program
has been developed, labeled the School-to-University Research Ex-posure (SURE).
This program integrates lectures on material science to junior and senior high
school level students with invitations to perform research at Clemson University
for one month in the summer on PBG composites. An important goal of the SURE
program is to identify those students in a wide socioeconomic spectrum that may
be technically inclined, with a specific focus on minorities and adolescents
from rural areas, and encourage them to pursue a technical field of
study.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;