* 0236697
* MCAA: Development and Validation of the Acting White Experiences Scale
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Angela Neal-Barnett, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2005
* USD 49,998.00

"Acting White" is one of the most negative accusations that African American
adolescents can make toward each other. Often, when adolescents are accused of
acting White, they begin to question or search for what it means to be Black.
This search results in some African American teenagers hiding their
intelligence, allowing their grades to drop, withdrawing from their White
friends, associating with peers they perceive as "authentically Black" or
withdrawing from Black adolescent society. Acting White also appears to be one
of the most misunderstood phenomena in Black adolescent life. Many researchers,
parents, teachers, and media personalities erroneously believe that acting White
means valuing academic success. In reality, acting White is creating for oneself
a racial identity that is perceived as being markedly different than the racial
identity of others in one's school or social environment. The perception that
one's racial identity differs from the status quo is influenced by an
individual's beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors as evidenced by speech, dress,
interests, education, and perceived self-esteem. This definition allows
researchers to empirically measure the impact of acting White on African
American adolescents' psychological and academic well-being using the Acting
White Experiences Scale. The instrument measures whether or not an adolescent
has had experiences associated with the accusation and the amount of
psychological distress created by the experience. In this project, the PI will
refine and demonstrate the usefulness of this scale in advancing knowledge about
acting White. African American adolescents from various school settings
(suburban, rural, urban, small town) will be given this scale along with several
other measures related to identity and academic achievement. The data generated
from this study will have significant impact on U.S. educational policy
particularly as it relates to the Black-White achievement gap. The psychological
impact of the acting White accusation can create in some Black adolescents a
negative change in academic achievement. For policy makers, understanding the
definition of acting White, the impact the accusation can have on African
American adolescents, and the role racial identity plays in moderating this
process will be critical to developing strategies and tools to bridge the
achievement gap and help African American adolescents succeed academically.

