* 0236502
* Collaborative Research:  Tree Species Effects on Ecosystem Processes in Lowland Costa Rica
* BIO,EF
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* James Raich, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 02/28/2007
* USD 524,000.00

Abstract.&lt;br/&gt;Research at La Selva Biological Station in lowland Costa
Rica addresses several topical questions related to the importance of species in
modifying or controlling the accumulation and cycling of carbon in lowland
tropical rain forest. First, how variable are different tree species in their
total productivity, aboveground:belowground allocation patterns, and biomass
accumulation rates? Second, how do variations among species in tissue chemical
composition alter the accumulation and decomposition of surface litter and fine
roots. Third, how do differences in detritus production, tissue quality, and
decay rates alter the accumulation and dynamics of soil organic matter? To
address these questions, the Peje Plots at La Selva, which are 14-year-old,
single-species tree plantations established will be utilized. Research findings
will be integrated into current understanding of tropical rain forest carbon
dynamics by applying the Century model.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This
collaborative research among four scientists at two Institutions will include
substantial involvement of Latin American scientists and students, in addition
to supporting a full-time graduate student and numerous undergraduate assistants
at Iowa State University. Preparing the next generation of scientists, both
Costa Rican and American, is a fundamental goal of this research. The
revitalized Peje Plots will provide a valuable long-term research facility for
other investigators at La Selva, one of the world's preeminent tropical field
stations, and will promote the long-range plan of La Selva. Altogether, the
results of this proposed research will enhance our mechanistic understanding of
how individual species influence organic matter dynamics in tropical systems,
will provide a demonstration of a sustainable land use alternative to pasture in
the lowland tropics, and will allow for an improved capacity to model the
biogeochemistry of tropical lands in response to land use and environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;