* 0236753
* Infrastructure Building to Develop a Center for Biological and Chemical Sensors  Research
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Alvin Kennedy, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* JAMES J. POWLIK
* 09/30/2006
* USD 899,765.00

Morgan State University is requesting funds to develop the University's research
capacity and to increase the number of minority students granted the PhD in its
Bioenvironmental Sciences and Doctor of Engineering programs. The funds will be
used to develop the research infrastructure necessary to create a Center for
Biological and Chemical Sensors Research (CBCSR). The Center's mission will be
to advance the fundamental scientific and technological knowledge needed to
develop new biological and chemical sensors, in order to enhance research in the
bioenvironmental sciences. The Center will be housed in the new science research
annex when it is completed in Fall 2003. Faculty and staff of the Department of
Chemistry in the School of Computer Mathematics and Natural Sciences will be
responsible for coordination and administration of the Center's activities.

The Center will focus on the development of novel chemical and bio-analytical
sensors to study biological and chemical processes as they relate to homeland
security, environmental toxicity, improvement and enhancement of environmental
monitoring and investigation of biological processes in living systems from
tissue to sub-cellular levels. The Center will implement an integrated approach
to sensor science and development that will include interdisciplinary research
extending from molecular design, synthesis and characterization of fluorophores
and luminophores to the development of microfluidic, sol-gel, and impedance
based devices. A synergistic research program will be developed based on the
following four areas of investigation: 1) Fluorescence resonance energy transfer
biological sensors based on new donor-acceptor pairs of fluorophores and
luminophores; 2) Incorporation of luminophores and biologically active molecules
in aerogels and microfluidic devices; 3) Application of the Riordan group
technique to predict adhesion and molecular expression in RNA secondary
structure as an aid in the design of biological and chemical sensors ; 4)
Development of dual monitoring bio-analytical sensors based on impedance,
fluorescence and near-IR spectroscopy.

The three components that will be addressed in this HBCU research capacity
building proposal include administration, infrastructure and collaborative
research. Funds for this project will be used to facilitate the following
specific capacity building activities: upgrade an existing NMR to increase
research productivity, upgrade an FT-NIR to perform cross-correlation
measurements, purchase a Micro-Thermal Analyzer to characterize variations in
sol-gel matrices and laser ablated polymer surfaces, faculty start-up funds,
exploratory research on the feasibility of using Riordan matrices to predict RNA
secondary structures, travel support for faculty and student to workshops and
conferences, support for graduate and undergraduate research students and to
hire a consultant, and administrative and technical staff. These activities will
significantly enhance Morgan's research productivity and thereby increase the
University's ability to effectively compete in a future NSF-CREST