* 0236327
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site at Florida International University's Hemispheric Center for Environmental Technology
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Cheng-Xian Lin, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Sally E. O'Connor
* 06/30/2005
* USD 159,916.00

ABSTRACT Ebadian, PI DBI-0236327

The Hemispheric Center for Environmental Technology (HCET) at Florida
International University (FIU) will establish a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site in Environmental and Biological Sciences, including
soil and groundwater research, brownfields redevelopment, waste disposal,
emission control, and deactivation and decommissioning. The main objectives of
the proposed REU site are (1) to identify and expose students to scientific
research early in their academic careers, (2) to prepare participants to engage
in environmental and biological science practice and development, and (3) to
encourage and assist participants in the pursuit of careers in environmental and
biological sciences. To accomplish these objectives, students will be recruited
and matched with a specific HCET research project, and experienced HCET
scientists leading that project will serve as mentors for the participating
students. Nine students will participate in the program during the academic
year. Students will be recruited from FIU and from public and private
universities in Florida that lack extensive research programs. As a research and
development center at a minority institution, HCET will target primarily
students from underrepresented minority groups to participate in the program and
will strive to provide a diverse environment for all participants. In addition
to research, students will participate in full-day workshops consisting on (1)
career paths in environmental and biological sciences and (2) scientific ethics.
For more information, please contact is Dr. M. A. Ebadian, tel. (305) 348-3585
or at ebadian@hcet.fiu.edu. Information about the proposed REU site will be
placed on HCET's web site at <www.hcet.fiu.edu> and will also be linked to FIU's
web site at <www.fiu.edu>.

