* 0236425
* Doctoral Research Capacity Building for Sensor Science Technology
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Manmohan Aggarwal, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* JAMES J. POWLIK
* 09/30/2006
* USD 959,000.00

Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University (AAMU) is submitting a proposal
for HBCU Doctoral Capacity Building Grant with a unified research focus on
Sensor Science and Technology (SST) in response to the NSF Dear Colleague Letter
of June 17, 2002. AAMU initiated the Ph.D. program in physics in 1986. AAMU is
one of the first HBCUs to start the Ph.D. program. The proposed projects have a
unified focus on Sensor Science and Technology. This fully supports the mission
of the university and&lt;br/&gt;meets the national standards of research in the
area of sensors. Industrial partners and scientists from federal laboratories
have endorsed this proposal. To ensure that each critical area based on AAMU
strength and the national need is represented, three subproject areas are
carefully chosen: Smart Optical Sensors, Fiber Optic Sensors, and Infrared (IR)
Sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of the novel materials and their
adaptation in the state-of-the-art sensors is our major scientific goal of the
proposal. This will increase the overall capacity and infrastructure of the
department and will help in attracting quality faculty, undergraduate and
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A one-week summer workshop and a short
course for faculty and UG students from HBCU's and other institutions will be
organized every year on sensor science and technology. Eight to ten faculty and
students will be invited from local and other universities and colleges. This in
turn will motivate and better prepare UG students towards entering graduate
schools in the areas of science and engineering. The short course will be later
recommended for a graduate course with 3
credit/semester.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alabama A&amp;M University is
strategically located in the city of Huntsville amongst major industrial
companies, NASA/Marshall Space Flight Center, US Army Missile and Aviation
Command, and US Army Strategic Missile and Defense Command. Several of these
have a focus on sensor technology. This NSF grant will help in (a) improving the
infrastructure of the department of physics at AAMU and (b) expanding the
scientific research being conducted as a result of the previous CREST-Center for
Nonlinear Optics and Optical Materials (1988-1998). The proposed grant will
strengthen the position of AAMU as a doctoral degree awarding institution among
HBCUs and other institutions. The grant will also help in attracting quality
faculty and students. The existing external departmental advisory committee will
review the impact of this grant on the infrastructure of the department. The
committee will report the findings to the PD/PI and to the department
chair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AAMU administration is committed to support the
proposal by contributing 31% cost-sharing and a reduction of indirect cost to
25% from a normal 35.5%. The PI/PD and investigators of the proposed grant have
many years of scientific and management experience, strong scientific track
record and are well recognized in the field of sensor materials and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;