* 0236497
* Genetic and Proteomic Analyses of Ralstonia Solanacearum Secreted Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2008
* Timothy Denny, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 03/31/2008
* USD 360,000.00

Ralstonia solanacearum is one of the world's most important phytopathogenic
bacteria and is also is one of the model systems for elucidating how Gram-
negative bacteria cause plant disease. The collective importance of the more
than 100 exoproteins (EXPs) secreted by the R. solanacearum type II and type III
systems has been established, but the identity and detailed role of individual
proteins in the secretome has only been assessed superficially. The overall
goals of this project are to carry out a proteomic analysis of the R.
solanacearum secretome and a genetic investigation of the role multiple EXPs
play in making this organism such an effective phytopathogen. A comprehensive
evaluation of several proteomic methods will precede a large-scale
characterization and identification of EXPs and their corresponding genes in the
genomic sequence of strain GMI1000. Bioinformatic analyses and comparative
genomics will be used to characterize the possible nature, function and
importance of the genes encoding the EXPs. The contribution to pathogenesis of
individual EXPs and groups of EXPs will be determined by constructing unmarked,
site-directed deletion mutants and testing them for colonization of tomato
plants. Results of this project will provide insight into how EXPs function in
R. solanacearum pathogenesis, and also will be relevant to understanding the
biology of other plant and animal pathogens and of environmental bacteria, such
as the closely-related Ralstonia and Burkholderia species. Assembling a large
catalog of secreted proteins and their predicted amino acids sequences will
provide a working data set for determining if there are common structural
characteristics of secreted proteins that can be used to predict which genes in
genomic DNA sequences encode EXPs.