* 0236732
* Compositional Processes in Language Understanding
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Brian McElree, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2007
* USD 256,559.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Brian McElree will conduct three
years of psycholinguistic research on people's interpretation of simple and
complex expressions. Language comprehension requires operations ranging from the
identification of individual words to the construction of a suitable
interpretation for a complete text or utterance. Recent formal analyses suggest
that complex operations are needed to derive a contextually suitable
interpretation of even common and seemingly simple expressions. These operations
appear to modify default interpretations of individual constituents, and they
often generate semantic content that is not explicitly represented in the
sentence or discourse. This project seeks to identify the processes and
knowledge structures used in language comprehension, and to determine whether
some compositional processes draw on local lexical properties rather than world
knowledge. Experiments will dissociate simple and enriched forms of composition
and so identify the properties that distinguish these different forms of
composition. On-line measures of sentence processing (eye-movement patterns,
self-paced reading times, and time-course functions derived from the speed-
accuracy tradeoff procedure) will contrast expressions hypothesized both to
depend on different types of information and to engage different kinds of
compositional operations. The experiments will examine how local (phrase-
internal) and global constraints affect composition, and whether there are
aspects of the compositional process that operate in a context-insensitive
manner. This project will advance our understanding of the critical interface
between lexical and syntactic processing on one hand and discourse and text
comprehension on the other. The research should also have implications for
formal linguistic theory, as well as for the development of efficient natural
language understanding systems. Moreover, as some aphasics show selective
deficits in understanding expressions requiring enriched composition, this
research may also aid in the characterization of particular language disorders
and illuminate the neural structures serving language processing. The project
will also provide valuable research experience for undergraduates and advanced
training for postdoctoral students.