* 0236061
* Nontarget Effects of Host-Specific Biocontrols: Direct and Indirect Effects of Biocontrols that Subsidize Native Consumers
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Ragan Callaway, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 02/29/2008
* USD 294,267.00

The indirect effects of consumers in food webs are known to be important in
ecological systems, but this knowledge has not been well integrated into applied
fields such as weed control by biological agents. The introduction of exotic
insects as biological control agents is an increasingly common strategy employed
for the control of invasive plants and is thought to be ecologically safe so
long as the control agents are host-specific. However, even host-specific agents
may be consumed by native species and so impact the rest of the food web. This
research will examine the indirect effects of an exotic gall fly, introduced to
control an invasive grass species, on populations of deer mice that are key
predators of insects and seeds in many western North American grasslands, and
are the primary vectors for the Sin Nombre hantavirus, which causes the deadly
hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in humans. Research goals are to conduct a
perturbation experiment by removing gall flies from grassland plots in order to
quantify the direct effect of gall fly subsidies on deer mouse populations, and
measure indirect effects, which include the prevalence of the hantavirus, seed
predation, germination and recruitment of native plants, and abundance of native
insects. This research will advance the field of biological control by providing
a means of more effectively filtering potentially hazardous insects from
biocontrol programs. Additionally, hantavirus information will be disseminated
to regional health authorities to help develop management guidelines to reduce
human health risks associated with gall fly-mediated increases in the prevalence
of hantavirus.