* 0236795
* Collaborative Research: Descriptive and Theoretical Studies of N|u
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Bonny Sands, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2007
* USD 44,072.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Amanda Miller-Ockhuizen, Chris
Collins, and Bonny Sands will conduct two years of research on N|u, an
endangered Khoesan language spoken in South Africa. In studying the sounds of
N|u, the research team will focus on issues such as the physical properties of
clicks and typologically rare vowels. The team will also document basic
morphological and syntactic structures of N|u, and they will produce a
quadrilingual dictionary of the language (N|u-English-Afrikaans-Khoekhoe). The
data for the project will be obtained by recording the speech of the
approximately 20 remaining speakers of N|u. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
documentation of endangered languages is critical because every language
reflects a unique culture and contains a wealth of scientific information.
Empirically adequate theories depend on representation of the full range of
languages. This project will contribute new information on a language with some
rare properties. The dictionary resulting from this project will be provided to
the N|u community for their literacy and language planning activities. Copies of
all the materials collected and the results of the various investigations will
be made available to the community, local linguists, and relevant governmental
and non-governmental organizations in the region. The research team will
collaborate with scholars of Khoesan languages from the University of Namibia,
the University of Cape Town, and the University of Toronto. The project also
includes research training for a young Namibian linguist and a graduate student
at Cornell University&lt;br/&gt;