* 0236165
* IRCEB: A Cross-Disciplinary Study of the Evolutionary Processes that Sustain Rainforest Biodiversity
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Thomas Smith, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Mike Bowers
* 09/30/2003
* USD 682,557.00

This project explores the evolutionary processes that generate and maintain
diversity and counteract the effects of extinction. Alternative models for
rainforest speciation will be examined through a parallel series of integrated
studies of rainforests worldwide. Within a multidisciplinary collaborative
framework, these investigators will increase our understanding of how rainforest
biodiversity is generated by achieving three goals. First, they will identify
general evolutionary processes that promote speciation and phenotypic diversity.
Second, they will identify landscape configurations essential to speciation.
Third, they will test alternative speciation hypotheses across diverse
vertebrate groups on three continents. The study will involve four vertebrate
groups (mammals, birds, reptiles and amphibians) in tropical rainforests in
Australia, West Africa and South America.

In addition to the scientific goals of this research there are also
conservation-related goals. The investigators will develop conservation
strategies that protect key evolutionary processes and develop conservation
plans that preserve evolutionary processes as well as current patterns of
diversity. The loss of rainforest biodiversity is one of the most critical
issues facing humankind. This research will build an understanding of the
evolutionary processes underlying rainforest diversity and develop concrete
plans to preserve them.