* 0236758
* DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Constraints on Structural Borrowing in a Multilingual Contact Situation
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Gillian Sankoff, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Gillian Sankoff, Ms. Tara Sanchez will conduct
fieldwork for her doctoral dissertation. She will interview residents of the
Caribbean islands of Aruba, Bonaire, and Curacao in the creole language
Papiamentu. Most residents also speak Dutch, English, and Spanish. These
interviews, along with written texts dating from 1776 to the present, will be
used in research on "borrowing" from one language to another. The most familiar
kind of borrowing is the borrowing of words. Another kind is the borrowing of
linguistic structure, such as word order patterns or verb inflections. This
project emphasizes the latter. Ms. Sanchez will use quantitative methods (e.g.,
multivariate analysis) to interpret influences on the usage patterns of borrowed
inflections ("-ndo" from Spanish and influenced by English, "he-" from Dutch,
passive verbs "ser," "wordu," and "keda" from Spanish and Dutch). She will also
examine word order patterns used for various pragmatic effects, and how these
may also reflect influences from the other languages spoken on the islands.

This project will make two significant contributions. The first is theoretical:
The research will clarify how language structure and social factors affect
borrowing. The second is empirical: The research team will make databases of the
written texts and oral interviews available to the public. These will be
published through the Linguistic Data Consortium of the University of
Pennsylvania. This publication will provide access to otherwise hard-to-come-by
data, benefiting both islanders interested in language and various scholars. The
research bears on Caribbean social science and history as well as theoretical
and applied linguistics particularly in sociolinguistics and creole studies.