* 0236039
* Protein cross-linking Reactions for Insect Cuticle Sclerotization
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Karl Kramer, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 02/28/2007
* USD 732,500.00

This project will address how insects use structural proteins, catechols,
oxidative enzymes, and chitin to stabilize their exoskeletons. The exoskeleton
is primarily composed of two structural polymers, protein and chitin. The
cuticle proteins are cross-linked by quinones derived from catechols by a
process called sclerotization, a vital metabolic step that occurs during each
stage of insect development. This interdisciplinary project will investigate the
interactions of quinonoid metabolites of catecholic precursors with cuticular
proteins from the tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta. The research will test a
hypothesis that sclerotization involves the formation of carbon-nitrogen cross-
links between the nucleophilic imidazole nitrogens of histidine and the ring or
side-chain carbons of o-quinones and p-quinone methides derived from catechols.
A second hypothesis to be tested is that differences in hardness and flexibility
from distinct regions of an exoskeleton are due to the occurrence of different
sets of proteins and cross-linking agents expressed by the underlying epidermis.
The first objective is to identify and characterize proteins expressed in
cuticles with different physical properties. The cuticle of the M. sexta larval
abdomen is soft and flexible, whereas the pupal abdomen is rigid and the larval
head capsule quite hard. cDNAs obtained for proteins that are expressed in pupal
abdominal cuticles, larval abdominal cuticle, and head capsule will be used to
study the pattern of expression of the corresponding genes with regard to
development and anatomy. The second objective is to investigate the structure
and properties of two M. sexta laccases. Laccases oxidize catechols to quinones
or quinone methides. Although laccases have been proposed to be important in
insect cuticle sclerotization, they have received little study. cDNAs for two M.
sexta laccases have been isolated, and their expression patterns characterized.
The insect laccases are composed of a catalytic domain similar to those of
fungal and plant laccases, as well as a unique amino-terminal domain not present
in other known proteins. M. sexta laccases 1 and 2 will be expressed as
recombinant proteins for characterization of their enzymatic properties,
investigation of the function of the amino-terminal and catalytic domains, and
for use in model sclerotization reactions described in objective 3. The third
objective is to investigate biochemical and biophysical properties of cuticle
using model sclerotization reactions. Selected proteins hypothesized to be
responsible for formation of rigid or flexible cuticle will be expressed as
recombinant proteins and used in model sclerotization reactions including a
catechol, a phenoloxidase, and in the presence or absence of chitin or a chitin
derivative. Protein-protein cross-links, protein-carbohydrate cross-links, and
the effects of different catechols and cuticle proteins on the physical
properties of cross-linked protein hydrogels and chitin-protein films produced
in vitro will be investigated and compared with cuticles from different
anatomical regions of M. sexta. Site directed mutagenesis experiments will test
a hypothesis that histidine residues are involved in protein cross-linking
during sclerotization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exoskeleton of insects is
composed of cuticle proteins and a polysaccharide called chitin. Each time an
insect molts, these components of the exoskeleton are synthesized and then they
are chemically cross-linked in a process called sclerotization. Sclerotization
results in a light-weight material with unusual strength. This project
investigates the chemistry of sclerotization, which is not yet well understood.
Model sclerotization reactions will be carried out to determine how the cuticle
proteins are linked to each other and to chitin. The biochemistry of insect
cuticle sclerotization may be a useful target for design of novel methods for
controlling insect pests of agriculture and insects that are vectors of
diseases. New types of cross-linked biopolymers, based on the chemistry of
cuticle sclerotization, may have potential uses in medicine and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;