* 0236408
* Improving Access and Storage for the University of Washington Bird Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Sievert Rohwer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 05/31/2006
* USD 183,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to the University of Washington
Burke Museum under the direction of Dr. S. Rohwer to improve storage and access
to the research collection of birds. The grant is specifically targeted at
increasing accessibility and upgrading storage conditions for three remarkable
collections held by the Burke Museum: 1) the largest collection of avian spread
wings in the world, 2) a unique collection of seabird skins and, 3) the 12th
largest avian skeleton collection in the world. The collection of 25,000 spread
wings at the Burke is unique and has supported several lines of research that
would have otherwise been impossible. However, its rapid growth over the past 15
years has led to over-crowded storage conditions, which must be remedied to
ensure longevity of the specimens. Similarly, many of the seabird skins and much
of the skeleton collection needs re-housing to ensure the long-term safety of
the collections. &lt;br/&gt;This grant will fund twenty new cases to re-house
and expand the wing, seabird skin, and skeleton collections. In addition, many
of the older skeleton specimens will be moved to archival quality boxes and re-
labeled using computer-generated labels. The latter will require that all of the
data from the skeleton collection be digitized and proofed. The digital database
now contains about 9,000 skeleton records that were entered from old museum
catalogs and ledgers, but have not been proofed to the original specimen labels.
Included in the grant are funds to complete the digitization of skeleton
specimen data, which will poise the Burke to make all data in the ornithology
collection, including genetic resource data, available over the Internet. This
will dramatically increase access to the collection for both formal scientific
research and informal education at all levels. Additionally, this will prepare
the collection for participation in a currently proposed project to geo-
reference all avian specimens in North American collections.&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this grant is multifold, because the community of users is
broad. Of greatest importance is the enhanced care of and access to collections
that serve a national and international community of researchers, educators, and
artists, as well as a vibrant program of undergraduate and advanced training at
the University of Washington - one of the world's premier research universities.
Because preserved specimens are our sole source of new data about past
populations and extinct lineages, projects that improve their long-term care
have many potential benefits to society. Examples abound, ranging from
discovering that DDT caused eggshell thinning in raptors to documenting lost
genetic diversity in the now fragmented eastern populations of Prairie Chickens.
Beyond original research, our collections serve a diverse community of users,
including state and federal agencies, conservation groups, wildlife artists and
sculptors, and a growing program of K-12 educational outreach. &lt;br/&gt;