* 0236029
* Evolutionary Biology of Insect Mating Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Guiyun Yan, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 03/31/2006
* USD 306,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;NSF IBN 0236029&lt;br/&gt;Evolutionary Biology of
Insect Mating Behavior&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Female mating with
multiple males within a single fertile period (polyandry) is a common phenomenon
in animal kingdom. Conventional wisdom assumes that males are selected to
maximize their paternity, females are choosy for the best possible sire.
However, some female insects are particularly promiscuous. Behavioral scientists
and evolutionary biologists have long been puzzled by why females mate with
multiple males despite potential costs such as expenditure of time and energy,
reduced life span, risk of predation and contracting sexually-transmitted
diseases. In the red flour beetle (Tribolium castaneum), a major pest of stored
grain products, females usually obtain sufficient sperm to retain fertility for
several months from a single insemination, but they copulate repeatedly even
within minutes the after first mating. Previous studies have demonstrated that
polyandry in this species does not confer direct fitness benefits to the
females, but enhance F1 male fitness and reduces F1 female fitness with
laboratory inbred strains. This project will examine the genetic benefits/costs
associated with polyandry and post-copulatory mechanisms that lead to enhanced
offspring fitness in T. castaneum. Specific questions to be addressed are: 1) is
the fitness tradeoff between sons and daughters of polyandrous females observed
in laboratory inbred strains a general phenomenon for field outbred populations,
and 2) are the superior sons and inferior daughters sired by the same males or
different males? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will advance our knowledge on
inter-sexual conflict and its consequences for species evolution. This research
will significantly enhance our understanding of the evolution of mating systems
and reproductive strategies. Because the red flour beetle is an important pest
of stored grain products, the results help to develop new strategies for pest
control through better understanding of its mating behavior and factors
regulating population dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;