* 0236662
* New Approaches to the Ring-Opening Polymerization of Renewable Resource Cyclic Esters
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2005
* Marc Hillmyer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/2005
* USD 414,000.00

The foci of this research are twofold. First, new cyclic ester polymerization
catalysts that contain two metal ions (Zn2 and/or Co2) bound to binucleating
ligands will be prepared and used to catalyze the transformation of lactide (LA)
into polylactide (PLA). Second, the physical properties of PLA will be
manipulated by the synthesis of a new class of alternating copolymers of lactic
acid and a cyclic ether component. The physical properties of the new polymers
and blends of the new polymers with PLA will be examined with the goal of
developing macromolecular plasticizing agents useful for the toughening of
crystalline PLA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Drs. William B.
Tolman and Marc A. Hillmyer of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Minnesota-Twin Cities. The Principal Investigators will focus their work on the
development of efficient, controlled and versatile methods for the synthesis of
polymers derived from renewable resources. To this end, the cyclic dimer of
lactic acid (LA) will be used as precursor to the aliphatic polyester
polylactide (PLA). The design of discrete catalysts for the conversion and
manipulation of the physical properties of PLA will be carried out. The project
has broader impacts for the environment and as an excellent area for the
training of students.&lt;br/&gt;