* 0236872
* International Workshop on Advanced Anode Materials for High Temperature Fuel Cells, Strasbourg, France
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2004
* Scott Barnett, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/29/2004
* USD 6,000.00

In the search for new, improved energy systems for the 21st century, the
emphasis is on environmentally friendly, efficient means of energy conversion
and storage. High temperature fuel cells offer energy conversion efficiencies as
high as 70% and low pollutant emissions, but significant technical and cost
problems remain to be overcome for power plants utilizing natural gas. There is
also considerable excitement about other applications of high temperature fuel
cells including transportation and portable generation. High temperature fuel
cells offer considerable promise for working with the hydrocarbon fuels required
for these applications. Closely allied to these applications in fuel cell
technology is the use of electrochemical reactors for the industrially important
electrocatalytic oxidation of hydrocarbons. In the long term solid oxide fuel
cell (SOFC) technology is foreseen as a candidate for a much more efficient
electrolysis of steam and carbon dioxide. In summary, the high temperature
electrochemical oxidation of hydrocarbons is an area of considerable strategic,
environmental and economical importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the
proposed NSF/DOE/ESF workshop, planned for Strasbourg, France on December 9-11,
2002, is to promote U.S./European collaborative investigations on the solid-
state electrochemical oxidation of hydrocarbons. The proposed workshop, which
will cover both fundamental and applied aspects, will be unique in its focus on
scientific issues related to hydrocarbon anode materials. The Program will
facilitate the exchange of ideas, educate the participant's groups regarding
state-of-the-art worldwide activities, promote educational and research
opportunities abroad for young scientists, and develop common programs of
activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;