* 0236053
* Herbivory and photosynthesis of oaks under elevated atmospheric CO2
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2003,07/31/2007
* May Berenbaum, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2007
* USD 585,000.00

Trees and other plants are under constant assault by insects. It is estimated
that on average 18 percent of forest productivity is lost to insect herbivores
each year. The investigators hypothesize that this value underestimates the true
impact of herbivores, and furthermore, that it will change substantially as the
composition of the atmosphere changes. Widespread combustion of fossil fuels is
causing a dramatic increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere. Plants respond to this increase with higher rates of photosynthesis.
However, other changes caused by rising carbon dioxide, including the formation
of thicker leaves with higher concentrations of sugars and lower concentrations
of nitrogen, are very likely to change the nutritional quality of leaves with
respect to insect herbivores. In North Carolina the investigators are exposing
plots in an intact pine forest to elevated carbon dioxide to simulate predicted
atmospheric composition in the year 2050. Preliminary data show that among
different kinds of oaks growing in the shade of the pines the amount of leaf
tissue removed by insects was different in the high- and low-carbon dioxide
plots. However, not all oak species were affected the same way. The
investigators hypothesize that herbivory will be greatest for those species with
greatest leaf nutritional quality under future atmospheric conditions. To test
this hypothesis measures of leaf structure and chemistry for oaks in elevated
and ambient carbon dioxide plots will be made. These measurements will be paired
with measurements of herbivory and of the numbers and types of insects.
&lt;br/&gt;Estimates of the amount of productivity lost to herbivores typically
are based on measurements of the amount of leaf tissue removed. An assumption
inherent in these estimates is that the remaining leaf tissue operates normally.
When a caterpillar devours a quarter or half of a leaf, does the remaining
tissue have normal rates of photosynthesis? To examine this question, the
investigators have designed a unique camera system that measures light
fluorescing from leaves. Fluorescence provides a direct measure of the rate of
photosynthesis, but unlike other methods the measurement of fluorescence allows
determination of how the rate of photosynthesis varies across the surface of the
leaf. This instrument can be used to test the hypotheses that insects with
different feeding behaviors will have different effects on photosynthetic rates
of the remaining leaf tissue. &lt;br/&gt;These new measurements of the effect of
herbivory on photosynthesis together with the experiments on the effects of
elevated carbon dioxide on herbivory will provide new insights into how plant-
herbivore interactions will alter ecosystem productivity in a future high-carbon
dioxide world. In addition to training doctoral research scientists, this
project also will provide the opportunity for undergraduate students, including
those of underrepresented groups, to participate in scientific research through
a NSF-sponsored Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology grant
administered by the University of Illinois. &lt;br/&gt;