* 0236686
* Oxometal Complexes and Redox Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Craig Hill, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 02/28/2006
* USD 418,000.00

The work of Dr. Craig Hill, Department of Chemistry, Emory University is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program of
the Division of Chemistry. The project involves new inorganic complexes and
systems that catalyze transformations using the most environment friendly and
economically desirable oxidants (oxygen/air) and solvent (water). Specifically,
the project will develop three major topics. First, multi-iron polyoxometallates
(POMs) will be employed as very reactive catalysts for selective organic
oxidations and the oxidative mineralization of carboxylic acids using oxygen in
air at room temperature. Secondly, catalytic oxidations by oxygen in water will
be designed to utilize stable POM ensembles that consume acidic/basic side
product produced during oxidations. Finally, the fundamental electron transfer
reactions of the POM catalysts will be determined using stop-flow methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project emphasizes utilization of environmentally
benign oxidants such as air and oxygenated water to oxidize organic materials,
including paper bleaching. The research will lead to great benefits to society
as more environment friendly and selective catalytic processes are developed.
The research activity will provide excellent training and educational
experiences to graduate students and post-doctoral associates. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;