* 0236520
* ICSU CCBS: Conference on Science and Mathematics Education as a requirement for Global Sustainable Development, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, September 21-23, 2002
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Shirley Malcom, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* N. Hari Narayanan
* 08/31/2004
* USD 159,000.00

The American Association for the Advancement of Science, on behalf of
theInternational Council for Science (ICSU) Committee for Capacity Building in
Science(CCBS), requests support from the National Science Foundation (NSF) for
the planning and implementation of an international conference to be held in Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil from September 21-23, 2002. The 3 day conference would be
organized by the ICSU (ICSU) Committee for Capacity Building in Science (CCBS)
and would be held in conjunction with the ICSU General Assembly, also in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. The premise of the conference is that high quality basic
science and mathematics education is a requirement for sustainable development
around the globe. To meet this requirement, the very poor quality of science and
mathematics education must be addressed, particularly in developing countries.
The focus of the conference is to discuss, develop and initiate programs of
action to promote the improvement of science and mathematics education around
the world. The conference is primarily intended for educators, scientists and
policy makers in both developing and developed countries who work at the K-8
levels. The conference will provide examples of collaborative models that
connect scientists and educators such as through informal groups, professional
science organizations and academies of science. It will also address and analyze
international science and mathematics reform efforts and continue the work of
ICSU to build a community of scientists deeply engaged in and committed to the
improvement of basic education.