* 0236175
* Workshop:  Computational Opportunuties in Algebra, Number Theory, and Combinatorics, September 21-22, 2002
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,12/31/2002
* J. Brian Conrey, American Institute of Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 12/31/2002
* USD 19,760.00

This workshop will bring together key people to discuss opportunities for
enhancing, via organized computational efforts, the research infrastructure in
Algebra, Number Theory, and Combinatorics. The list of anticipated participants
includes researchers who use computational tools in their research, researchers
who have developed computational tools for use in research, and researchers not
currently making significant use of computational tools. An effort is being made
to include women and other researchers from groups under-represented in
mathematics. The outcome of the workshop will be a document that will contain
general principles, strategies, and long-range goals intended to be useful for
the program officers in ANTC as they decide on future proposal that contain
computational aspects. It is hoped that this document will also stimulate
further discussion and action within the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the main issues that will be
addressed at this workshop are:&lt;br/&gt;1. What kind of problems do we want to
solve?&lt;br/&gt;2. What tools do we need?&lt;br/&gt;3. Knowing what tools we
need, how to we make them available and how do we implement them?&lt;br/&gt;4.
How can we simplify the process of making data available to anyone who would
like to use it?&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is intended as a brainstorming session to
systematically organize the communities' efforts regarding these
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;