* 0236166
* RUI: Molecular Phylogenetics and Allopolyploidization in Rubus (Rosaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Lawrence Alice, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2007
* USD 211,592.00

0236166&lt;br/&gt;Alice&lt;br/&gt;Systematic biology aims to understand
relationships among species and infer their evolutionary histories followed by
testing of hypotheses concerning observed patterns and causal processes. Two
important processes in plant speciation are hybridization and polyploidy (more
than two copies of each chromosome per cell). Both hybridization and polyploidy
have been involved in the origin of many agriculturally important crops, making
an improved understanding of these processes valuable to the public, scientific,
and academic communities. This research focuses on the plant genus Rubus, a
member of the Rose family. The genus is economically and ecologically important
as fruit crops (raspberries, blackberries), ornamentals, food for wildlife and
indigenous peoples, invasive weeds, and in early forest succession. Rubus is
considered one of the most challenging groups of flowering plants with regard to
species identification and classification due to frequent hybridization,
plasticity in external form, and the high incidence of polyploidy. Dr. Alice's
goals are to infer evolutionary relationships within Rubus, examine the origins
of several polyploid groups, test hypotheses of hybridization, assess trends in
morphological features that may be useful in classification, and develop an
informative and user-friendly web site for Rubus. DNA sequencing of five
different chloroplast and nuclear regions is proposed followed by phylogenetic
analysis and hypothesis testing. Dr. Alice has studied the evolutionary history
and classification of Rubus for the past several years and his laboratory
routinely employs the techniques proposed. Data obtained largely through the
efforts of undergraduate student researchers demonstrated that his approach is
feasible and importantly that undergraduate students can learn and apply these
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed activity includes
the elucidation of evolutionary relationships in Rubus, from which changes to
existing classifications will be proposed, examination of polyploid species and
hybrids contributing insight to speciation processes, investigation of an
infrequently used DNA region in phylogenetic study, and identification of
morphological traits useful in classification. The broader impacts resulting
from the proposed project include active participation in all phases by three
undergraduate students and one graduate student providing them direct insight
into scientific research, training in highly marketable skills, and experience
presenting their results at professional meetings. Finally, a Rubus web site
will be developed at Western Kentucky University for dissemination of
information.&lt;br/&gt;