* 0236340
* Emotion Processing and Social Competence in Head Start Children
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Ronald Seifer, Bradley Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Namy
* 08/31/2008
* USD 399,472.00

The project will examine emotion in 4-year-old children attending Head Start.
For the most part, the study of emotion has focused on middle class children, a
much smaller set of basic information is available for children from poverty
backgrounds. Thus, the first aim of this research is to extend what is known
about the development of emotion to children from limited income families. The
second aim is to measure emotion in several ways, so that coherence among
indexes may be evaluated. These assessments will include interviews of children
regarding basic emotion knowledge, observation of children to evaluate freely
displayed emotions, laboratory assessments to examine emotion coping and
response to emotion-eliciting stimuli, assessment of hypothalamic pituitary
adrenal (HPA) axis reactivity (baseline cortisol, cortisol reactivity), and
assessment of heart rate variability. The third aim is to assess relations
between the several measures of emotion and indicators of social competence,
with social competence assessed using sociometric techniques and by multiple
direct observation of social behavior. One basic hypothesis is there will be
modest correspondence among the different measures of child emotion: cognitive
understanding of emotion, behavioral expression of emotion, reports of emotion
experience, and physiologic indicators of emotion. A second basic hypothesis is
that emotion measures will be moderate predictors of social competence, and that
degree of prediction will be enhanced by using information from multiple
sources. &lt;br/&gt;This project will have broad impact in three ways. First, it
will inform theory regarding the development of emotion processing in children,
particularly limited income children. Second, it will obtain knowledge regarding
systems that support learning and school success in young children. Although
many low-income children experience environmental challenges, children who are
more emotionally skilled may fare better than others in terms of school
readiness and subsequent learning. Social competence is likely an important
mediator between individual emotion processing and learning performance in
classroom environments. Third, it will inform understanding of the development
of behavior problems and disorders. Because emotion processing is a core feature
of many disorders, such as depression, conduct disorder, oppositional defiant
disorder, and anxiety disorders, enhanced understanding of early development of
emotion processing could prove useful in developing more effective interventions
focused on children's behavioral health.&lt;br/&gt;