* 0236736
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Pronominal Interpretation and the Syntax-Discourse Interface: An ERP-Study
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Maria Pinango, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Maria M. Pinango, Ms. Petra Burkhardt will conduct a
series of experiments for her doctoral dissertation. She will investigate how
different types of pronominal elements (e.g., "him/her" and "himself/herself")
are interpreted during sentence comprehension. The experiments will record
event-related brain potentials (ERPs) while participants listen to sentences,
focusing on the time when the pronominal is heard. The study explores how and
when pronominals determine their referents. In contrast to full nouns (like
"apple" or "dog"), pronominal elements do not have fully fledged meaning of
their own. For instance, in a sentence like "The man said that Mary called him,"
"him" may mean "the man." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research connects important
questions in linguistics (regarding the architecture of the language system),
computer science (regarding dynamic implementation of formal systems,
specifically pronominal resolution) and neuroscience (regarding cortical
distribution of language). The research will have implications for the study of
brain and cognition relations, as it addresses the reasons that the
representation of these referentially deficient elements is particularly
vulnerable in certain neurological diseases (e.g., Alzheimer's, Schizophrenia)
and cerebro-vascular syndromes (e.g., Aphasia). The project will also provide an
opportunity for undergraduate students to receive research training, and it will
foster interaction between researchers in the cognitive neuroscience community
at Yale University.&lt;br/&gt;