* 0236683
* A Three-Dimensional In Vivo System for Visualizing Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Jennifer Barton, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Vicki B. Vance
* 04/30/2007
* USD 104,999.00

How genes are expressed is a fundamental aspect of biology. An unmet challenge
is to examine the three-dimensional gene expression patterns in intact organisms
without disruption. Current technologies to follow gene expression in vivo
either fail to penetrate deeply enough or provide too poor of a resolution for
many basic research questions. Optical coherence microscopy (OCM) allows non-
destructive, repetitive, quantitative, in vivo three-dimensional visualization
of tissues and organs in intact organisms. Previous proof-of-concept experiments
demonstrated that OCM could be used to non-destructively image in vivo, three-
dimensional gene expression from a strong promoter using a naturally occurring
polymer, PHB (poly-D-(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate) as the reporter gene. The goal of
this project is to investigate the sensitivity of this method. Transgenic plants
will be generated in which the gene reporter (PHB) is expressed at different
levels and at different locations. These plants will then be analyzed using OCM
to visualize the reporter gene product, and computer vision methods will be
applied with the goal of determining the sensitivity of the method.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science, at its best, creates the future. A key part of
how science "creates" the future is through discovery and understanding while
educating others. Part of the support for the project will be for retention of a
minority undergraduate in the Medford laboratory. In addition, partial support
will be provided to two graduate students. To enhance the local impact of the
work, an outreach activity to a local K-12 school is also planned. To enhance
the wider educational impact of the work, information from the technology will
be incorporated into classroom instruction. To enhance the wider scientific
impact, presentations at professional meetings and publications in peer-reviewed
journals are planned. This work will apply knowledge of engineers and computer
vision specialists to develop the next-generation of gene analysis instruments
for biologists. As such, this project is firmly positioned to significantly
enhance scientific and technological understanding.