* 0236966
* CAREER: The Role of Dynamics in Enzyme Function by NMR, Chemical Synthesis, and Biochemistry
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* J Loria, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2008
* USD 538,451.00

This CAREER project addresses fundamental questions regarding the role of
intramolecular protein dynamics in enzyme catalysis. Chemical synthesis of novel
ligands and biophysical characterization of enzyme/ligand complexes will be
combined with solution NMR spin-relaxation experiments to provide a richer
understanding of the coordination between protein flexibility and protein
function. These studies will be performed with the enzyme Ribonuclease A. NMR
experiments will probe protein motion on distinct timescales relevant to those
of biological function. Characterization of ps - ns motions will allow
dissection of site-specific thermodynamic contributions involved in enzyme
complex formation. Motions in the ms - ms regime are of similar timescale to
chemical and physical processes essential for catalysis. Their characterization
will provide atomic resolution of motions involved in a catalytically active
enzyme. These experiments will provide the level of understanding of physico-
chemical forces in enzyme function essential for the design of biocatalysts and
optimization of protein/ligand interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
impact scientists and non-scientists alike, research and education must be
integrated. Efforts to achieve this will focus on research mentoring, teaching,
and the promotion of interaction among research groups. Incorporated within
these three activities will be training and teaching of students at the
undergraduate and graduate levels and from geographically underrepresented
regions in an effort to simultaneously advance discovery and learning. First,
the principal component of the educational plan consists of teaching two
courses, 'Biochemical rates and mechanisms' and 'NMR spectroscopy.' These
courses are targeted to beginning graduate students and advanced undergraduates.
Both courses combine theory with experimental applications and rely on problem
solving and student presentation to provide an active learning environment.
Second, a major effort will be made as research mentor to graduate and
undergraduate students. In addition to students from Yale, a student from rural
West Virginia will be invited to perform research each summer. Finally, to
promote interactions among students from diverse research groups, monthly
seminars will be organized and students will be encouraged to attend and
participate in discussions.&lt;br/&gt;