* 0236887
* International C. Elegans Meetings: to be held June 29 - July 3, 2003, Los Angeles, CA; and, in 2005
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Stuart Kim, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 03/31/2006
* USD 29,500.00

0236887&lt;br/&gt;Kim&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is to help support travel
and registration costs for about 18 students and post-doctoral fellows to attend
the 2003 International C. elegans Meeting. This is the only international
meeting exclusively devoted to research on C. elegans. Workers in the field
regard this as the most important meeting they attend in the years in which a C.
elegans meeting is held. A meeting devoted exclusively to C. elegans research
can achieve many aims impossible at mixed symposia: far greater knowledge can be
assumed in the audience, much more sophisticated discussion is possible, and an
integrated approach to the biology of the organism can be pursued.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will be at UCLA from June 29 to July 3, 2003
and will attract about 1800 participants in total. This meeting provides a forum
for all researchers studying C. elegans to present and discuss results on a
broad range of topics related to C. elegans biology, including: programmed cell
death, functional genomics, aging, RNAi, and germ line biology. The meeting will
also attract and inform researchers who are currently not using C. elegans as
their primary model. The meeting will promote and showcase the research of
younger scientists (graduate students, postdoctoral researchers and assistant
professors) including women and minorities. At the last meeting in 2001, 99% of
presentations were given by young researchers. Finally, the meeting will provide
a forum for the exchange of methods, mutants and DNA clones. The meeting will
have special "workshops" set aside for this goal. Funding for a second meeting
in 2005 is also planned.&lt;br/&gt;