* 0236678
* Coping with Academic Difficulty: An Examination of Conversations Between Friends
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2003,08/31/2007
* John Smith III, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 08/31/2007
* USD 169,276.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Ellen Altermatt will conduct two
years of research on children's ability to cope with academic difficulties.
Given that children spend a substantial amount of time with friends and view
friends as an important source of support and guidance, it is expected that
children's interactions with friends will play a critical role in their coping.
This research has as its primary goals (a) to observe children's conversations
with friends after they encounter academic difficulty, and (b) to predict
changes in children's responses to difficulty from the features of these
conversations. Coping strategies, friendship support processes, and achievement-
related beliefs will be assessed by questionnaires and videotaped observations.
The project's long-term goal is to better understand the role that peers play in
socializing positive self-evaluative and motivational beliefs, particularly in
academic contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will improve
understanding of the processes by which social interactions between friends
contribute to changes in children's achievement-related behaviors and beliefs.
It answers calls from the coping and friendship literatures to supplement self-
reports of children's coping behaviors and friendship experiences with
observations of actual social interactions between close friends. Given evidence
that unsuccessful coping with daily stressors can lead to negative, long-term
interpersonal, psychological, and achievement-related outcomes, this research
has important practical implications for improving the social and emotional
well-being of children and for promoting school success.&lt;br/&gt;