* 0236584
* Conformal Deposition of Dielectric Nanolaminates
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2006
* Roy Gordon, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/2006
* USD 435,626.00

Research:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous work supported by NSF, the PI
discovered a process for the rapid deposition of highly conformal coatings
consisting mostly of silicon dioxide (silica). The method uses alternating layer
deposition (ADL) from two different vapors supplied alternately to a surface to
make a coating that is laminated on the nanometer scale. Each layer is formed
with a highly precise atomic level of control over thickness, smoothness,
conformality and composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes theories that
should permit him to extend the capability of this deposition method in five
different ways:&lt;br/&gt;1. Lower dielectric constant. Carbon-doping of the
silica films will be used to lower the dielectric constant (k). Carbon will be
introduced into the coating by chemical modification of the
precursors.&lt;br/&gt;2. Selective sealing of pores. By use of the catalytic
character of the ALD process, the PI plans to deposit the carbon-doped low-k
material to seal the pores near the surface of the ultra-low-k dielectrics,
without placing any material inside interior pores. This process will prevent
the electrical leakage that occurs after deposition of electrically conductive
materials onto ultra-low-k dielectric materials.&lt;br/&gt;3. Selective trench
filling. By another use of the catalytic character of the ALD process, the PI
plans to fill the insides of narrow trenches with low-k material, while keeping
adjacent flat surfaces free of any deposit.&lt;br/&gt;4. Higher growth rate.
Using his theoretical mechanism for the ALD process, he plans to further
increase growth rate by the synthesis and testing of a new chemical
precursor.&lt;br/&gt;5. ALD of optical multiplayer filters. The ALD process has
the right characteristics to make superior low-index layers for optical multi-
layer filters, even on non-planar surfaces such as those found on lenses or
focusing mirrors. A method is also being considered for ALD of layers of the
other material needed for these filters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each of the five planned activities could have
important impact on critical needs in the microelectronics and optical
communications industries:&lt;br/&gt;1. This process would extend the unique
capabilities of ALD to make highly conformal low-k insulators needed in
microelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;2. Selective sealing of surface pores on ultra-low-k
dielectrics is needed to provide the smooth surfaces needed for making
interconnections in microeletronics.&lt;br/&gt;3. Selective trench filling would
allow the filling of isolated trenches between microelectronic transistors
without the use of the expensive chemical/mechanical polishing step normally
needed to remove excess silica from the top surface.&lt;br/&gt;4. Achievement of
still higher deposition rates will make the ALD process more cost-effective for
all practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;5. Wavelength-selective filters with
higher quality are needed in fields such as integrated optics and electronics,
and optical communications.&lt;br/&gt;