* 0236396
* CAREER: The Evolution of Transportation Networks: Empirical Research and Agent-Based Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2008
* David Levinson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract - CAREER: The Evolution of
Transportation Networks: Empirical Research and Agent-Based
Models&lt;br/&gt;This research endeavors to understand the evolutionary growth
process of transportation networks at a theoretical and empirical level,
recognizing the inter-dependence of supply and demand. Key questions to be
examined include: Why do networks expand and contract? Do networks self-organize
into hierarchies? Are roads (routes) an emergent property of networks? What
investment rules predict the sequence and location of network improvements? When
are already existing facilities expanded (more lanes on the same link) as
opposed to new facilities being provided (a new link)? How can transportation
planning be improved to take advantage of a new understanding of network
evolution?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is hypothesized that simple, measurable
factors (such as traffic growth rates, volume to capacity ratios, and comparison
with adjacent upstream and downstream links) explain many of the resulting
decisions. This investigation will examine a time series of capital improvement
projects and decisions for the Twin Cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul, relating
them to network structure characteristics. These empirical models will be
embedded in agent based models to replicate the process of network
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research specifies and estimates component
models explaining travel behavior, network costs and revenue, and investment
decisions. Then the components will be integrated into the simulation model and
tested. Both the estimation of individual component models and their integration
into a simulation of network growth (and decline) will increase our limited
understanding of network evolution processes. This new understanding will have
broader impacts on transportation planning practice, and ultimately on the shape
of cities and regions. Incorporating explicit measures of network externalities
in decision making will lead to better plans, network routing decisions, and
implementation strategies. Understanding and illustrating how decisions in one
point of time affect future choices should help guide planners and decision-
makers desiring to shape the future. The long-term consequences of incremental
changes will be assessed. This will help decision-makers assess the effects of
expanding existing facilities or routes, or building in new rights-of-way or
offering new services. This improved understanding of long term network dynamics
would lead to better planning and design of road networks to exploit network
externalities and maximize future choice for decision makers. The knowledge of
how current decisions foreclose or create future opportunities should improve
decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary educational objectives of the
research are to 1) integrate transportation network evolution into courses on
Urban Transportation Planning, Transportation Economics, and Transportation and
Land Use, 2) develop a Freshman Seminar on Transportation Policy to involve
University of Minnesota undergraduates through the Undergraduate Research
Opportunities Program, and 3) involve Native American High School Students from
the Fond du Lac tribe in Transportation. Use of the simulation model in the
courses will provide the students a unique tool for understanding the
implications of policy decisions on network
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;