* 0237913
* CAREER: Stochastic Models for Video-Equipped Intelligent Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2005
* Vera Kettnaker, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Daniel F. DeMenthon
* 03/31/2005
* USD 74,265.00

A surprisingly large number of safety tasks can be viewed as the detection of
unusual events. This research will develop video analysis systems that can
distinguish ``unusual'' from ``normal'' activities without specifying the
unusual events ahead of time. This stands in contrast to most current systems
which are designed to recognize special, pre-determined events. Three major
thrusts of work will make the development of such video safety systems more
realistic: (1)The PI will significantly increase the precision of parametric
process models by including the event duration and the time of an event.
(2)These complex models require more training data, yet only few data points
will be available to estimate the time-dependent parameters. Therefore, this
research will explore several different ways of estimating accurate models
robustly from limited data. (3)Finally, this research will investigate how to
use HMMs to detect deviations of the current time-series from the learned model.

The theoretical work will be put to practice on a task that will increase the
safety of independently living senior citizens. The system will learn a model of
the daily habits of the person based on video data from multiple cameras in the
apartment. Emergency situations like strokes and falls can then be detected as
deviations from the regular behavior, and a care taker can be notified. In the
later stages of the project, the new models will also be applied to other safety
and traffic tasks.

The education component of this award includes the development of extensive
tutorials on stochastic modeling techniques which will be made available to the
public online, as well as an interdisciplinary seminar on stochastic modeling at
RPI.