* 0237113
* CAREER:  Approximation Algorithms - New Directions and Techniques
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Moses Charikar, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Petros Drineas
* 06/30/2009
* USD 400,041.00

&lt;br/&gt;The theory of NP Completeness has shown that several
naturally&lt;br/&gt;occurring problems are unlikely to have polynomial
time&lt;br/&gt;algorithms. One approach to overcome this fundamental
intractability&lt;br/&gt;for optimization problems has been to shift the focus
from exact&lt;br/&gt;solutions to obtaining approximate solutions. The study
of&lt;br/&gt;approximation algorithms has thus emerged as a rich and exciting
field&lt;br/&gt;and recent advances have led to good approximation algorithms
for&lt;br/&gt;several fundamental optimization problems. Despite these
developments,&lt;br/&gt;several interesting and difficult open problems remain.
A primary&lt;br/&gt;focus of this career development plan is studying the
approximability&lt;br/&gt;of fundamental problems and attempting to close such
gaps in our&lt;br/&gt;understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad research
goals of this career development plan are
the&lt;br/&gt;following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Developing new tools to devise
approximation algorithms &lt;br/&gt;for problems on directed
graphs.&lt;br/&gt;2. Developing new techniques for metric approximations and
&lt;br/&gt;embeddings as building blocks for approximation.&lt;br/&gt;3.
Investigating a systematic way to obtain and exploit&lt;br/&gt;strengthened SDPs
as well as the use of strengthened SDPs for &lt;br/&gt;graph partitioning
minimization problems and ordering problems.&lt;br/&gt;4. Devise techniques to
deal with scheduling problems with&lt;br/&gt;precedence
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;5. Extend the machinery of approximation algorithms to
new&lt;br/&gt;settings such as information theoretic and algebraic
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program will involve students at all
levels, from&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate projects on understanding the quality of LP
and SDP&lt;br/&gt;relaxations through computational experiments, to the
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;research suitable for Ph.D. students. The educational
component of&lt;br/&gt;this project includes the development of courses geared
towards&lt;br/&gt;disseminating new algorithmic ideas outside the theoretical
computer&lt;br/&gt;science community; the techniques developed in the latest
research&lt;br/&gt;will be distilled into new graduate and undergraduate
courses. Course&lt;br/&gt;materials developed for such new courses will be made
freely available&lt;br/&gt;to enable similar courses to be taught
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;