* 0237233
* CAREER: Framework for Investigating Physical Evolutionary Constraints Using 3-dimensional Data with Application to the Plesiosaurian Neck
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Ryosuke Motani, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2006
* USD 409,730.00

Organisms physically interact with their environments, and therefore the
evolution of their shape and size is expected to be constrained by physical
principles. The PI will develop a framework to test this assumption
quantitatively by combining recent 3-dimensional computation techniques (fast
3-dimensional digitization, Finite Element Analysis [FEA], and 3-dimensional
printing) with physical experiments (flume test and mechanical properties
measurement). As the first test case, the framework will be applied to a group
of marine reptiles from the age of dinosaurs (Plesiosauria: Reptilia). Some
plesiosaurs are known for long necks (up to 6 m long, containing about 70
vertebrae), but there is no consensus as to whether they were flexible or
stationary. A scale model of a neck, produced through 3-dimensional scanning and
printing, will be used to establish approximate motion patterns of the neck,
which will be tested by 3-dimensional motion analyses using FEA. Once the likely
motion patterns are established, approximate hydrodynamic and mechanical
constraints resulting from the motion will be modeled by equations, aided by
Computational Fluid Dynamics, as well as flume experiments using scale models. A
preliminary study shows that their neck and skull lengths present a uniform
scaling pattern, presumably reflecting physical constraints arising from typical
behavior of the animals. This observation and the obtained model equations will
be combined to test the presence of physical constraints behind the evolution of
the long neck. To establish the framework further, living cetacean specimens,
for which material properties and vertebral motion range are measurable, will be
studied in the same manner to verify the validity of the FEA motion analyses.
Two Ph.D. students and up to 18 undergraduate students will be trained.