* 0237175
* Molecular Systematics of the Lampsilini (Bivalvia: Unionoida): Evolution of Ancient Sex-Specific Extension of the cytochrome c oxidase II Gene
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Walter Hoeh, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 01/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract DEB - 0237175

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Walter R. Hoeh at Kent State University to study
the molecular systematics and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) inheritance in the
freshwater mussel (bivalve) tribe Lampsilini. Doubly-uniparental inheritance of
mtDNA has been found in marine and freshwater mussels. This system has been
studied extensively in marine mussels but relatively little work has been done
on the species-rich freshwater fauna. Studies of the doubly-uniparental
inheritance system indicate that mtDNA gender-switching events are common in
marine mussels; however, recent work suggests that these gender-switching events
are absent in freshwater mussels. This situation may be related to a 600
nucleotide extension of the COII gene in freshwater mussel male-transmitted
mtDNA. Using DNA sequencing techniques, this project will examine the evolution
of the COII extension in the Lampsilini, a group of freshwater mussels that are
of particular interest because it contains some of the most interesting
morphological adaptations within bivalves as well as a secondary reduction of
the COII extension in a species within this tribe. This project's specific
objectives include: (1) construct robust estimates of lampsiline phylogeny, (2)
investigate the evolutionary pattern of reduction of the COII extension, and (3)
examine the molecular evolution of the male- and female-transmitted mtDNAs.
These objectives will facilitate tests of lampsiline evolutionary relationships,
determine the lability of the COII extension, determine the extent to which the
COII extension prevents gender-switching, and increase our understanding of the
forces underlying molecular evolutionary change.

The completion of these specific objectives has broad implications, including:
conservation of freshwater mussels, one of the most imperiled faunas in the
world; the evolution of doubly-uniparental and standard maternal mtDNA
inheritance; evolution of morphological sexual dimorphism in the Lampsilini; and
mechanisms underlying molecular evolution. In addition, the proposed research
will provide training for a young evolutionist/systematist.