* 0237734
* Conference on Perception and Realization in Language and Gender Research
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2004
* Mary Bucholtz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2004
* USD 22,480.00

The National Science Foundation supports the Conference on Perception and
Realization in Language and Gender Research. This conference will held during
the intersession of the 2003 Linguistic Society of America Summer Institute at
Michigan State University. The conference will combine invited papers, panel
discussions, poster sessions, and workshops. The goal is to increase awareness
of international perspectives on the rapidly expanding linguistic subfield of
language and gender and to forge ties between researchers in the U.S. and other
countries by providing multiple opportunities for focus on a single question:
How is the relationship between language and gender perceived and realized, both
by speakers and by researchers themselves? This theme recognizes growing
attention to the question of the empirical validity of any relationship between
language and gender. Until recently, such a relationship was thought to be more
or less fixed in gender difference and to obtain across many contexts of
language use. Language and gender research emphasized this relationship by
documenting specific gender differences in language use and developing
explanations based on culture or power. In the past 15 years, researchers have
focused less on differences and more on the role of context in the study of
female and male speakers. This reframing of the field has produced a new set of
research questions regarding perceived associations between gender and
particular linguistic features as well as the realization of such associations
in specific contexts of language use. These questions include: How can one be
sure that a linguistic phenomenon is associated with gender? How and when are
gender identities salient? To what extent do perceptions of gendered language
use correspond to linguistic manifestations of gender identity?

The project will lead to scientific advancement in language and gender research
by bringing together representatives of various theoretical, methodological, and
disciplinary perspectives to address newly central issues in the field. In
addition, the conference provides a rare opportunity to bring current concerns
in language and gender to the linguistics community at large, and to provide
education and training to graduate students at the early stages of their
graduate careers. The conference will also support the education of
undergraduates and the application of language and gender research findings to
real-world problems, such as issues of gender and language in institutional
contexts like the law, medicine, and education. Results of the conference will
made available electronically as working papers as well as in traditional
published form. To make conference results accessible and inexpensive for the
widest possible audience, online publication will be especially promoted.

