* 0237059
* Functional Genomics of High Pressure Adaptation
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Douglas Bartlett, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 02/28/2007
* USD 412,508.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Douglas Bartlett of Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, University of California, San Diego to identify and characterize
genes and proteins which enable some species of microorganisms to flourish in
deep ocean environments where the pressure can be as great as one thousand times
greater than that which exists on the surface of our planet and where the
temperature is close to freezing. Most of the proposed work will be performed on
a deep-sea bacterial species whose entire genome sequence will soon be
completely known. In order to accomplish the research goals mutant cells unable
to grow at high pressure will be isolated and the basis of their pressure
sensitivity will be ascertained using state of the art bacterial genetic and
molecular biology techniques. Proteins whose abundance is controlled by pressure
will be identified using a semi-automated biochemical process. The properties of
genetically engineered mutants that cannot make certain pressure-regulated
proteins will be examined so that the role of these proteins in microbial growth
at high pressure can be better understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria possess
a greater variety of genes than any other life forms and many of these genes
have value in medicine and biotechnology. Microbes from the extreme environment
of the deep ocean will undoubtedly possess novel genes of practical value. For
example, it is already known that many deep-sea bacteria have genes for the
production of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, and these molecules are
useful for human cardiovascular health and the prevention of certain diseases.
Characterizing the genes and proteins which enable life in the abyss, which
represents the largest part of Earth where life is found, provides the
opportunity for learning fundamental details of how life can exist under
dramatically different physical constraints. In addition, the work performed as
a part of this grant may provide details on how life could exist outside of our
planet where low temperatures and high pressures exist, such as within the
aquatic environment of Jupiter's moon Europa. &lt;br/&gt;