* 0237217
* CAREER: Structural-functional Analysis of the V-ATPase Subunit d by Site-directed Mutagenesis and Overexpression in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Karlett Parra, Ball State University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 06/30/2007
* USD 696,180.00

Vacuolar H+-ATPases (V-ATPases) are proton pumps required for normal cell
growth, organelle acidification, and ion homeostasis, and they consist of a
peripheral complex, V1, and a membrane-bound complex, V0. This research focuses
on establishing the roles and functions of the subunit d of the V0 complex in
the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast provides an excellent system to
explore V-ATPase assembly, catalysis, and regulation by using genetics,
cellular, and biochemical techniques. Specifically, amino acid substitutions in
conserved regions of subunit d will be used to probe the structural and
functional importance of these regions. Subunit d interactions with V1 and V0
will be further explored by overexpressing subunit d in cells that carry intact
V-ATPases (wild-type), V0 alone (vma2), and V1 alone (vma3). These studies will
contribute to the elucidation of both the structure and regulatory mechanisms of
V-ATPases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project is designed to make
significant contributions to both the understanding of V-ATPases and to
strengthening of undergraduate education. The latter goal includes enhancing the
undergraduate curriculum by including research-based experiments in the
biochemistry lab courses. This activity will provide opportunities for critical
thinking and scientific discovery in the classroom. Student participation will
be encouraged with possibilities for academic credit, stipends, awards, and co-
authorship of resulting publications. Intrinsic to the project is the goal to
enhance diversity by fostering the participation and retention of students that
are underrepresented in sciences. The project will also involve summer research
by high school students. These activities would enhance student retention at
Ball State University and encourage diversity.&lt;br/&gt;