* 0237126
* Collaborative Proposal: Dental Development and Life History of Malagasy Lemurs
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Gary Schwartz, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 01/31/2005
* USD 142,999.00

Ever since the pioneering work of Adolf Schultz, primatologists have shown a
sustained interest in the skeletal developmental correlates of life history
variation among primates, and in their implications for understanding the
evolution of life history. More recently, the fossil record has been the direct
focus of such comparative work. New tools in dental microstructure are available
for teasing out aspects of life history variation among extinct species and have
begun to be applied with great success to subfossil lemurs. Teeth preserve
within them a permanent record of their development enabling researchers to
retrieve longitudinal developmental data from single adult specimens. This is
not merely extremely useful for exploring life history variation among extinct
species, but it promises to revolutionize our understanding of some aspects of
the life histories of extant species as well. &lt;br/&gt;Scientific merit: This
study will bring the study of dental microstructure and other new analytical
tools to bear on one of the most fascinating groups of extinct primates: the
giant subfossil lemurs of Madagascar. Their closest living relatives, the extant
lemurs, show remarkable variation in the timing of dental, craniofacial, and
somatic growth and development, all within the context of a highly seasonal and
unpredictable environments. These differing patterns of dental and skeletal
growth relate to variation in lemur life history strategies - in particular, to
the trade-off between adult female survival and reproductive effort. By
combining data on the behavioral ontogeny of food processing (using new
techniques in use-wear analyses), dental development and eruption (via
radiography), and dental microstructural analyses of single adult specimens,
this project will address questions never before asked of extinct primates: How
long was gestation in giant lemurs? How rapidly did they grow? At what age did
weaning occur in these species, and how prolonged was the weaning transition? Do
frugivorous lemur species grow more slowly than like-sized folivores, as
predicted by the ecological risk aversion hypothesis? Does the seasonal
scheduling of growth in extinct lemurs cause a large proportion of adult size to
be achieved before weaning, or do fundamentally different rates of infant growth
characterize extinct lemur taxa as they do extant lemurs? Finally, advances in
landmark-based 3-D geometric morphometrics (e.g., Morphologika, HETPAD), along
with conventional analysis of trait-age matrices to chronicle the relationships
between dental, brain and craniofacial development in extinct lemurs, allows us
to test current hypotheses regarding the evolution of life history strategies in
what is perhaps the world's most unique and diverse adaptive radiation of
primates. Ultimately, this study will provide the evolutionary developmental
framework for understanding the evolution of life history variation in primates.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: An important broader impact of this study is graduate
and postgraduate training. One of the PIs has a Malagasy graduate student who is
studying lemurs and has expressed an interest in learning the techniques
described here. The microstructural work required here will also provide ideal
training for a two-year postdoctoral associate. Furthermore, the PIs have
ongoing collaborations with others in the realms of Madagascar's paleobiology,
lemur ecology, ecomorphology, heterochrony and skeletal ontogeny, and dental
microstructure. We expect the work described here to intersect profitably with
other research projects, and thus to inform research on the evolution of primate
community structure in Madagascar, the patterns and causes of extinction, and
the evolutionary developmental biology of primates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;