* 0237549
* CAREER:  Opportunistic Communication: A Design Paradigm for Wireless Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2009
* Pramod Viswanath, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* William H Tranter
* 04/30/2009
* USD 400,001.00

Demand for wireless communication services has been growing much faster than
additional resources (such as bandwidth) are allocated. Besides scarce available
bandwidth, wireless system designers have to deal with several unique
challenges, not commonly found in wireline &lt;br/&gt;networks, such as
interference caused by transmissions and user specific time and frequency
varying channels. Managing the limited resources through a harmonious design
&lt;br/&gt;of the physical and networking layers is a central problem in the
design of wireless systems and a very relevant one. The intense research
activity over the past decade addressing this issue can be &lt;br/&gt;roughly
dichotomized into two parts: the physical layer work focusing mostly on point to
point communication and the networking layer work of resource allocation using
an abstraction of the physical layer. Further, engineering design of wireless
systems, for the most part, has centered around making individual point to point
links reliable and developing a networking layer using an appropriate model of
the physical layer. This project takes a fundamental physical layer view of the
wireless network communication problems and sheds insight into novel design
techniques &lt;br/&gt;at both the physical and the networking layer, yielding a
significant boost to the overall system capacity. One novel viewpoint is
multiuser diversity, a form of diversity inherent in a wireless
&lt;br/&gt;network. In a system with many users whose channels vary
independently, there is likely to be a user whose channel is near its peak at
any one time. By scheduling transmissions only to users with &lt;br/&gt;the best
channel, multiuser diversity gain is harnessed. This form of "opportunistic
communication" provides a sharp boost to the system throughput. Through the lens
of multiuser &lt;br/&gt;diversity, channel fluctuations are preferable, in sharp
contrast to the point to point communication view. This project conducts a
systematic study of the role of multiuser diversity: schemes to artificially
induce and harness it. Other specific problems studied include a fundamental
view of the multiple antenna downlink (broadcast) channel and an ad hoc
networking model. Teaching is an integral part of this project and is partly
carried out through the &lt;br/&gt;development of four courses. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;