* 0237918
* CAREER:       Efficient Discovery of Previously Unknown Patterns and Relationships in Massive Time Series Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Eamonn Keogh, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

To date, the vast majority of research on time series data mining has focused on
similarity search and to a lesser extent on clustering. However, from a
knowledge discovery viewpoint, there are several important unsolved problems in
time series data mining that are more interesting, important, and challenging.
This project addresses these problems. The long-term goal is the creation of
efficient algorithms to allow the extraction of knowledge in the form of
patterns, anomalies, regularities and rules, from massive time series datasets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the ubiquity of times series data, the work may
have benefits in areas as diverse as cardiology, industry, astronomy, medicine,
bioinformatics, finance, meteorology, entertainment and networking. Local
collaborators in industry and science, who will test the algorithms, have been
identified. To enhance broader impacts of this project, results will be
disseminated by an expansion of the UCR Time Series Data Mining Archive, which
will make all code, datasets and publications created by the project freely
available to data mining researchers and practitioners. The Web site
(http://www.cs.ucr.edu/~eamonn/NSFcareer/NSF.html) provides more information
about this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A special feature of the project is an
effort involving undergraduate and graduate students to find, implement and
compare relevant work to the approach developed in this project. Time series
data analysis is very important for business and thus the project will have
broad impact beyond its scientific impact.&lt;br/&gt;