* 0237931
* Exploration of Eukaryotic Microbes in Sulfide-Enriched Sedimets at Redox Boundaries in the Black Sea
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Stefan Sievert, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2005
* USD 14,945.00

The Black Sea is the largest known oxygen-depleted, sulfide-enriched basin on
Earth. Although hydrogen sulfide is usually toxic, oxygen-depleted marine waters
rich in sulfide can have surprisingly high densities of eukaryotic
microorganisms (e.g., foraminiferans). This modest NSF award will support work
on a single research collecting cruise in the southwestern Black Sea to explore
microbial communities at points where the sediment/water interface intersects
with the disappearance of oxygen in the water column. Populations of eukaryotic
microbes will be quantified and characterized, as well as examined for the
presence of symbiotic bacteria. Environmental conditions will be determined by
using chemical data that will be collected from the same samples (as part of
other NSF projects, G. Luther, University of Delaware). Results will provide a
view of what may be a very unique bottom-dwelling Black Sea microbial community,
with many organisms previously unknown to science, thereby providing a
foundation for future, more multidisciplinary detailed studies in the area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxygen depletion caused by human activities is becoming
more widespread in marine waters. Characterizing microbial consortia in the
Black Sea may lead to a better understanding of the role of these communities in
other waters where the process is less desirable, and could suggest new
remedies. Other broader impacts of this project include the involvement of an
undergraduate student from an institution in an EPSCoR state, and interaction
between the PI and possible foreign collaborators. Results will be integrated
into coursework taught in future classes at the University of South Carolina.
&lt;br/&gt;