* 0237713
* Microbial Observatories: Collaborative Research Linking Microbial Discovery to Biogeochemical Processes: An Oligotrophic Oceanic Microbial Observatory
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Stephen Giovannoni, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2009
* USD 339,294.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Carlson (University of California Santa
Barbara) and Giovannoni (Oregon State University) to investigate the cell
biology and Biogeochemical activities of the major microbial groups in the open
ocean. This project will focus geographically on the Bermuda Atlantic Time-
series Study (BATS) site, which for the past decade has been a test bed for the
development of advanced molecular techniques for measuring microbial diversity,
and is one of the longest time-series studies of oceanographic conditions on the
planet. The rich data set from BATS provides important physical, chemical and
biological information that is used by the microbial observatory to understand
how ocean conditions affect the activities of planktonic microorganisms. The
ocean microbial observatory will apply a new high throughput cultivation
technology developed at Oregon State University to identify, count and cultivate
the major oceanic microbial groups that have not previously been cultured.
Technologies will also be employed to characterize the quality and quantity of
organic substrate utilization by these microorganisms.

Heterotrophic microorganisms use dissolved organic carbon (DOC) to grow. The
global dissolved organic carbon (DOC) pool is estimated to be 685 Gt C, a value
comparable to the mass of inorganic C in the atmosphere. Small perturbations in
the metabolism of DOC by microorganisms could impact the balance between oceanic
and atmospheric carbon dioxide, providing a strong impetus to understand how the
dynamics and diversity of microorganisms affect DOM production, consumption and
distribution in the oceans. The genomic DNA sequences, biochemical properties
and patterns of DOC utilization of these organisms will be studied in the
laboratory. This data will be used in field studies that document and explain
natural patterns of change in microbial communities and DOC. In addition this
project will also host summer courses at the Bermuda Biological Station for
Research designed to expose graduate students to state-of-the-art molecular
biology and oceanographic techniques.