* 0237438
* PECASE:  Exploring Population Persistence and Community Assembly Through "Resurrection Ecology"
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Carla Caceres, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 02/28/2009
* USD 518,800.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: Exploring Population Persistence and Community Assembly
Through "Resurrection Ecology" Institution: University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign

Dormant eggs of zooplankton accumulate in large numbers in lake sediments, where
they can remain viable for centuries. When eggs are removed from the lake and
hatched, they provide a living link to past communities. Dozens of lakes in
Vermilion Co., Illinois were formed within the past century by strip-mining, and
I will use these lakes to address questions regarding how different factors
influence the persistence ability of populations, and consequently, the
development of aquatic communities. I will take sediment cores that extend to
the formation of each lake. This presents a unique opportunity to examine
factors responsible for why populations become extinct, since the eggs contained
within the core display the entire colonization history of zooplankton, and
demonstrate patterns of species replacement through time. Many of these dormant
eggs can be hatched, allowing me to use multiple populations of Daphnia to
investigate the relative importance of within population (genetic diversity,
life-history variation) versus among population (competition, predation)
processes in determining changes in species composition over time. As part of
the education component, I will produce a manual for elementary school teachers
that will include activities for self-guided field trips of the lakes located a
state park.

This project was originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a
Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in
September 2004.