* 0237579
* CAREER: The Emergence of Sociopolitical Differentiation in Prehistoric Communities of the Southwestern United States
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2003,04/30/2007
* John Kantner, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2007
* USD 321,340.00

With National Science Foundation CAREER award, archaeologist Dr. John Kantner
will investigate why social and political inequities appeared in a small,
egalitarian community 1,000 years ago in what is now northwestern New Mexico.
The research is guided by principles from a variety of disciplines, including
anthropology, ecology, psychology, and economics, that together show how human
behavior is guided by evolutionary and cultural forces that often lead to
cooperation but also can result in competition and inequality. The model that
Dr. Kantner will evaluate proposes that the development of new sociopolitical
relationships is stimulated by specific contextual changes, such as climatic
improvements or exposure to new religions, that affect how people evaluate their
regular interactions with one another. Depending on the nature of the changes,
human relationships can be restructured such that inequities develop. While this
study considers this process in one specific prehistoric community, both the
theoretical foundations for the research as well as the detailed explanatory
model have wider implications for understanding human behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER funding will allow Dr. Kantner to conduct five
years of interdisciplinary archaeological research on the selected prehistoric
Anasazi community. The investigations will include traditional survey and
excavation of family households combined with the use of modern remote-sensing
equipment and geochemical analyses in order to reconstruct the social and
economic history of the community. To minimize destruction of irreplaceable
archaeological sites, to avoid disturbing federally protected prehistoric
cemeteries, and to make the most efficient use of the funding, a targeted
sampling approach will be used. In addition to the archaeological fieldwork,
computer-based geographical (GIS) techniques will be used for reconstructing
what the climate and landscape were like through the community's history. The
results of the research will include a detailed social, economic, and political
history of the community as well as a precise paleoecological history. These two
sequences can then be compared, allowing for a comprehensive evaluation of the
model for the origins of village-level inequality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate and graduate students from Georgia State
University (GSU), an urban environment that accommodates a generally
disadvantaged student body, will be integrated into all stages of the research-
from field work to professional activity and public outreach. Much of the
funding will therefore indirectly and directly support student training in
archaeology and professional research. A portion of the CAREER funding will
support the purchase of equipment and development of facilities for conducting
modern archaeological research. Students will also assist in the development of
an educational website providing updates on the research to the wider public and
to other professionals. By the end of the five year research program, GSU will
have an updated infrastructure for archaeological research and for teaching the
science of archaeology, and Dr. Kantner will have completed a comprehensive case
study of the emergence of sociopolitical differentiation, providing a foundation
for future professional research and student learning experiences.&lt;br/&gt;