* 0237360
* Upgrading of the 40AR/39AR laser dating system at the University of Alaska Fairbanks
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2005
* Paul Layer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2005
* USD 80,000.00

0237360&lt;br/&gt;Layer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides proposal
partial support for the upgrade of an existing 40Ar/39Ar laser dating laboratory
at the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF). The upgrade will significantly
improve signal stability and dating precision, minimize downtime due to
equipment failure, extend the useful life of the spectrometer, and allow for
dating of larger samples or those experiments requiring precise temperature
control. The laboratory has been operating as a 40Ar/39Ar facility since 1990,
and the laser system has been in operation since 1994. Specifically, funds will
be used to replace the electronics in the VG3600 mass spectrometer, purchase a
UPS for power stability, install an existing resistance-heating furnace, upgrade
vacuum components, and improve data processing and archiving
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;UAF will provide 33% of the direct equipment purchase.
In addition the Geophysical Institute of the University of Alaska supports the
annual operation of the laboratory (budget is approximately $100,000/yr) with
some of the support coming from external grants and contracts. This funding
supports a full-time laboratory technician, undergraduate student assistants, 3
months of PI time and many of the day-to-day operating and maintenance expenses
of the laboratory. The Geochronology Laboratory at UAF operates as a regional
facility with interests in geologic and geochronologic problems in Alaska and
elsewhere. The PI maintains strong collaborations with researchers at the Alaska
Division of Geological and Geophysical Surveys, the United States Geological
Survey and at U.S. and foreign universities, and it is expected that the
upgrades will allow these collaborations to continue and expand. This upgrade
will prove beneficial for continuing research in thermochronometric and
chronostratigraphic studies, application of argon isotopes as indicators of
magmatic processes and the dating of very young samples.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;