* 0237566
* CAREER:  Interface Control and Three Dimension Mechanisms of Branch-Limited Eutectic Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Ralph Napolitano, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 06/30/2009
* USD 377,500.00

The project seeks to advance the fundamental understanding of microstructural
transformation in materials with emphasis on eutectic solidification. Major
objectives are to identify, characterize and quantify the complex three-
dimensional mechanisms involved in local adjustment and self-optimization of
irregular growth morphologies. The project will develop a more complete and
general view of coupled growth phenomena. Several solidification techniques will
be used to grow eutectic structures under various types of thermal and geometric
constraints. State-of-the-art characterization techniques, including optical and
electron microscopy, serial micromilling, diffraction-based methods and in-situ
imaging will be utilized to investigate the 3-D adjustment mechanisms and their
relationship to the relevant anisotropic interfacial properties. Computational
methods will also be employed for the investigation of various specific
morphological features such as interface curvature, missing orientations,
faceting behavior, growth mode transitions, and triple-junction morphology.
Technological importance of eutectic solidification provides a clear source of
motivation for students, and the visually striking microstructures that
typically evolve during eutectic solidification serve as graphic illustrations
of transition dynamics, providing very effective teaching
examples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topic of eutectic solidification offers a
wealth of rich problems involving multicomponent thermodynamics, solid-liquid
and solid-solid interfacial phenomena, morphological stability, chemical and
thermal diffusion, and nucleation phenomena. The educational efforts are
designed to establish a set of standard practices that will facilitate
integrated research and teaching with the involvement of education
professionals, leaders of student organizations, and representatives from
various community youth organizations. By involving youth organizations, such as
the Boys &amp; Girls Clubs of America, an effort will be made to engage the
disadvantaged and underrepresented segments of our youth population.&lt;br/&gt;