* 0237968
* CAREER: Institutional Structure, Civic Engagement, and Crime in Nonmetropolitan America
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Matthew Lee, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2004
* USD 400,058.00

This CAREER project develops a research and teaching program that examines
the&lt;br/&gt;relationship between non-economic institutional structures, civic
engagement, and crime rates in nonmetropolitan communities. Accumulating
evidence suggests nonmetropolitan communities or rural communities exhibit
substantial variation in rates of crime over time and space. However,
criminological theory and empirical research continues to focus on urban
communities. Consequently, students of sociology, criminology, and criminal
justice are rarely exposed to issues of crime and its control outside of an
urban context. These deficits persist despite the facts that the nonmetropolitan
population is steadily growing, and that traditionally urban problems such as
drug production and distribution (and their attendant problems) are spreading to
nonmetropolitan areas. The general objectives of the research are to: (1)
articulate more thoroughly a conceptual model to explain variation in crime
rates over time and space emphasizing the importance of community institutional
structures and civic engagement for strengthening informal social control, and
(2) provide a series of cross-sectional and longitudinal tests of the conceptual
framework using Uniform Crime Report and Supplementary Homicide Report data and
information from the Census of Population and Housing, the Census of Churches,
and the Economic Census. The study also investigates variations in the
explanatory power of the framework across crime types and for disaggregated
crime rates (gender, age, race, etc.). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
component consists of developing an undergraduate course on rural crime. This
class makes use of innovative instructional techniques, including experiential
learning and assisted learning activities. These techniques will be augmented by
the development of a research and teaching web site where students can access
data on crime, institutions, and civic engagement for nonmetropolitan
communities. The PI will also develop a graduate course on rural crime and
community organization. The cumulative efforts of the ongoing research project
will be integrated into this course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merits of the study lie in advancing a more concrete perspective on the social
sources of community organization and applying it to crime in a generally
neglected context - nonmetropolitan communities. Additionally, previously
unanswered questions on the explanatory efficacy of the theory across sub-
categories of crime are addressed. The project has significant broader impacts
in that it will not only enhance the knowledge base on rural crime, but also
increase the labor force marketability of a student body drawn primarily from
rural areas. Many of the students will go on to work in criminal justice and
social service agencies in nonmetropolitan areas after graduation. Study results
can inform social policy on how to effectively engage institutions at the local
level and cultivate civic engagement in communities at large. &lt;br/&gt;