* 0237474
* SBIR Phase II:   Low-Cost, High-Efficiency Power Amplifiers for Magnetic-Resonance Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Frederick Raab, GREEN MOUNTAIN RADIO RESEARCH CO
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2007
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II will develop and test a
prototype low-cost, high-efficiency transmitter for magnetic-resonance-imaging
(MRI) systems. Existing MRI transmitters use conventional power amplifiers
(PAs), which makes them inefficient and consequently large, heavy, and
expensive. Phase I has demonstrated the feasibility of using developed high-
efficiency amplification techniques to produce significantly more power from a
given transistor, thus lowering the cost. Also demonstrated was the feasibility
of using these amplifiers to produce the pulsed-RF signals used by MRI. Phase II
will develop a prototype transmitter that combines high-efficiency power
amplification with digital signal processing to provide both low cost and
superior signal quality. This in turn will produce superior image quality,
resulting in improved diagnostics. The transmitter will be organized into
broadband RF-power modules that can be combined in building-block fashion to
produce transmitters for different MRI applications. The prototype transmitter
will be configured into a manufacture able form to facilitate transition to
Phase-III commercialization. Finally, the prototype transmitter will be tested
in an MRI system and images obtained will be compared to those obtained with a
conventional transmitter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary commercial
application for the new transmitter is medical imaging. Every MRI system
includes a high-power RF transmitter. The manufacturers of MRI systems purchase
transmitters from smaller manufacturers. The RF transmitter is the most
expensive subsystem, and keeping the cost down is of great interest. The
building-block approach allows all market segments to be addressed, beginning
with the lower-power "1-T" systems for specialized applications and moving
subsequently to higher-power "3-T" systems for high-resolution whole body scans.
The combination of lower cost and superior signal quality is expected to make
the proposed transmitter very attractive to systems manufacturers. Secondary
applications include security systems such as suitcase scanners and
communication radios for both civilian and military applications.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;