* 0237920
* CAREER: Cross-Layer Architectures for Power Adaptive and Smart Antenna Equipped Mobile Ad Hoc Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,09/30/2009
* Srikanth Krishnamurthy, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2009
* USD 467,002.00

In this proposal the goal is to increase the capacity of ad hoc networks by
efficiently using power control and smart antennas. Traditionally there has been
a clear separation between the layers of the protocol stack. In particular, the
design and development of protocols at the physical and higher layers has tended
to proceed independently. In order to exploit the functionalities provided by a
particular layer it is important that the other layers be made aware of the
features at the other layers. In particular, traditional protocols do not
exploit the ability to tune transmission power or the presence of smart antennas
effectively. In fact, many of them fail to function correctly or suffer from
degraded performance. The PI propose cross-layer architectures that would
consist of new inter-dependent protocols at the MAC, routing and the transport
layers that can effectively exploit the aforementioned physical layer features.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First the proposer propose a power aware cross-layer
architecture wherein the layers jointly co-operate to dynamically choose the
correct transmission power levels in response to both short term and long term
factors. Short-term power management is based on increasing the power levels
temporarily to re-establish links that fail due to mobility to provide the
higher layer protocols a short grace period to recuperate from failures. Towards
this the proposer propose methods that help in determining whether link failures
are due to mobility or are induced due to congestion effects. Based on such
determinations, intelligent decisions on how the power levels ought to be tuned
are taken. Long-term power management is based on choosing transmission power
levels for long periods of time such that the topology of the network is shaped
to achieve the best throughput. The choice of the power levels are jointly made
based on interactions between the layers such that appropriate trade-offs
between performance metrics such as throughput and power consumption are
achieved. Our methods are applicable in cases wherein the nodes in the network
are heterogeneous in terms of power capabilities, i.e., the maximum powers with
which different nodes are able to transmit are potentially different.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, the proposer propose a cross-layer architecture
that exploits the presence of smart antennas. The architecture facilitates close
interactions between the MAC, routing and transport layers to exploit both
directional transmissions and receptions in a highly dynamic environment. The
interactions help choose the right local connectivity to ensure that a high
level of spatial re-use of the spectrum is achieved while keeping the
communication overheads fairly small. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational plan
is expected to enhance awareness of wireless networking among their students and
motivate them to further explore the exciting field of wireless networking. In
addition, outreach activities are expected to increase the awareness of wireless
networking in the local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have a big
impact on ad hoc network design by bridging the gap between the physical layer
and higher layer technologies. It is expected that the cross layer architectures
that we will develop will lead to a significant enhancement in the capacity of
ad hoc networks. This in turn, may be expected to further the potential of the
widespread deployment of these networks. Examples of such deployments may be in
vehicular networks, disaster recovery missions, and tactical battlefields
missions. Furthermore, the mechanisms that will be developed are expected to
provide considerable power savings that would reduce battery drainage and
thereby extend the longevity of the network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
envisioned that this work will motivate future research and development in terms
of other possible cross-layer technologies wherein higher layer protocols can
exploit other physical layer functionalities such as variable modulation
techniques or the ability to dynamically vary the level of error control coding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research agenda is complemented by a strong educational
plan that includes (a) the enhancement of the content of existing courses in
networking and the initiation of new and exciting courses on wireless networks
at both the undergraduate and graduate levels (b) increase our outreach
activities to bring wireless technology to the local community by demonstrations
and talks at local high schools and (c) close collaboration with industry to
improve our students' awareness of commercial
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major Intellectual Contributions:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major intellectual contribution in this proposal is to
exploit cross-layer dependencies to provide interactions between layers to fully
exploit features at the physical layer in mobile ad hoc networks. In particular
the proposer focus on the presence of smart antennas and the ability to tune
transmission power levels at the physical layer. If such interactions are not
provided and protocols at the different layers are designed independent of each
other, the capacity of the network is considerably lower than what can be
achieved with such interactions. Furthermore, many of the protocols may not work
in the way envisioned or may perform unsatisfactorily. We provide mechanisms
that can allow the various layers to co-operate to intelligently make choices on
(a) how the network topology should be formed to begin with and tuned
dynamically and, (b) what to do at a particular layer in response to an event at
another layer, in order to increase the capacity of the network and achieve
considerable power
savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;