* 0237945
* CAREER: Conformations of Beta-Sheet Folding Intermediates: The Discrimination Between Productive Folding and Aggregation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Patricia Clark, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2008
* USD 851,698.00

The objective of this CAREER project is to develop general models for b-sheet
formation and stabilization. Several all-b-sheet proteins are unusually
thermostable, and many function in harsh extracellular environments where
unusually high stability is required for activity. Many of these proteins have
simple structural topologies (for example, the parallel b-helix), which,
together with their thermostability, make them attractive subjects for use as
'molecular scaffolds' for designing new functionalities. However, these proteins
have an Achilles' heel: while the native protein may be thermostable, the
folding intermediates are often quite thermolabile, and prone to aggregation. A
prerequisite for adapting these proteins for alternative functions is to
understand how they operate. Yet little is known about the details of b-sheet
formation, particularly parallel b-sheet formation. This project will use
biochemical and biophysical approaches such as fluorescence spectroscopy,
protease sensitivity, and changes in molecular radius to examine the
conformations of folding intermediates for two all-b-sheet proteins with very
stable yet difficult-to-form native states. This work will uncover the features
of b-sheet folding intermediates that (1) promote correct folding to the native
structure, and (2) suppress the off-pathway aggregation reaction. The results of
these studies will have broad application to the design of correctly folded
b-sheet proteins for biotechnological purposes.

The education goals of this project focus on introducing students at all levels
to the interdisciplinary approaches of modern scientific research and
development. The specific objectives include updating the undergraduate
curriculum to incorporate a new upper-level undergraduate elective in protein
biophysics, and a new general chemistry course for first year students, focused
on the interdisciplinary approaches of modern scientific discovery. Current
efforts to recruit female and minority researchers will be continued and
expanded.

