* 0237346
* Support for the Bird Division Collections at The University of Michigan Museum of Zoology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* David Mindell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 03/31/2006
* USD 475,000.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; A grant has been awarded to the University of
Michigan in Ann Arbor under the direction of Dr. D. Mindell to support the
research and teaching collections in the Museum of Zoology Bird Division (UMMZ-
BD). The UMMZ-BD avian research collections include over 203,500 specimens,
divided among six preparation types (skins, skeletons, fluids, eggs, nests, and
frozen tissues). The study skin collection alone includes about 171,600
specimens. The UMMZ-BD is one of the two or three largest and most comprehensive
collections to be associated with a major research university having an active
and productive graduate student training program in systematic biology and
biodiversity. The ornithological collections are notable for their excellent
taxonomic and geographic coverage, including many uncommon species from
relatively remote areas of the world, for the large number of geographic series
for many species, and for its 316 holotypes (individual specimens used to
describe new species). &lt;br/&gt; The objectives are (1) to purchase new
specimen cases to replace old ones, constructed during the 1920s through the
1940s, which do not provide sufficient protection from insects, and (2) to
employ a Curatorial Assistant to help move and transfer specimens to the new
cases. New, taller cases with additional drawers, will also make more efficient
use of existing space in the Ruthven Museums Building on central campus at the
University of Michigan. This will help to alleviate current crowding of
specimens in drawers and facilitate future growth of the collections. The
university will purchase approximately 137 new double cases with drawers and 79
new single cases with drawers along with the necessary acid-free blotting paper
and trays for the drawers. A Curatorial Assistant will be hired for 14 months to
assist in transferring specimens from the old to the new cases. A staging area
in the Ruthven Museums Building will be used to move out old cases and receive
shipments of new cases on an incremental basis. Funds provided by the National
Science Foundation will be augmented by significant matching funds from the
University of Michigan, including support toward the purchase of new cases and
for physical facilities improvement (air conditioning) in the UMMZ-
BD.&lt;br/&gt; The potential impact of the project on advancing knowledge and
science may be described as follows. Maintaining the extensive UMMZ-BD avian
collections and making them broadly available to the scientific, educational,
and resource management communities and to the public will enhance future
research and teaching in the areas of avian systematics (molecular and
morphological), evolution, as well as ecology and conservation for all
scientists and students, nationally and internationally, interested in these
aspects of biodiversity research. Collections maintenance is also vital in
fulfilling the UMMZ-BD's research and teaching missions.&lt;br/&gt;