* 0237219
* The Nodulin 26 Family of Plant Aquaglyceroporins: Transport Properties and Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Daniel Roberts, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2008
* USD 414,299.00

Major Intrinsic Proteins are an ancient family of ubiquitous membrane channels
that serve as the "molecular plumbing" of cells and tissues, mediating the rapid
transport of water and solutes across biological membranes. The MIP family is
particularly diverse in plants, reflecting the importance of water relations in
plant growth and development and the need to adapt to osmotic challenge (drought
and salinity). In this project the structural, functional and regulatory
properties of a unique subset of plant MIPs, the Nodulin-like Instrinsic
Proteins (NIPs) will be investigated. The archetype of this family is nodulin
26, which is a major component of the symbiosome, an organelle formed during the
nodulation of legume roots with symbiotic, nitrogen-fixing bacteria of the
Rhizobaceae family. Nodulin 26 forms a multiselective channel that transports
water and uncharged solutes across the symbiosome membrane, and may engage in
gas exchange (fixed ammonia and molecular oxygen) that is critical to the
symbiosis. Nodulin 26 transport is activated by calcium-regulated
phosphorylation in response to developmental and water stress signals. The goals
of this project are to investigate: 1. the transport selectivity of nodulin 26
and its ability to mediate gas permeability across the symbiosome membrane; 2.
the role of calcium-dependent phosphorylation and other regulatory factors on
nodulin 26 transport and selectivity; 3. the structures of phosphorylated and
unphosphorylated nodulin 26 by crystallography and molecular dynamics
techniques, and 4. the transport properties and biological functions of NIP
orthologs in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. The proposed work will aid in
establishing a structural and functional profile for this conserved family of
membrane transporters, as well as shedding light on the environmental and
developmental factors that regulate their function. Besides contributing to the
understanding of transport processes associated with nitrogen-fixing legume-
microbe symbiosis, the work will also provide insight into additional
fundamental roles of NIPs in water relations and stress adapation by utilizing
the powerful Arabidopsis molecular genetic model system.

Broader Impact: From the perspective of infrastructure, the work will impact our
understanding of the molecular basis of stress regulation and adaptation in
plant systems as well as provide a structural framework for plant MIP protein
research in general. The understanding of the molecular basis of plant stress
responses and nitrogen fixing symbioses are fundamental topics of agricultural
importance. The project will serve as a foundation for the training of
undergraduate research scholars, as well as Ph.D. candidates and post doctoral
associates at the University of Tennessee. In addition, this project will also
serve as a foundation for a continuing collaboration with international
scientists in plant membrane biology and signal transduction processes related
to plant drought and osmotic stress signaling.

The Molecular Biochemistry and Integrative Plant Biology Programs jointly fund
this project.