* 0237349
* Ongoing Management and Online Access of Ephemeroptera Collections at Florida A&amp;M University
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Michael Hubbard, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 04/30/2006
* USD 68,776.00

A grant has been awarded to Florida A&amp;M University under the direction of
Dr. Michael Hubbard to enable online access to research collections of mayflies
at Florida A&amp;M University (FAMU). The grant continues NSF support of these
important collections by providing resources to move historical records onto an
internet accessible museum database. FAMU is responsible for the care of
collections representing original surveys of many aquatic insects in the
Southeastern states. Other extensive holdings are of worldwide importance and
represent research accomplishments of FAMU faculty and collections donated to
FAMU because of the University's internationally recognized
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant continues previous NSF support for
taking care of historic donations. A major portion of the grant is concerned
with moving the information contained in these collections to online access
using a museum database designed under NSF support. Records will be converted
from a card catalog to electronic format for internet access. The records at
FAMU, dating from the 1940's, formed the basis for developing biological water
quality standards in the state and provide the records necessary to document
change over time. These records can be located on a modern georeferencing system
with the planned addition of latitude-longitude coordinates. As an affiliate of
the Florida State Collection of Arthropods, all records at FAMU can also link to
other databases within the state. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NSF recognizes that
there is a wealth of information to be found in historic collections that must
be available to modern researchers using modern data-gathering techniques. NSF
support also helps undergraduate students and provides training in museum
management and care of scientific material. Students under previous NSF support
have already gone on to entomological or biological careers, some with graduate
degrees. All entomological programs at FAMU support school enrichment
activities, provide workshops and training programs, identify insects on
request, and participate in the community. Research specimens are loaned
internationally and numerous visitors from abroad visit Tallahassee to study
these mayflies, all as a result of important NSF support.&lt;br/&gt;