* 0237129
* Determinants of Molecular Recognition Between Pheromone Receptors and Lipopeptide Pheromones of Schizophyllum Commune
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Thomas Fowler, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 02/28/2006
* USD 306,630.00

Some members of a group of common cell surface receptors called the G protein
coupled receptors, or GPCRs, can be stimulated by several activating molecules
that appear dissimilar. It is not understood how a single receptor recognizes
several seemingly different activators, or if the receptor simply cannot
differentiate between them. Evidence to date suggests that subtle differences in
activators can, in fact, be detected by these receptors. This project will
explore how the receptors recognize their multiple activators. A set of GPCRs
and their pheromone activators, derived from the mushroom fungus Schizophyllum
commune, will be used as an experimental model. Small, discrete changes will be
made in the receptors and pheromones in order to identify areas within these
molecules that are important for determining their mutual and specific
recognition. New information gained from studying these receptors and pheromones
will have implications for understanding the same type of receptors in other
organisms, where less is known about one or the other partner. Both receptors
and pheromones will be studied using molecular genetic techniques with an
emphasis on recombinant DNA technology. Another genetic model fungus, the
baker's yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, will be employed as a surrogate organism
in which to test the changes made in the mushroom's receptors and pheromones
because this yeast can be grown and manipulated with great
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this basic biological research is
potentially great. S. commune uses its receptors and pheromones to recognize
compatible mating partners, while similarly complex sets of receptors and
activators are the basis of taste and smell in animals and humans and,
additionally, mating behavior in some animals. A large percentage of
pharmaceuticals target GPCRs, thus a better general understanding of how GPCRs
function will be of benefit for understanding drug action and design. An S.
commune collection currently being submitted to the Fungal Genetic Stock Center
at Kansas University will provide a genetic resource for further studies on
these receptors and pheromones. In addition, this project will provide
opportunities for undergraduate students to receive hands-on training in modern
genetics, molecular genetics, and microbiology.&lt;br/&gt;