* 0237947
* PECASE: Formal Analysis and Validation of Probabilistic Guarantees on QoS and other Power/Performance Characteristics in  Embedded Systems Design
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2009
* Sandeep Shukla, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2009
* USD 441,001.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: Formal Analysis and Validation of Probabilistic
Guarantees on QoS and other Power/Performance Characteristics in Embedded
Systems Design&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As micro-electronic and micro-computing advances
proliferate to a large class of information technology appliances, there are two
trends dominating the current generation of applications and capabilities. The
first trend is increasing use of software in a large number of appliances that
imparts intelligent processing and decision making to manage device response and
its interaction with the user and the environment. The second trend is increased
networking of this "embedded intelligence" (also called ambient intelligence in
Europe) due to advances in communication and on-chip networking capabilities.
Computing in such systems is increasingly application-oriented and must be
responsive to the environment in which the device will be placed from hand-held,
personal spaces to the human body. This portability of embedded computing places
extreme demands on the ability of the system architectures to tolerate varying
energy source conditions, communication channel conditions, network conditions,
etc. Yet, there is also an increasing need for the application to be predictable
on various measures including performance, energy and power consumption and
other QoS (Quality of Service) properties. System availability and performance
reliability are also extremely important as these systems interact with real
world processes and their unavailability may lead to adverse or even disastrous
consequences. This research addresses some of the important challenges in the
management of the power, energy and performance of embedded computing and
networked devices in ways that allows us to develop close bounds on the quality
of results achieved. This project is developing fundamental technical advances
in the state of the art in dynamic power management (DPM) (at both hardware and
software levels), and other types of QoS predictability by employing techniques
from formal verification, probabilistic modeling and model checking, and
cooperative game theory. The educational part of this project aims at building
embedded systems engineering as a sub-discipline of Computer Engineering at
Virginia Tech, as well as on popularizing the research results through
demonstration of the techniques to more tangible engineering examples. For
example, the tools developed may be used for high-way traffic modeling, analysis
and controller synthesis for traffic maintenance. Such demonstrations (with
appropriate animation) are being developed to illustrate the power of formal and
mathematical modeling of complex systems to K12 level students and attract them
to engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project techniques for analysis of
strategies and protocols employed in embedded computing systems for resource
management are being investigated. The tools being developed will allow formal
validation of probabilistic guarantees on performance, energy expenditure and
QoS. The project also applies existing tools (whenever possible) for formal
analysis to achieve the goals of predictability of such measures. In particular,
the following types of questions are being dealt with. (a) How to analyze and
compare power/performance characteristics of multiple competing strategies
without having to resort to expensive simulation based methods? (b) How to
formally verify probabilistically quantified guarantees on the measures of
interest? (c) How to guide designers of embedded system in choosing between
alternative possible strategies to achieve some performance goals? (d) How to
formally analyze network protocols, using energy models of the
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;