* 0237822
* CAREER:    Investigating Circuit and Physical Level Issues in High-Performance Deep Submicrometer Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Yehea Ismail, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2009
* USD 399,999.00

Semiconductor technologies exhibited explosive growth in complexity and speed
over the last two decades. Since the early 1980s, the operating frequencies have
increased from a few megahertz to several gigahertz and the operating
frequencies of leading microprocessors are expected to exceed 10 gigahertz in
few years. Also, the spacing between devices and interconnect have dramatically
decreased due to the continuous scaling down of the technology feature size.
These trends have led to issues and challenges in the design and analysis of
high performance integrated circuits that previous generations did not exhibit.
Most of these issues are at the circuit and interconnect (physical) levels.
Also, these issues are expected only to increase in importance in future
generations of integrated circuits since frequencies and device densities will
only increase. &lt;br/&gt; This project involves a five-year plan to develop
rigorous research among many of these high-performance deep submicrometer
issues, which is necessary for correctly designing future generations of
integrated circuits with operating frequencies in excess of ten gigahertz. This
research is also directly applicable to many emerging technologies and
nanotechnologies due to the common issues at such high frequencies. This
research specifically investigates the following issues: 1-Increased coupling
and crosstalk noise, 2- Frequency dependent interconnect models, 3- High
temperature effects on the performance of integrated circuits and the
reliability of interconnect, and 4-Physical design techniques including noise
and power as parameters. &lt;br/&gt; As part of this effort, the education plan
aims at creating a dynamic curriculum that copes with the advances in the VLSI
field, since the VLSI field is one of the fastest changing areas of knowledge.
Another goal of this education plan is to increase and stress intuitive
understanding in VLSI education which is necessary for efficient problem solving
and innovation. Another primary goal of the education plan is to encourage
collaboration between industry and academia via internships and industrial
research partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;