* 0237132
* VPython: Real-time 3D Visualization for Science and Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Bruce Sherwood, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/2006
* USD 292,286.00

Interdisciplinary (99) Physics (13) The project is developing software to make
it easy for scientists, engineers, and their students to create computer models
of physical systems that include real-time, 3D, interactive graphics. The value
of 3D computer visualization in science and engineering education and research
is widely recognized. 3D modeling of molecules in chemistry and biology is
perhaps the most widely used 3D tool, whose high utility has justified the
expensive development of appropriate software. Many math packages generate 3D
representations of functions. However, more general use of 3D visualization,
coupled to the flexibility of a general-purpose programming language, has been
blocked by great technical difficulties which require high computer skills to
overcome. This is particularly limiting for educational applications. Even in
chemistry and biology where 3D tools exist, it is difficult or impossible for
scientists to modify or extend these packages. These applications do not have
the open-ended flexibility of a programming language.

A new tool, VPython, makes it possible for many scientists and engineers, and
students of science and engineering, to create 3D visualizations quickly and
easily, coupled to the flexibility and power of a programming language.
Moreover, these visualizations can be interactive in real time, transcending the
limitations of a canned movie. The project is bringing VPython to a mature level
of open source development, so that thereafter it can be easily maintained and
extended, as a contribution to the infrastructure of science and engineering
research and education.