* 0237708
* CAREER: Feedback Control Theory for Biological Pattern Generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2009
* Tetsuya Iwasaki, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

Objective: The overall goal of this career proposal is to explore the purely
interdisciplinary subject&lt;br/&gt;of feedback control system design for
generation of rhythmic patterns found in animal locomotion,&lt;br/&gt;and to
develop effective pedagogical methods for inspiring engineering students with
benefits of&lt;br/&gt;biological knowledge in the context of systems and
control.&lt;br/&gt;Specific Goals:&lt;br/&gt;I. Develop an orbital trajectory
analysis method for a class of nonlinear systems arising from&lt;br/&gt;modeling
of biological pattern generators.&lt;br/&gt;II. Establish a method for designing
a dynamical system that achieves pattern generation with a&lt;br/&gt;prescribed
oscillation profile.&lt;br/&gt;III. Revise the dynamics and control curriculum
to provide a broader view of systems through&lt;br/&gt;crossdisciplinary
training in neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;IV. Integrate the bio-control research into
the science and engineering education at broad levels&lt;br/&gt;including K-12
and college undergraduate.&lt;br/&gt;V. Broadly disseminate the results of the
proposed activities.&lt;br/&gt;Methods and Procedures (Keyed to the Specific
Goals):&lt;br/&gt;I. Mathematically formulate an oscillation analysis problem
and derive a solution using tools&lt;br/&gt;from robust control theory. Examine
the degree of conservatism exploiting the biological knowl-edge&lt;br/&gt;of
particular central pattern generator (CPG) architectures.&lt;br/&gt;II. Use the
analysis result in I as a basis for developing a general theory for the design
of CPGs&lt;br/&gt;utilizing linear matrix inequality methods. Test the
applicability of the design conditions against&lt;br/&gt;the CPGs known from
biology.&lt;br/&gt;III. Improve an undergraduate course on systems modeling by
introducing neuronal modeling&lt;br/&gt;and pattern generation mechanism.
Develop a new graduate course on robust and nonlinear control&lt;br/&gt;for
regulation and biological oscillation.&lt;br/&gt;IV. Develop research-based
educational tools through multidisciplinary, teamworking,
senior&lt;br/&gt;thesis projects. Use the tools to stimulate K-12 and
undergraduate students' intellectual curiosity&lt;br/&gt;into engineering and
science through a series of outreach/educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;V.
Utilize conference presentations, publications in archival journals, invited
seminars, and&lt;br/&gt;possibly tutorial workshops in major international
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The central theme of feedback control
theory has been the regulation around an&lt;br/&gt;equilibrium point of a
dynamical system. In contrast, much less attention has been paid to
control&lt;br/&gt;specifications involving periodic motion (or oscillation)
generation despite their practical impor-tance.&lt;br/&gt;The basic research
outlined in this proposal will provide an initial stepping stone toward
a&lt;br/&gt;new control paradigm that focuses on autonomous pattern generation
by feedback dynamics. In&lt;br/&gt;particular, the project will establish a
systematic method for analysis and design of pattern genera-
tors&lt;br/&gt;through the exploitation of biological knowledge on neuronal
oscillators.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The crossdisciplinary research activities
over biology and control fields are in-tegrated&lt;br/&gt;into educational
activities at all levels. The revised curriculum will provide
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;and graduate students with a broader perspective on
engineering problems. The senior thesis project&lt;br/&gt;will develop students
with team-oriented problem-solving skills in a multidisciplinary
environment.&lt;br/&gt;The outreach activities will contribute to improve
scientific literacy of K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;