* 0237493
* CAREER:       Probabilistic Evaluation of Computer Security based on Experimental Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Michel Cukier, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

The goal of this research project is to evaluate the security of a computer
network based on experi-mental data (i.e., vulnerability and attacker data
collections). Data on vulnerabilities are collected and analyzed through the use
of existing tools and new tools to be developed as part of this project. Data on
attackers are collected using networks of computers where the user/attacker
behavior is monitored. A new formalism is being developed for describing
privilege gains due to the observed vulnerabilities. State machines are used to
describe the attacker behavior. A new probabilistic framework is being developed
to evaluate the security of a computer network based on experimental data. More
specifically, for various computer networks, the parameters relevant to security
issues need to be defined. The value of these parameters is then estimated
through the data collected on these systems. The proposed probabilistic
framework is then used to estimate the parameters values for a given computer
network based on the parameter values obtained on other networks. The pa-rameter
values are then used to evaluate the overall security of the computer
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project proposes a new approach for
evaluating the security of a computer network based on experimental data. The
results obtained from this project will allow security practitioners to quantify
the security of a computer network. Moreover, this research includes the
development of different tools and large data collections on vulnerabilities and
attackers. The PI will develop course materials and tutorials and make
available, through web-based access, the course materials. A web site
(http://www.enre.umd.edu/faculty/cukier.htm) will be maintained at the
University of Maryland where further information can be obtained. The results,
tools and collected data will be made avail-able to the security
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;