* 0237105
* CAREER:  Theoretical Investigations of Non-Equlibrium Processes in Chemistry and Biology
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Anatoly Kolomeisky, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2008
* USD 467,783.00

Anatoly Kolomeisky of Rice University is supported by the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to pursue research and disseminate knowledge in
the area of non-equilibrium processes relevant to a microscopic chemistry-based
understanding of biology. He will study the dynamics of polymer translocation
across nanopores, extend models to explain why the ligand-receptor bond rupture
as a function of loading rate deviates from Hooke's law, investigate molecular
motors, and determine the mechanisms for polymerization in biologically
interesting filaments. This field lies at the interface of chemistry, physics
and biology and the research will be closely coupled to the training of
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
underlying role of physical chemistry in biology remains an intellectually
challenging problem area of great relevance to future biochemical technologies.
Problems addressed in this proposal will allow for a better understanding of
targeted delivery of pharmaceuticals and subsequent dispersal. A related area in
need of a microscopic understanding is how conversion of energy into motion
proceeds in biological systems. Examples of such processes, all of which are
facilitated by molecular motors, include cell division and transport, molecular
contraction and genetic transcription. Kolomeisky plans to extend his research
on molecular motors. Imparting the knowledge and requisite skills to a
multidisciplinary array of chemical, biological and physical scientists will be
accomplished by introducing a course on biophysical chemistry that is aimed at
the advanced undergraduate or beginning graduate level student. Early interest
in this new area will be raised by outreach to high school students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;