* 0237505
* Adding High Resolution Images to the Online Database of Insect Primary Types in the Museum of Comparative Zoology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Brian Farrell, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 05/31/2006
* USD 413,999.00

A grant has been awarded to Harvard University under the direction of Brian D.
Farrell to provide high-resolution images of type specimens in the insect
collections of the Museum of Comparative Zoology. Type specimens are the
objective bearers of the names of the species they represent, and serve in
comparing other specimens for identifications. For insects and there very
diverse groups, the types are crucial for identifications by taxonomists and
other users of biodiversity because the descriptive literature is inadequate for
this purpose. The Department of Entomology of the Museum of Comparative Zoology
at Harvard University has an NSF-supported online database of the approximately
28,000 insect primary types in it's holdings. This collection of types is second
in the United States only to the National Museum. Over 50 percent of these types
are from developing countries, where insect diversity is highest, yet resources
for taxonomic studies are most limiting. With the assistance of technical
support personnel we have, in two years time, have established three state-of-
the-art camera/computer stations and an efficient protocol and placed high
resolution images for 2,500 of these types online and archived them for long
term storage. We now propose to accelerate the process of producing high
resolution images of our primary types online by hiring additional technicians
and procuring associated camera equipment to complete the imaging, uploading
online and archiving of the five largest insect orders over the next three years
time. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed activity
lies in the enhancement to the scientific&lt;br/&gt;practice of taxonomy.
Examination of types is a bottleneck in the description of
species&lt;br/&gt;that will be much alleviated by instantaneous access to high
quality images on the&lt;br/&gt;internet. The broader impact resulting from the
proposed activity consists of the new&lt;br/&gt;access to crucial information on
type specimens, specifically the high quality images, given to an audience of
scientists and concerned laypersons in the developing countries from which these
specimens originated, thus repatriating the information. This will speed the
documentation of biodiversity in such countries and foster local expertise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;