* 0237324
* Improving Access to the Botanical Collection at the San Diego Natural History Museum through Improved Housing and Curation
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Paisley Cato, San Diego Society of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 04/30/2006
* USD 84,153.00

&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to the San Diego Natural History Museum
(SDNHM) under the direction of Drs. J. Rebman and P. Cato. The project, entitled
"Improving access to the SDNHM botanical collection" will address overcrowding
of specimens, access, and future growth of the collection at the SDNHM
Herbarium. Dominated by specimens from southern California, Baja California and
related areas, the SDNHM Herbarium now contains approximately150,000 specimens
of vascular and nonvascular plants. This collection is invaluable for research
on the diversity of the California Floristic Province, one of the world's 25
biodiversity hotspots. Within the last five years collection growth and research
activity have increased steadily in the herbarium and cases are now at capacity.
Committed to biodiversity and natural history research and documentation of the
flora in southern California and the Baja California region, the SDNHM Herbarium
activities are centered around the use of collected specimens for systematics,
floristics, conservation, and biodiversity research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current project being funded will enhance access to the botanical specimens in
the SDNHM Herbarium through increased storage space and improved curation of its
collections. Specifically, the grant will enable the purchase of many new
herbarium cabinets and supplies in order to alleviate severe overcrowding and
make the collection more accessible and better curated. This endeavor will
require the hire of a temporary Collection Assistant to assist in curation,
moving, pest management and organizing the collection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once crowding is relieved, and the botanical collection at
SDNHM is better housed and curated, access will be significantly improved for
researchers, students, biological consultants, and the public onsite. This
project will aid SDNHM with its commitment to activities centered on collected
specimens for use in systematics, floristics, conservation, and biodiversity
research in the southern California and Baja California local region. The
herbarium expansion project will also help to facilitate the initiation of the
San Diego County Plant Atlas Project (SDCPAP) that is being organized by the
SDNHM Botany Department. The SDCPAP proposes to document the botanical diversity
of the county by recruiting "parabotanists" (non-professional botanists who will
be trained in the survey, inventory, and ethical collection of proper plant
specimens) to collect plant specimens from a grid system covering the entire
county. This is especially important because San Diego County has the highest
botanical diversity of any county in the contiguous United States, but that
diversity has not yet been thoroughly recorded. A concerted effort by the SDCPAP
to document the occurrence and geographic location of local plant species with
vouchered specimens to be deposited in the SDNHM Herbarium will provide valuable
scientific information that is being lost as our County becomes increasingly
developed and also educate the public on the biological importance of our
region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;