* 0237852
* RUI: Genetics of Bdellovibrio Bacteriovorus
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2003,09/30/2005
* Eileen Spain, Occidental College
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 09/30/2005
* USD 105,658.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Mark O. Martin of Occidental College to study
the genetics of the bacterial predator Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus. This unusual
microbe exists in two forms: a free swimming phase in search of other Gram
negative bacterial prey cells to attack and invade, and an intraperiplasmic
growth phase between the inner and outer membranes of prey cells. Different
genes are expressed in each portion of the life cycle of Bdellovibrio, and this
project proposes to investigate these "predation" genes. A combination of
functional complementation, reporter gene technology, transposon mutagenesis,
and other molecular biological tools will be used to investigate the genetics of
this fascinating bacterium. A previously identified and unexpected alpha amylase
gene from Bdellovibrio will be characterized with regard to structure, function,
relationship to other amylases, and temporal expression throughout the
organism's lifecycle. In addition, transposon mutagenesis and in vivo expression
technology will be used to identify and characterize Bdellovibrio genes involved
with predation and intraperiplasmic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected
that bacterial predation will be found to play a significant role in microbial
ecology and population structure; thus, intensive study of Bdellovibrio will be
an important first step in understand the roles that microbial predators play in
nature. The compartment in which Bdellovibrio grows and reproduces, the
periplasm of prey cells, is unusual and difficult to study. Bdellovibrio's
adaptations to this environment will shed light on the nature of the periplasm
in ways that cannot easily be matched by in vitro studies. Additionally, the
periplasmic life style of Bdellovibrio may show relationships to the diverse
strategies used by bacteria that cause disease in animals and plants.
Importantly, this proposal involves undergraduate students at every step.
Because of the demographics of Occidental College, this grant will provide many
opportunities for students from diverse backgrounds, including underrepresented
minorities, to explore a unique research system. Additionally, the techniques
used in this proposal will be incorporated into the laboratory portions of
relevant courses, to give all students the opportunity to explore microbial
genetic analysis: how research is actually carried out, and how results are
interpreted, evaluated, and presented.&lt;br/&gt;