* 0237612
* CAREER: Solid-State NMR of Half-Integer Quadrupolar Vanadium Sites in Vanadium Haloperoxidases
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2003,10/31/2003
* Tatyana Polenova, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 10/31/2003
* USD 137,000.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of
the Chemistry Division, Polenova will study vanadium-containing enzymes and
associated model compounds using a variety of NMR techniques. The NMR
experiments will be interpreted using density matrix simulations of spectra, and
the electric quadrupole gradients for the vanadium will be interpreted using
parameterized electronic structure calculations. These methods will be applied
to haloperoxidases as well as to studies of vanadyl model compounds with known
crystal structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal ions serve a number of purposes in
proteins, including catalytic, storage, and structural functions. Many of the
mechanistic aspects behind these functions are not well understood. The
application of solid-state NMR to metal sites in proteins is an important
application. In this work Polenova is able to gather data about metal complexes
with high sensitivity and high resolution. These data should have an impact on
understanding biologically relevant systems as well as helping advance the state
of knowledge at the interface between spectroscopy, bioinorganic chemistry, and
metallobiochemistry. The results have the potential to help develop more
environmentally friendly methods of catalysis. In her research program Polenova
involves not only graduate and undergraduate students, but she also performs
outreach to high school students. In addition, her education activities
encourage underrepresented groups to pursue careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;