* 0237483
* The Characterization of the Methanothermobacter Thermautotrophicus Origin of Replication and its Associated Proteins
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Zvi Kelman, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 02/29/2008
* USD 402,000.00

Every proliferating cell must duplicate its genetic information accurately and
only once per cell cycle. Any process that falls short of or exceeds these
limits results in cell death or abnormal proliferation. The long-term goal of
this research program is to understand the mechanisms governing DNA replication
in eukarya, and this research project will focus specifically on the origin of
replication, a specific location on the chromosome where replication initiates.
Whereas DNA replication has been well characterized in bacteria, viruses and
bacteriophages, many aspects of the process in eukarya, particularly in the
initiation phase, are still unknown. The complex eukaryotic cell cycle entails
numerous regulatory signals and factors from the first step of origin
recognition to the final step of cell division, making it difficult to study
individual components and events. An organism that may help to circumvent some
of the complexity of eukaryotic replication is a prokaryote with eukaryotic-like
replication processes,the archaeon Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus (Mth).
Archaeal DNA replication appears to be more similar to the eukaryal rather than
the bacterial process. However, the archaeal DNA replication apparatus appears
to require fewer proteins and complexes. Thus, archaea may provide a good model
system for understanding the enzymology of eukaryotic replication. The research
will focus on the mechanisms of the initiation of DNA replication in Mth.Both
wild-type and mutant recombinant proteins will be used in in vitro experiments
designed to:1) isolate and identify the origin binding proteins,2) understand
how the origin is recognized and bound by the initiation proteins; and 3)
identify the functional motifs in the archaeal origin. A long-term goal is to
develop an in vitro replication system for Mth; the information gained from
these biochemical studies will be directly applicable to such a system.