* 0237050
* SGER:  Spatial Patterns of  Flood Sedimentation in Response to an Extreme Event: Guadelupe River, Texas
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Paul Hudson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 07/31/2003
* USD 20,000.00

Although floodplain research has been a mainstay of fluvial geomorphology, much
is not known about the importance of large flood events to floodplain
construction. This is particularly significant with respect to the
interpretation of the influence of climate change (both in the past and looking
ahead to the future) on drainage systems, because flood deposits serve as proxy
evidence for flooding and landscape response. Humid coastal plain fluvial
systems have been studied intensively, but the semi -arid and arid drainage
systems of Texas may be particularly sensitive to large rainfall events, and far
less research has been devoted to floodplain processes in these settings. This
Small Grant for Exploratory Research will support a project that investigates
flood sedimentation in the Guadalupe River valley of east central Texas, which
experienced an extreme flood event in early July 2002. The project considers the
influence of downstream drainage basin controls on the pattern and character of
flood deposits. Most of the project will be field based, with supplemental data
obtained from USGS 1:24,000 topographic maps and digital orthophotos. The
thickness of the flood deposits will be measured in the field, and particle size
analysis of flood sediments will occur in the University of Texas geomorphology
laboratory. Total-stations surveying will be used for mapping the floodplain
topography and location of sediment samples. The drainage basin controls on
flood sedimentation will be examined by considering the floodplain topography,
valley dimensions (gradient and width), flood regime (discharge, stage, length
of inundation), and the planform channel morphology. The influence of riparian
vegetation on sedimentation will be considered by comparing the canopy cover and
tree density within each site, and between sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is expected to contribute theoretically to understanding of the
importance of large events to floodplain construction. It will assess how
various controls influence the spatial dimensions of flood deposits (volume and
particle size). Regionally, the project will increase understanding of
floodplain sedimentation in western Gulf Coastal Plain fluvial systems.. this
project will provide valuable opportunities for student involvement in the
fieldwork, and through follow-up activities, it will enable the investigator to
be more effective in teaching fundamental field techniques, fluvial
geomorphology, and analytic approaches using geographic information systems. The
project also will yield data that may prove to be quite useful for local
officials as they plan future flood-prevention and -control
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;