* 0237384
* Improvements to the Auburn University Aquatic Invertebrate, Fish, and Amphibian and Reptile Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* John Feminella, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 04/30/2006
* USD 347,862.00

A grant has been awarded to Auburn University to fund critically needed
improvements to the Auburn University Natural History Learning Center's (AUNHLC)
aquatic invertebrate, fish, and amphibian and reptile collections under the
direction of Drs. Armbruster, Feminella and Guyer. The museum collections housed
in AUNHLC describe one of the world's hotbeds of biological diversity. Alabama
is among the most important states in terms of biodiversity, and, unfortunately,
is one of the most imperiled. Because collections at Auburn University document
the rich history of these diverse temperate ecosystems, these collections are
particularly important for regional conservation planning. This proposal is
designed to fund improvements to the aquatic invertebrate, fish, and amphibian
and reptile collections at Auburn University. The fish collection is one of the
largest in the southeastern United States and it exhibits a growth rate that is
far in excess of the nationwide average. It was ranked as an important
collection by Poss and Collette (1996). The collection currently has specimens
from around the world, but has its strongest representation in the southeastern
United States. The amphibian and reptile collection at Auburn is the premier
herpetofaunal collection from Alabama and has significant holdings from
surrounding regions. The amphibian and reptile collection has been used
extensively, particularly in the production of field guides such as "The
Reptiles and Amphibians of Alabama" (Mount, 1975), an acclaimed regional guide.
The aquatic invertebrate collection has the greatest rate of growth of any of
the collections at Auburn University through research efforts of the staff and
adoption of orphaned collections. Growth is particularly strong in mollusks,
which includes significant holdings of threatened, endangered, and extinct
freshwater mussels and terrestrial snails. Alabama has a tremendous diversity of
molluscs, but until recent efforts at Auburn, Alabama has lacked a place in the
state to house specimens. In addition to molluscs, the aquatic invertebrate
collection also contains specimens of may other taxa including insects,
oligochaetes, and crustaceans. &lt;br/&gt;Currently, the museum is enjoying the
most productive period in its history. The university has laid out an ambitious
plan to provide a more permanent home for the collections. To achieve this goal,
the institution has pledged monetary support for the day-to-day operations of
the collections, and financial resources for collection personnel following the
initial funding provided by this grant. This funding will include money for a
second collection manager, a fulltime technician for one year, and for graduate
research assistants to accomplish the goals of this study. In addition, support
is provided for shelving and casework for the aquatic invertebrate, fish, and
amphibian and reptile collections and incorporation of backlog materials,
reorganization of the collections, and transfer of specimens from isopropanol to
ethanol so that the collections are standardized. The greatest part of the
funding is for the personnel that are essential for the completion of this
project. Museum collections are our only means of recording the biodiversity of
an area and saving it for future generations. As areas become increasingly
impacted by human development, collections become correspondingly more important
in describing historical distributions, suggesting what might have caused
species extirpations, and providing insight into how degraded ecosystems might
be restored. The collections at Auburn are active in releasing collection
records on the internet, and several web-based projects (such as internet-based
species keys) are underway to expose and educate people about global as well as
local biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;