* 0237115
* US-Australia Cooperative Research in the Development and Applications of New Methods in Quantum Chemistry
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Mark Gordon, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/2005
* USD 25,254.00

0237115&lt;br/&gt;Gordon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Professor Mark
Gordon and three graduate students from Iowa State University for travel to
Canberra Australia to collaborate in computational quantum chemistry with
faculty of the Australian National University. Their Australian hosts and
collaborators are Professors Michael Collins and Leo Radom of the Research
School of Chemistry and Professor Alistair Rendell of the Computer Science
Department. Each of the Ph.D. students has distinct research interests and will
work with a different host with similar interests. Ms. Netzloff will work with
Professor Collins on the interface between electronic structure theory and
dynamics. They will link the multi-reference structure code developed at Iowa
State with the potential energy surface building program developed at ANU and
applying the new combined capability to the study of the dynamics of important
molecular systems. Mr. Olson will work with Professor Rendell and members of the
ANU Supercomputer Center on the development of high performance electronic
structure codes, including scalable and graphics code for electronic structure
theory. Ms. Rintelman will work with Professor Radom and his group on practical
implementation of multi-reference methods on problems in surface chemistry and
solvation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This suite of research addresses methodological
and theoretical problems at the cutting edge of quantum chemistry, where
experimental data are extremely rare and difficult to obtain. The improved
computational methods that result will enhance the power of quantum chemistry
for addressing important technological and industrial problems. The
collaborative arrangements with three world-class scientists and their research
groups at ANU provide outstanding international research opportunities for three
U.S. graduate students, two of them women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;