* 0237484
* CAREER: Colonizing Land Via the Estuarine Route: Ontogeny of Osmoregulation and Settlement Behaviors in Three Brackish Water Fiddler Crabs
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Renae Brodie, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 04/30/2007
* USD 624,114.00

CAREER: Colonizing land via the estuarine route: ontogeny of osmoregulation and
settlement behaviors in three brackish water fiddler
crabs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Renae J. Brodie&lt;br/&gt;University of South
Carolina&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The colonization of land is one of the most
significant evolutionary events in the history of animal life. While vertebrates
are conspicuous members of terrestrial faunas, the most prolific and diverse
land animals are actually invertebrates that have evolved from marine ancestors.
One of the first challenges faced by colonizing marine invertebrates is the need
to modify larval stages so they recruit near adult terrestrial habitats. Larval
settlement behaviors must change and larvae must evolve the capability to
tolerate physiological stresses that they encounter on land. In completely
terrestrial animals, these early life stages develop on land within protective
egg membranes or inside the adult parent. This study will examine changes in
larval behavior and physiology in Uca minax, a freshwater fiddler crab that is
at an intermediate stage of land invasion.&lt;br/&gt;To examine these changes,
U. minax will be compared to two less terrestrial relatives, Uca pugilator and
Uca pugnax. All three species undergo larval development in coastal marine
waters. Using molecular genetic techniques, these fiddler crab species will be
tracked from when they leave open coastal waters and enter South Carolina's
north inlet estuary, until they join adult populations as juveniles. This will
resolve the mystery of whether young crabs settle directly into adult habitats,
move in gradually as they develop and grow, or settle randomly throughout the
estuary, dying out in areas that are not suitable for them. Once patterns of
settlement are established, larval responses to adult odor cues in different
salinity environments will be investigated in the lab. A different suite of
behavioral responses by U. minax compared to the other two species may help to
explain how it invades adult freshwater and terrestrial habitats.&lt;br/&gt;To
determine if young U. minax are physiologically adapted to survive low-salinity
conditions, survivorship of larval and juvenile U. minax in a series of
salinities (ocean-strength to freshwater) will be compared to that of U.
pugilator, U. pugnax and U. uruguayensis, a distantly-related species from
Brazil. Osmoregulatory ability (ability to control internal salt concentrations)
at these salinities will also be assessed. In this way, it will be possible to
explore the evolution of osmoregulatory changes in development that accompany
the invasion of land in fiddler crabs.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to yielding
evolutionary insights, this study will have ecological and educational impacts.
Fiddler crabs are dominant players in southeastern estuaries, where they are
important prey for birds and fishes, and modify landscape topography and species
composition in areas where they burrow and feed. A more detailed understanding
of the dispersal patterns, behavior and physiology of young fiddler crabs will
facilitate the monitoring of estuaries. The educational benefits of this work
will come from a strong effort to increase the level of participation of people
of color in biological research. To this end, graduate and undergraduate
students of color will be recruited from the University of South Carolina and
nearby Historically Black Colleges and Universities to assist in the proposed
research. Also, undergraduate and graduate students will turn aspects of the
scientific work into hands-on activities for K-12 students that will be
developed for a Web site about marine and terrestrial invertebrates with the
assistance of local elementary-school children. &lt;br/&gt;