* 0237975
* CAREER: DNA as a Nutrient-A Role for Competence Gene Homologs in Long-Term Survival
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2009
* Steven Finkel, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 04/30/2009
* USD 629,095.00

Most models of the natural history of bacteria include cycles of "feast and
famine," where the organism experiences nutrient abundance as well as nutrient
stress. However, for most microorganisms, nutrient availability is usually
restricted. To understand mechanisms of bacterial survival under laboratory
conditions that better reflect the natural environment, we study the nutrient-
limited stationary phase of the E. coli life cycle. We have identified a gene
family essential for E. coli to survive long-term incubation during stationary
phase. The activities of these genes enable the bacteria to use extracellular
DNA as the sole source of carbon and energy. These genes are homologs of genes
in other organisms known to be involved in horizontal gene transfer, making the
cells competent for natural transformation. Therefore, they are known as "com"
genes. However, unlike bacteria such as Haemophilus influenzae or Bacillus
subtilis that are naturally competent for genetic transformation, E. coli is not
known to be naturally transformable. The identification of these genes in E.
coli suggests that the organism takes up DNA not necessarily to be used as
genetic information, but also to be used as a carbon and energy source. The
focus of this project is to understand the ability of E. coli to use DNA as a
nutrient, determine the roles of these com genes in DNA catabolism, and
elucidate the patterns of com gene expression and regulation. This project also
includes the introduction of a new course, "Mechanisms of Bacterial Survival,
Adaptation &amp; Evolution", whose focus is to explore the mechanisms used by a
variety of microorganisms to survive in disparate environments, allowing them to
adapt to environmental change.