* 0237727
* CAREER:    Signal Processing for Multiuser Multiantenna Wireless Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2010
* Aylin Yener, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 01/31/2010
* USD 406,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0237727&lt;br/&gt;Aylin Yener&lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania State
University- Univ. Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of wireless access is
ever increasing. The wide social impact of becoming tetherless ranges from
providing constant reachability in emergency situations; to providing better
educational services in schools with wireless network access. Future wireless
systems are expected to provide much higher capacity due to emerging
applications that demand data oriented and multimedia communications services.
This research involves the exploration of attainable performance limits of
wireless communication systems. The scarcity of wireless bandwidth dictates that
future systems must utilize multiple antennas in addition to temporal and
frequency resources. The premise of this research is that a significant
improvement in wireless system capacity can be achieved by designing
transmitters and receivers that jointly optimize all system
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator considers interference limited
multiuser wireless communication systems where users ``share'' the transmission
medium in a non-partitioned manner. The signal processing framework developed is
for a most general shared channel where multiple transmit and receive antennas
are used, code division grants sharing of time and frequency resources, and
multiple data streams are transmitted per user. The&lt;br/&gt;focus is on
understanding the performance limits under different channel/system constraints
as well as methods that achieve these limits. The research issues considered
include: characterization of the maximum number of users that can be supported
when jointly optimum temporal-spatial transmission and temporal-spatial
reception techniques are employed; characterization of the optimum
transmitters&lt;br/&gt;(and receivers) and design and analysis of algorithms
that converge to these transmitters (and the corresponding receivers);
investigation of the robustness of the techniques and results under different
channel/system conditions as well as when partial/inaccurate information is
available about these conditions; implementation of the resulting algorithms on
a wireless testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;