* 0237419
* Problems in Bioinorganic and Oxygen Atom Transfer Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Richard Holm, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 05/31/2007
* USD 855,000.00

This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Prof. Richard H. Holm of Harvard University focused on
molybdenum/tungsten hydroxylases and oxotransferases. The catalytic centers
contain mononuclear Mo or W atoms bound to one or two pterin-dithiolene ligands
(often called molybdopterin). The experimental approach involves the synthesis
of low molecular weight representations or analogs of the catalytic sites of
enzymes, which are fully characterized before being studied in reactivity
investigations. The natural ligand is represented by a synthetic dithiolene,
which functions as an ene-1,2-dithiolate when bound to molybdenum or tungsten
and closely simulates the electronic environment engendered by the pterin-
dithiolene. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through analog systems, the project examines
reactions of the enzymes nitrate reductase, formate dehydrogenase, arsenite
oxidase, acetylene hydratase, sulfite oxidase, and aldehyde oxidase, among
others. This involves the synthesis of new active site analogs in oxidized and
reduced states, including uncommon monodithiolene complexes, and kinetics
determinations with attendant evaluation of rate constants and activation
parameters. Kinetic and other information is used to deduce probable mechanisms
for the reactions investigated. Also under investigation are the synthesis and
oxo transfer reactivity of the non-physiological metals niobium, tantalum, and
rhenium in their higher oxidation states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The essential
components of enzymes involved in global carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycles and
catalyzing the transfer of a single oxygen atom will be studied through analog
complexes. Some of these enzymes, such as the sulfite and xanthine oxidases,
occur in humans; and their malfunction leads to significant health risks.
Graduate and postdoctoral students will be trained in synthesis,
characterization and mechanism and in regard to the interrelationships between
model and biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;