* 0237796
* CAREER - New Methods for Simulating Biomolecules of Several Microns in Length
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Jianpeng Ma, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/29/2008
* USD 672,154.00

A substantial part of molecular functions involves motions in a wide range of
length scales, e.g., from the vibrations of chemical bonds to global
conformational changes of supermolecular complexes to macroscopic muscle
contractions. The goal of this research is to introduce several new
computational methods for describing the motions at any desired length scale
without losing the details of atomic calculations, which is an unprecedented
simulation capacity. The central method is substructure synthesis method that
regards a given structure as an assemblage of substructures acting together in
some ways. The choice of substructures is arbitrary, and sometimes quite
natural, such as domains or subunits in supermolecular complexes. First, the
vibrational modes for each substructure are determined by solving an eigenvalue
problem. Next, various substructures are joined together by a set of constraints
to enforce geometric compatibility at the inter-substructure interfaces. The
modes for the assembled structure can then be computed by the Rayleigh-Ritz
principle using a set of low-frequency substructure modes. Computationally, this
represents a much more desirable problem than solving the full eigenvalue
problem for the assembled structure. This new methods will be applied to
F-actin, a typical filamentous system of several microns, to study its
mechanical and dynamic properties at any length. This will also help interpret
the experiments that measure molecular elastic properties.

The new methods for simulating motions in a wide range of length scales will not
only have an impact on the study of molecular dynamics, but also will
significantly contribute to the fields of bioengineering and chemistry.
Moreover, since some concepts in the proposed methods are related to those in
the mechanical engineering field, their implementation as methods for describing
motions of complex molecules requires knowledge of multiple disciplines
including biology, physics, and engineering. The success of this project will
therefore be an excellent example of creative thinking and problem solving
benefited from interdisciplinary communication. The beneficiaries will not only
be the trainees who are directly involved in the project, but also a larger
audience with diverse background who are commonly interested in problems in life
sciences and engineering, but from very different perspectives. Particularly, it
will expose undergraduate students to concepts of interdisciplinary research.
Finally, a broader community will be reached via public distribution of the
computer software developed in this work.