* 0237401
* Computerization of the Lichen Collection at the Michigan State University Herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Larry Prather, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 04/30/2007
* USD 270,104.00

A grant has been awarded to Michigan State University, under the direction of
Drs. Prather and Fryday, to database the Lichen Collection of the MSU herbarium
and make the data available online. The collection consists of about 120, 000
specimens and is one of the largest lichen collections in the U.S, although it
is the geographical scope of the collection that makes it truly unique. Around
half the collections are from North America, but it also has scientifically
important collections from many Southern Hemisphere island floras, including
many very poorly known areas, such as the Falkland Islands, Juan Fernandez
Islands, Tierra del Fuego, New Zealand islands, and Iles Kerguelen. There are
also large and important collections from many Caribbean islands and the Canary
Islands. All of the data associated with the specimens, including collector,
collection date, locality, and habitat will be entered into the database and
thus checklists of specific areas, distributions of species, and construction of
lists of holdings can now be conducted through different types of searches.
Consequently, this database will be extremely useful to researchers and also
will facilitate curation of the collection. Since so few lichen databases are
established, and none of them cover as broad a geographic region, these data
will be the foremost web-based tool for lichen distribution.&lt;br/&gt;All
written data associated with the specimens will be entered into a database. This
database will be placed on the MSU Plant Biology web server and made fully
searchable over the Internet. Students and herbarium employees will enter the
data, which will be verified for accuracy, and will also label each specimen
with a barcode. Herbarium staff will be responsible for updating the online
database with recently entered data at regular intervals. &lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide baseline information that is needed to facilitate research
on lichens. Lichens are important because they are widely used as bioindicators
for estimating the impact of pollution and climate change. They are also an
important component of all terrestrial ecosystems, from the tropics to the polar
regions, from below sea-level to the highest mountains, from the most natural,
untouched environments to the centers of urban conglomerations. As part of this
project, twelve undergraduate students, three graduate students, and one
additional full-time, temporary staff member will receive training in herbarium
procedures and gain experience with lichens. The availability of the data on the
Internet will serve as a form of data repatriation to the many countries,
especially developing ones, from which the collections were made. It will also
impact the ongoing biodiversity crisis that affects, in particular, many of the
tropical and subtropical regions represented among the collections. By
facilitating research on these organisms this project will provide a tremendous
benefit to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;