* 0237406
* Experimental and Numerical Investigation of the Mechanisms of Local Extinction Using Flame Kernel-Vortex Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* William Roberts, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 03/31/2007
* USD 330,000.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
investigate, both experimentally and computationally, the local extinction
processes occurring in premixed flames using a novel flame kernel-vortex
configuration. The kernel-vortex interaction provides a rich configuration to
study at least two important mechanisms responsible for extinction: flame-flow
field topologies (curvature and strain); and flame-flame interactions (or mutual
flame annihilation processes). Conditions of positive and negative unsteady
strain rate and curvature may be generated simultaneously within the same
interaction, providing the ideal condition for comparing the flame's response to
different types of flame stretch. Moreover, the relative size of the expanding
kernel to the vortex results in an evolving contribution of the vortex to flame
wrinkling and its advection during the kernel evolution. The two complementary
(experimental and computational) approaches are coordinated to provide improved
understanding of the role of flame and flow field topologies (mainly unsteady
strain and curvature effects) and mutual flame annihilations on local flame
extinction, and to identify experimental observables that measure the local
burning intensity in premixed hydrocarbon flames. Three important elements
represent the main thrusts of the&lt;br/&gt;work and its technical merit: (1) An
experimental study of extinction processes during flame kernel-vortex
interactions. The study relies on a broad range of experimental conditions that
span different flame and vortex strengths. Simultaneous measurements of
intermediate species, temperature, and velocity provide a more robust link
between flame and flow-field topologies and the local flame response; (2)
Numerical studies of the general structure as well as the structure of two
important regions in the flame kernels that are subject to quenching by unsteady
strain or mutual flame annihilation. The numerical studies are used to identify
relevant experimental conditions and explore, using detailed chemistry, the
chemical mechanisms involved during extinction. Initial conditions for the
detailed chemistry simulations are provided by the selected experimental
conditions; and (3) The combined approaches provide complementary information to
identify conditions and mechanisms for local extinction. An equally important
endeavor is to use the simulations to identify candidate experimental
observables that may be used to quantify the burning intensity of hydrocarbon
premixed flames for unsteady and extinction
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The kernel-
vortex offers a realistic and advantageous configuration to develop models for
flame extinction that will be of value to our understanding of turbulent flames
in general and turbulent kernels specifically, such as those observed in spark-
ignited internal combustion engines and other practical combustion devices. The
methodology proposed can have a broad impact on similar problems in combustion
science and related areas of research where neither computational nor
experimental approaches alone can adequately explain observations. The paradigm
of coordinated experimental-computational approaches provides unique
opportunities for the education of graduate students in both approaches as the
project requires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;