* 0237368
* Wood Identification Collection Enhancement and Web Access
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Elisabeth Wheeler, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 12/31/2005
* USD 279,455.00

Wood Identification Collection Enhancement and Web Access Project North Carolina
State University

Through a grant awarded to North Carolina State University, Dr. Elisabeth A.
Wheeler, Dr. Kathleen R. Brown, and Ms. Deborah Westmoreland will direct a
project to create InsideWood, an extensive, Internet-accessible wood anatomy
reference, research, and teaching tool. InsideWood will build on existing
databases, specimen collections, and photographic images, beginning with those
at NCSU. The wood collection databases for fossil (more than 1,500 records) and
present-day woods (5,200 records, representing more than 200 families, 2,500
genera, and 10,000 species) have been used for over 16 years. Unfortunately,
these collections are not available via the Internet, and the current software
is near obsolete and does not use the complete set of descriptors recommended by
a committee of the International Association of Wood Anatomists (IAWA). This
project will develop a Web site with non-exclusive, open architecture allowing
for long-term use of wood databases with IAWA terminology. The addition of high-
resolution images will increase the value of the site and enhance its
functionality for wood identification, information retrieval, and instruction.
As part of the InsideWood project, the organization of the NCSU wood collection
(samples, slides, photographs, and databases) will be strengthened, and the
continued availability of its contents for research and teaching will be insured
at an archival level. This project will demonstrate the importance of wood
collections to a broad audience, with information from the collections' samples
and slides incorporated into the InsideWood Web site.

InsideWood will integrate the wood anatomy databases at NCSU and the wood uses
database of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, U.K. (Dr. Peter Gasson,
collaborator). The databases will be merged and restructured to use the same
controlled vocabulary recommended by the International Association of Wood
Anatomists. A database structure that allows for continual addition of new data,
both text and images, will be designed and implemented, taking advantage of best
practices in information science and digital libraries. A public Web interface,
including multiple search and display options, will be developed and tested.
Recent additions to the NCSU wood collections will be organized and examined to
expand the database content. The database will also include a collaborator
interface allowing wood anatomists and other subject specialists throughout the
world to contribute new data and images to the project and will provide broad
accessibility to data and images that might otherwise be lost to the scientific
community.

Wood is an important renewable resource and has long had many uses. A publicly
accessible wood identification tool, with many images for comparison of unknown
woods to woods from research collections, will be useful in many contexts. Wood
identification is of practical value to professionals in forensic science and
customs law enforcement, and to antique dealers, museum conservators, and those
who restore wooden buildings. Identification of ancient woods provides data
useful for interpreting climate and vegetation changes through time and the
interactions of early humans with their environment. Wood anatomy affects wood's
material properties and tree physiology, so wood provides many examples of the
relationships between form and function. Images in the database will illustrate
variability in wood structure that is functionally significant. InsideWood will
provide instructional material on wood anatomy useful for educators and students
at the high school and university levels and for professionals such as extension
agents and park personnel. This resource will enhance the study of plant
relationships, ancient environments, and forest biology and ecology.



