* 0237714
* Student Travel for 2nd International Conference on Cat-CVD (Hot Wire CVD); Denver, CO
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Harry Atwater, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 09/30/2003
* USD 5,000.00

A conference on Cat-CVD (Hot-Wire CVD) Processing, http://www.nrel.gov/cat-cvd2/
, will be held in Denver, CO September 10-13, 2002. The conference objective is
to provide a forum for discussion to assess and understand the deposition of Si
and other thin film related materials by the Cat-CVD (Hot-Wire CVD) process, to
address deposition related processing issues, and investigate new applications
which may lead to industrial utilization of this rapidly maturing technology.
&lt;br/&gt;The program is organized as a workshop-style conference to provide an
interdisciplinary forum for device engineers, solid state physicists, and
materials scientists to discuss topics of common interest both formally through
invited and contributed presentations, and informally during a variety of events
including a poster presentation session. Objectives are to stimulate
communications among the community of researchers addressing Hot-Wire CVD
Processing and its relationship to technology. A variety of disciplinary
backgrounds-chemistry, physics, engineering and materials science, is
represented and contrributes positively to the intellectual content of the
Conference. Along with the opportunity to assess the field and future
directions, it is expected that new ties will be established between
universities, government research institutions, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;An evaluation of the progress and status of
Hot-Wire CVD Processing and related device issues along with current assessments
of the most important developments will be of significant value to the
understanding and enhanced utilization of electronic materials in computing,
data processing, and communications. To promote and sustain the growth of such
technologies, it is vital to attract the support, enthusiasm, and interest of
young researchers and students. To this end, sessions will be held sequentially,
and special efforts made to ensure information exchange in an informal setting.
Leading scientists in the Si field have committed to attend the conference, so
there will be opportunity for interactions between researchers of all levels of
experience in Cat-CVD. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;