* 0237835
* CAREER:Type Systems and Next Generation Tools for Scripting Language Extension Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* David Beazley, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2005
* USD 178,198.00

0237835 &lt;br/&gt;David Beazley&lt;br/&gt;Univ of
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scripting languages are an increasingly
important part of many software projects. A key feature of scripting languages
is that they can be integrated with existing programs, typically written in C or
C++. This integration of languages, commonly known as extension programming, is
often achieved through the use of automatic code generation tools.
Unfortunately, the development of these tools has been relatively ad-hoc and
uncoordinated. The goal of this project is to provide a more formal foundation
for extension programming by&lt;br/&gt;recasting the problem in terms of type
systems. This foundation will then be used to expand the scope of extension
programming tools to include software reliability mechanisms such as contracts.
Finally,&lt;br/&gt;the research will investigate support tools such as mixed-
language debuggers. The research will be conducted in the context of the SWIG
project--an extension programming system already used by thousands
of&lt;br/&gt;programmers in industry, government, and academia. As a result, the
work will directly impact these users by pushing the extension building problem
in new directions. Moreover, the research aims to bridge the practice of
extension programming to more formal aspects of programming languages, software
architecture, and software engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;