* 0237172
* Mechanistic Studies of TiO2-based Mn/Ni Catalysts for the Low Temperature SCR of NOx with NH3
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Panagiotis Smirniotis, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 01/31/2008
* USD 255,726.00

Medium temperature DeNOx processes have been widely utilized throughout the
world since the selective catalytic reduction (SCR) of NO by ammonia is widely
recognized as a key chemical transformation for environmental protection.
Hoewever, water and sulfur dioxide poisoning are important challenges for SCR
catalysts that will be used to process alternative fuels and chemical
feedstocks. Prior work by the principal investigator has demonstrated that
Mn/TiO2 is active at temperatures as low as 80 oC and is resistant to water.
Addition of Ni to this catalyst appears promising in order to enhance sulfur
dioxide tolerance. The research will provide a fundamental understanding of Mn-
Ni/TiO2 systems based on key mechanistic and spectroscopic investigations.
Transient kinetic methods will be utilized in order to provide new insights into
the reactions pathways and to establish the basis for high selectivity. The
principal investigator will also use advanced instrumentation capabilities such
as in situ FTIR spectroscopy with labeled compounds to determine adsorbed
species and reactive intermediates. Other surface analysis techniques are
skillfully incorporated into the proposed work. The combination of approaches is
characteristic of excellent, modern catalysis research.

The broader impacts of this research include education of students in advanced
catalysis and characterization techniques and involvement in relevant
technological applications. Students will be involved in poster and paper
presentations and in preparation of numerous publications. The principal
investigator is committed to recruiting under-represented minorities for the
research program, including working with a new ethnic engineering office at the
University of Cincinnati.