* 0237052
* Relaxation Dynamics of Multiarm Polymer Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2005
* Lynden Archer, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 10/31/2005
* USD 351,800.00

Experimental studies of stress relaxation dynamics of well-defined branched
polymer liquids have long been recognized as important for understanding
structure-processing relationships in commercial long-chain branched
polyolefins. When these studies are performed using well-characterized entangled
branched polymers they can provide direct insight into more general
relationships between molecular architecture, relaxation dynamics, and rheology.
The objective of the proposed research is three-fold. First, to determine the
effect of branch point motion and constraint release on the linear rheology of
model branched polymers. Second, to advance fundamental understanding of
nonlinear rheology of entangled branched polymer liquids in shear and
extensional flow. Finally, to devise methods for visualizing motion and stress
relaxation processes in branched polymer liquids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benefits
of the proposed research extend beyond its direct impact on scientific
understanding of branched polymer dynamics. The research, for example, addresses
a problem of considerable industrial importance at a time when advances in
metallocene catalyst chemistry are allowing unprecedented control of molecular
architecture in commercial branched polymers. Fundamental understanding of
structure-processing relationships in these materials will help reduce expensive
trial-and-error experimentation now required to optimize existing processes for
new materials. The proposed research also comes at a time when the first
rigorous treatments of architecture effects on polymer processing and properties
are beginning to appear in textbooks. This research will impact education in a
variety of ways. Knowledge developed by study will improve the quality and scope
of information about branched polymer physics written in text books and taught
in the classroom. The proposed fluorescence microscopy experiments using
branched DNA will also provide an excellent demonstration tool for modern
courses in polymer science. Finally, the graduate and undergraduate student
researchers who will work on the project will receive training in several
emerging areas of polymer science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;