* 0237224
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Genome Sequencing of the Budding Bacterium Hyphomonas Neptunium
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Timothy Hoover, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 325,000.00

Dr. Timothy R. Hoover of the University of Georgia, Dr. Yves V. Brun of Indiana
University, and Dr. Naomi Ward of The Institute for Genomic Research have been
awarded a grant to sequence the genome of the budding bacterium Hyphomonas
neptunium. The goal of the project is to identify and assign potential functions
to the genes in H. neptunium. The H. neptunium genome consists of approximately
2.7 million nucleotide base pairs forming about 2,000 genes. Random genomic DNA
fragments will be sequenced, and the collected data will be assembled into the
complete genomic sequence. Gene identification will be done using an algorithm
and potential roles for the gene products will be assigned by comparing the
sequences of these products with those in a database of bacterial protein
sequences. Genes that match entries in the database will have the corresponding
role and gene common name associated with the match assigned to the predicted
coding region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many bacteria reproduce through a process
known as budding. Little is known about budding or associated activities such as
chromosome partitioning. Understanding these processes is critical for
developing new strategies for controlling the growth of unwanted bacteria or
exploiting those with desirable activities. This research will enhance studies
on budding by identifying all of the genes within a representative budding
bacterium. Researchers can use these data to identify proteins that have roles
in budding or associated processes. Interestingly, the budding potential of a
newly differentiated stalk cell is limited to about seven budding events; thus
H. neptunium can be used as a model for microbial senescence. Such experiments
can be adapted to be appropriate for undergraduates, graduate students, or post-
doctoral researchers. Thus, this research will provide significant educational
opportunities for a wide variety of students. This is a Microbial Genome
Sequencing Award funded through a collaborative program between the National
Science Foundation and the Department of Agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;