* 0237674
* CAREER:   Direct Foliar Uptake of Atmospheric Nitrogen:  Molecular to Ecosystem Considerations
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Jed Sparks, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2009
* USD 532,000.00

ABSTRACT

Jed Spark's five-year CAREER award will establish an integrated research and
education plan to investigate exchanges of gaseous reactive nitrogen compounds
between the atmosphere and terrestrial ecosystems, the balances of which are
intrinsic to the maintenance of life on earth. Sparks and his students will
focus on the magnitudes of these exchanges using studies at multiple scales,
from the molecular-physiological with emphasis on mechanisms controlling
exchanges, to the biogeochemical with emphasis on the mass balance of nitrogen
cycles of ecosystems, to atmospheric nitrogen chemistry with emphasis on the
reactivity and control over turnover times. This program will enable a new
generation of Interdisciplinary scientists to be trained.

Reactive nitrogen compounds derive from natural soil driven processes,
lightning, emission from fertilizer application, and industrial sources and are
of particular interest for three reasons. First, at high concentrations reactive
oxidized nitrogen is known to be toxic to plants, although at lower
concentrations such compounds have been shown to act as an "atmospheric
fertilizer." Second, direct input of nitrogen through leaves into plants is not
normally considered by ecologists, while it is conceivable that this could
result in both short and long-term effects on photosynthesis, changes in litter
quality, and changes in carbon and nitrogen allocation patterns within plants.
Finally, nitrogen oxides play a central role in controlling the chemistry of the
lower atmosphere by catalyzing the formation of ozone.

Sparks will investigate the molecular and physiological mechanisms of foliar
nitrogen uptake, quantify the magnitude and controls over canopy-level flux of
reactive nitrogen over a range of ecosystems, and support the development of
both regional and global biogeochemistry and air-quality models. Additionally,
he will implement a two-phase education plan aimed at recruiting and training
young scientists. He will first develop a web-based educational platform
supported by the Cornell Adult University aimed at recruiting prospective
students to the field. He then will support training of young scientists through
participation in his research and participation in the Biosphere-Atmosphere
Research Training program at the University of Michigan Biological Station.

Making linkages between gene expression and biogeochemical processes, as will
occur under this award, is a very important part of the future of ecosystem
science and a suitably lofty goal as a theme for the early career development of
this young scientist.

