* 0237811
* CAREER:  Lateral Composition Modulation in InAs/GaSb Superlattices:  Nanometer Sized Quantum Wires
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2011
* Donna Stokes, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2011
* USD 423,967.00

This CAREER project represents an integrated research, instructional and
outreach activity. The aim of the project is to gain fundamental understanding
of "natural" quantum wires formed by lateral composition modulation (LCM) during
molecular beam epitaxial (MBE) growth of InAs/GaSb superlattices, InxGa1-xSb
single layers and InAs/InxGa1-xSb multilayers, where these materials may be
utilized for applications such as nano- and opto-electronic devices. This
research may significantly impact the development of solid-state technologies
utilizing InAs/(In)GaSb LCM materials forming the basis for new LCM devices,
such as lasers based on quantum wire (QWR) technology. An objective of the
research plan is to control the formation of the LCM nanostructures, i.e.,
degree of modulation and modulation wavelength, and address re-producibility
issues. This will be done through analysis using migration-enhanced epitaxy
(MEE) to effectively control interfacial composition since LCM is associated
with a surface undulation at the interface. Another objective is to structurally
characterize the modulated structures by conventional and advanced x-ray
diffraction techniques, i.e., in plane x-ray diffraction (XRD), grazing-
incidence diffraction (GID) and grazing-incidence small-angle scattering
(GISAXS). These techniques will allow probing of the LCM structures in terms of
depth/interface analysis, not available through conventional XRD. Cross
sectional transmission electron microscopy (XTEM) will also be used in
conjunction with XRD to yield a survey of the physical structure of the LCM. A
third objective is to characterize the optical and electrical behavior of these
structures by polarization dependent photoluminescence and magneto-
photoluminescence to demonstrate quantum wire behavior, and Hall effect
measurements to determine the materials prospect for future nano- and opto-
electronic device development. An established collaboration with the Naval Re-
search Laboratory (NRL) on the growth of these materials will greatly enhance
the success of the project and broaden and enrich the perspectives of students
involved in the project beyond the confines of the PI's laboratory through
summer internships. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental
materials science research issues having technological relevance. An important
feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the integration
of research and education. The educational plan extends beyond usual graduate
and under-graduate student activities via four avenues: (1) Development of a
course based on experimental techniques in solid-state physics and its role in
the future of nanotechnology targeted toward first and second year physics and
engineering graduate students. This course will introduce experimental
techniques of solid-state physics as they apply to nanotechnology as well as
include laboratory visits and experimental demonstrations; (2) Advising
undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral associates in the PI's laboratory will
broaden their individual perspectives beyond that of a single specialty. These
students will also assist with laboratory demonstrations for an experimental
solid-state physics course being developed; (3) Mentoring and exposing
undergraduate students involved in the Louis Stokes Minority Alliance Program
(LSAMP), to solid-state nanotechnology through laboratory positions and
laboratory tours as well as presenting lectures at the LSAMP annual conference
and (4) Yearly lectures at local high schools on the impact of nanotechnology on
society.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;