* 0237056
* Workshop -- Use of Sediment Quality Guidelines and Related Tools for the Assessment of Contaminated Sediments, Montana, 2002
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Gregory Schiefer, Society of Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2003
* USD 20,000.00

This SETAC-sponsored Pellston Workshop, Use of Sediment Quality Guidelines
(SQGs) and Related Tools for the Assessment of Contaminated Sediments is the
latest in a series of SETAC-sponsored workshops to examine the state-of-the-
science of different assessment tools and to provide recommendations for
improving assessments of sediment quality and ecological risks. This workshop
will focus on the issue of how best to integrate information derived from
multiple chemical and biological lines of evidence in sediment quality
evaluations. These lines of evidence, which are developed through the
application of different assessment tools, often include chemistry-based
sediment quality guidelines (SQGs). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Invited participants
will explore the scientific underpinnings of five critical questions about
sediment quality assessment. Participants will be organized into five technical
workgroups, each focused on one of the following
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. What are the scientific underpinnings and
uncertainties associated with SQGs?&lt;br/&gt;2. How well do SQGs represent the
potential for effects or no effects observed on&lt;br/&gt;aquatic
biota?&lt;br/&gt;3. How can SQGs be used in one or more frameworks to assess
sediment&lt;br/&gt;contamination?&lt;br/&gt;4. How should other assessment tools
that are available for evaluating sediment&lt;br/&gt;contamination be used in
combination with SQGs?&lt;br/&gt;5. What are the assessment and management
options for addressing particularly&lt;br/&gt;complex sediment
systems?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Steering Committee will guide pre-workshop
technical activities, assign discussion-initiation papers, and facilitate the
workshop. The proceedings of the workshop will then be published in a peer-
reviewed book and distributed by SETAC.