* 0237956
* CAREER: An Integrated Discovery-Based Genomic Approach to Discerning the Role of Nuclear Positioning Genes in Neurodevelopment
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Guy Caldwell, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 06/30/2009
* USD 580,440.00

0237956 &lt;br/&gt;Guy A. Caldwell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: An Integrated
Discovery-Based Genomic Approach to Discerning the Role of Nuclear Positioning
Genes in Neurodevelopment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The positioning of nuclei within
cells is essential for development and is involved in such diverse processes as
fertilization, cell division, as well as migration and synaptic activity of
neurons. Dr. Caldwell's laboratory has established a link between genes
associated with the cellular cytoskeleton and deficits in neuronal activity,
specifically related to proteins implicated in nuclear positioning. As the
complexity of the human brain renders it intractable to detailed molecular
characterization, the proposed studies will utilize the powerful attributes of
the nematode model organism Caenorhabditis elegans. This simple animal shares
most cellular features commonly associated with human neuronal function (ion
channels and neurotransmitters like dopamine and GABA). Dr. Caldwell's group has
identified a set of evolutionarily conserved nuclear positioning genes and are
performing a comprehensive series of experiments to examine the mechanisms by
which genetic factors regulate cytoskeletal establishment of neuronal
development and activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of the research will have
an impact beyond developmental neuroscience into areas of cell biology in
general. This CAREER proposal provides thoughtful integration of research and
educational concepts. &lt;br/&gt;Its focal point is a discovery-based genomics
lab course that incorporates Internet-based bioinformatics exercises within an
experimental context. The education impacts of these studies include the
involvement of minority participants, enhancement of research alliances with
liberal arts colleges and other universities, cross-disciplinary projects in
bioinformatics, and a novel student-edited interdisciplinary on-line science
journal designed to foster scientific literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;