* 0237661
* Technology and Empire in the Nuclear Age:  A Global and Local History of Uranium Mining
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Gabrielle Hecht, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 06/30/2005
* USD 124,412.00

After World War II, public discourse about the nuclear age invoked rupture: for
better or worse, nuclear technology had changed the world forever. For the
weakening colonial powers, another rupture loomed: the loss of empire. With an
ambivalent eye on the U.S., British and French leaders began to argue that
international power no longer rested on imperialism, but on nuclear might. For
the half-century since then, possessing a national nuclear program has been a
symbol of modernity. But what has global nuclear development meant for local
communities? How have nuclear technologies shaped relationships between
developing nations and nuclear powers? The history of uranium mining shows that
colonialism and its complex dynamics were central to the technological and
geopolitical success of the nuclear age. Hiroshima uranium came from the Congo.
Britain had colonial ties to uranium-supplying regions in Africa. Uranium helped
Australia and South Africa to ally themselves with the defense of the West.
France could pursue an independent nuclear program partly because of reserves in
its African colonies. Internal colonial dynamics figured too, as deposits were
found on native tribal lands. And uranium played a key role in new colonial
relationships between South Africa and present-day Namibia. Uranium's history
makes visible actors often ignored in nuclear narratives: Malagasy lab
technicians, Gabonese topographers, Namibian bulldozer drivers, South African
ore sorters, Native American shaft sinkers, and Aboriginal landowners. This
project offers a new perspective on the nuclear age by exploring the history of
uranium mining as a set of interacting technological, political, and cultural
practices in global, local, and comparative perspective. It focuses on four key
zones: Francophone Africa; native lands in North America; Australian Aboriginal
territories; and Namibia and South Africa. The project runs from the late 1940s
to the late 1980s. How did the technologies and practices of uranium mining
reflect and shape political, social, and cultural relationships in each of these
zones? In what ways and to what extent were these zones linked? The project
investigates each uranium mining site in its immediate local and national
context. It examines how each site fit into an international network of atomic
energy agencies, corporations, and other related institutions. And it explores
the circulation of people, technologies, knowledge, and practices through:
mining sites, multinational corporations, national and international atomic
energy institutions, local and international technical training programs, and
local and trans-national activist organizations. The project reshapes our
understanding of how one of the most significant technologies of the Cold War
became global, and explores in depth the local dimensions of that global reach.
By examining the different ways that uranium companies positioned themselves as
instruments of development and the ways that locals responded to that
positioning, the project illuminates the changing meaning of development over
time and place. By attending to the emergence of technical training programs and
environmental and social impact studies, the research shows variance in their
methods and meanings, thereby offering important frameworks through which to
assess the use of such programs and studies. Finally, its focus on uranium
contributes to an understanding of the proliferation of nuclear materials. In
all these domains, the historical perspective offered by this project
illuminates the long-term fate of technopolitical processes and may suggest
frameworks for thinking about new policies.