* 0237444
* 4th US-China-Japan Symposium on Lifeline Earthquake Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Anne Kiremidjian, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Chang
* 03/31/2004
* USD 6,300.00

The objective of this proposal is to support the travel of several of the US
participants to Qingdao, China, to participate in the 4th US-Japan-China
Symposium on Lifeline Earthquake Engineering on October 28-31, 2002. Twelve
papers are presented from US participants who have submitted papers to the
symposium. Of those, three participants are supported by the Pacific Earthquake
Engineering Center (PEER), three are supported by the Mid-America Earthquake
Center (MAE) and three are supported by the Multidisciplinary Center on
Earthquake Engineering Research (MCEER). This project supports the travel funds
for the remaining three participants plus partial publications costs for the
conference material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A joint agenda for research in
lifeline earthquake engineering is developed as a result of the symposium. The
research agenda is agreed upon by the representatives from the three
participating countries. The challenges in lifeline earthquake engineering are
identified and specific approaches are proposed. Use of innovative technologies
and the new laboratory/instrumentation at the NEES sites will be a particular
new focus for the research agenda to be discussed at the symposium. The broad
impact of the symposium are (1) the identification of specific research needs
that are relevant to the US; (2) research areas where collaboration between the
US, China and Japan are particularly suitable and desirable; and (3) mechanisms
for developing joint research programs between specific institutions in the US
and respective organizations in China and Japan. Findings from the symposium are
included in the symposium proceedings volume, which will be made public and will
be used in subsequent activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four women are included
in the US delegation one of which is a starting assistant professor and one is a
young research scientist. Results of the symposium will enable the development
of a concrete plan for lifeline earthquake engineering research with a specific
focus on the development of advanced technologies that will take the field to
the next level of advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lifelines, which include
transportation, water, sewage, power, and communications&lt;br/&gt;systems are
key to for any civilized nation's survival, particularly after major
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;This area of earthquake engineering has received little
attention in the past decade.&lt;br/&gt;Events of the September 11, 2001, have
demonstrated, as all other prior major earthquake&lt;br/&gt;events and natural
disasters, that the ability of a community to recover from a
major&lt;br/&gt;disaster depends extensively on the availability and rapid
recovery of the infrastructure of&lt;br/&gt;the region. Thus, it is important
that this research be pursued. Research results will continue to make
significant changes in the design and performance of civil
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;