* 0237412
* CAREER:    Domain-Specific 3D Interaction Techniques for Design and Construction Tasks in Immersive Virtual Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Doug Bowman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2009
* USD 499,999.00

This is a 5-year continuing award. This research effort will address the
application of immersive virtual environments (VEs) to the architectural design
and construction industries. Specifically, it aims to make immersive design
applications - those in which the designer can create or modify a 3D space while
immersed within it - possible. There are four components to this work. First,
the PI will design and evaluate user-centered 3D interaction techniques
specially targeted at design and construction tasks. He will then design and
implement a high-level software framework that supports rapid prototyping and
development of immersive design applications. Next, he will develop several
proof-of-concept VE applications using the domain-specific interaction
techniques and implemented in the software framework. Finally, the PI will
educate students, both in HCI (through a new course and textbook on 3D
interaction), and in the design disciplines (through the use in courses of the
VE applications developed in this project). This research will have a
significant impact in the VE and 3D interaction communities, leading to an
increased understanding of how interaction techniques can be tailored to
particular tasks and domains. The software framework will impact research in
immersive design, allowing graphics and VE novices (domain experts) to build
powerful interactive VE applications. The example applications the PI builds
will impact the design and construction industries, providing a tighter design
cycle and an increased understanding of difficult 3D problems. And there will
also be a two-pronged impact in the classroom, where the PI will use VE
technology as a learning tool in the design disciplines and introduce cutting-
edge research in 3D interaction to graduate-level HCI
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;