* 0237167
* RUI-Microbial Observatories: A Longitudinal Molecular Diversity and Chemical Survey of Red Layer Microbial Communities in Yellowstone National Park
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2009
* Sarah Boomer, Western Oregon University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 01/31/2009
* USD 532,414.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. S. Boomer of Western Oregon University to
identify, characterize, and monitor bacterial diversity at four long-term hot
spring study sites in Yellowstone National Park. This award funds a renewal of
what is known as the Red Layer Microbial Observatory project, the overall goal
of which is to discover novel hot spring bacteria and consortia, and to
understand their patterns of distribution and diversification. These studies
will focus on Red/Green Nonsulfur microorganisms, a poorly understood ancient
lineage of bacteria, and employ DNA sequence analysis and molecular population
assessment techniques. Site assessment will also include extensive geochemical
monitoring, including a cooperative effort with collaborators at the Thermal
Biology Institute (Montana State University). This grant will also improve and
support the maintenance of an on-line public database that integrates
environmental and molecular data over time, allowing us to make correlations
between environmental variation and observed genetic profiles of these microbial
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Western Oregon University is a public
institution that involves undergraduate students in research projects, both
through research-based class and lab curricula as well as through intensive
summer training experiences and workshops. A new component of this project will
include an extensive commitment to research-based pre-college education outreach
and the development of workshops for training teachers in molecular biology.
During the first award period, this research project involved 83 undergraduates
and 65 pre-college participants. Over the next five years, we anticipate this
renewed project will impact twice as many undergraduates and three times the
numbers of pre-college students, in addition to 35-50 teaching candidates per
year. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;