* 0237685
* Regulation of Alternative RNA Processing of the Human Calcitonin/CGRP Gene
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Hua Lou, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael K. Reddy
* 03/31/2007
* USD 411,296.00

Alternative RNA processing is a process that generates multiple protein isoforms
from a single gene, and thus is an important regulator of gene expression. Up to
60% of human pre-mRNAs undergo alternative processing, making this a ubiquitous
biological process. The long-term goal of this research is to understand the
mechanism that controls tissue-specific alternative RNA processing using the
human calcitonin/calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) gene as a model. The
calcitonin/CGRP pre-mRNA is processed to produce calcitonin in thyroid cells and
CGRP in neurons. Previous studies have identified an intron element and several
splicing factors that are required for calcitonin production. Very little is
known about the neuron-specific CGRP-producing pathway. Recent studies from the
PI's laboratory have identified two additional factors TIA and a neuron-specific
factor. These new factors suggest a novel role of the intron element in addition
to previously characterized polyadenylation enhancement function. The goal of
this project is to characterize this novel role of the intronic element and
determine the precise functions of TIA and the neuronal factor in regulated
processing of the calcitonin/CGRP pre-mRNA. The combined data from these studies
will provide fundamental insights into regulated RNA processing. Moreover, these
studies on the neuron-specific factor will significantly advance knowledge of
tissue-specific control of alternative splicing.