* 0237297
* PECASE: Probing protein surfaces using multiple solvent crystal structures
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Carla Mattos, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/28/2009
* USD 773,849.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: PECASE: Probing protein surfaces using multiple
solvent crystal structures&lt;br/&gt;Institution: North Carolina State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the research supported by this
PECASE award is to investigate the character of ligand binding sites on proteins
using the novel multiple solvent crystal structures method. The idea is to solve
the crystal structures of different proteins in a variety of organic solvents in
order to map their binding surfaces. The study will focus on five representative
proteins that interact with different types of ligands. The premise is that the
solvent molecules have characteristics in common with component parts of larger
ligands and bind primarily in areas that evolved as binding sites. At the same
time, changes in the properties of the bulk solvent relative to an aqueous
solution provide changes to the protein environment. Analysis of the protein
crystal structures in these multiple environments can be used to delineate
structural components that are able to adjust to the change. Are there common
patterns of hydration, plasticity and hydrophobic exposed surfaces that are
independent of vast differences in shape, dynamics, electrostatic and
hydrophobic content of the binding sites? To what extent does the type of ligand
determine the surface properties of proteins, and how do dynamics affect the
binding site features? Answers to these questions are critical to our basic
understanding of protein-protein and protein-ligand interactions and will
ultimately help to bridge the gap between what we observe experimentally and
what we can predict from first principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact:
Model building and refinement of the crystal structures will be integrated into
an undergraduate course on protein structure and function and into a graduate
course on macromolecular modeling. The students taking these courses will work
closely with the research team to complete the refinement of the structures.
Thus, the scientific objectives of this project will be accomplished within an
educational framework designed to enhance the knowledge and research experience
of individuals from several stages of the academic ladder. This project aims to
1) decrease the gap between teaching and research experiences of the students,
2) expose a large number of students to the questions guiding cutting edge
research while offering students an illustration of the concepts discussed in
class, 3) spark an interest in undergraduates, particularly women and Latino
students, that might never have had the motivation to inquire about research
outside of the classroom and 4) develop a process by which post-docs and
graduate students are motivated to be excellent
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was originally funded as a CAREER
award, and was converted to a Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and
Scientists (PECASE) award in September 2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;