* 0237395
* Neuroanatomy of Odor Learning and Memory in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2008
* Andrew Andres, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 04/30/2008
* USD 455,615.00

0237395 deBelle, John J.&lt;br/&gt;Neural structures and cellular components
participating in associative (Pavlovian) odor learning and memory have been
identified by genetic, transgenic and cell ablation studies in the fruit fly,
Drosophila melanogaster. Anatomical defects in brain structures called mushroom
bodies (MBs) and biochemical defects in signal transduction have each
(separately) been linked to reduced learning and memory in flies. The present
studies will focus on five Drosophila mutants that have reduced MB phenotypes
(mbm, mbmB, mbmC, mbr and smu). The first goal is to correlate anatomical and
memory defects in mutants with gene expression patterns in MBs. This will test
whether genetically defined MB subdivisions are sites of specific biochemical
processes underlying one or more sequential phases of memory consolidation. The
second goal is to establish accurate genetic maps for the MB structure genes and
to isolate new transposon-tagged mutant alleles. Brain and behavior phenotypes
of these new alleles will then be characterized in P-element excision
experiments. New alleles will also facilitate rapid entry to molecular analyses.
For one gene (mbmB), a recently-identified transposon allele will be
characterized through cloning and transgene rescue of mutant phenotypes, and by
biochemical assays for levels of PKA-C1 (the suspected gene product) in mutant
flies. New transposon-tagged alleles of the other MB genes will facilitate
similar functional analyses. The long-term goal is to characterize MB structural
gene products that function in MB development, memory consolidation, or common
aspects of both. The overall significance of the proposed work is to integrate
neuroanatomical and biochemical mechanisms underlying behavioral plasticity.
Proposed studies will determine how functional specificity can be achieved
through anatomical partitioning of relatively ubiquitous cellular mechanisms. In
particular, these studies will reveal important aspects of the neural mechanisms
underlying behavioral plasticity in animals and will offer unique research
opportunities for students from underrepresented
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;