* 0238113
* CAREER: Novel Conductive Oxide Coatings on Metallic Inteconnect for Intermediate Temperature SOFC Application
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Jiahong Zhu, Tennessee Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 01/31/2009
* USD 414,453.00

This project aims at addressing the critical issues related to metallic
interconnects for intermediate-temperature solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC)
application. With the current trends in reducing the SOFC operation temperatures
to the range of 500-800 degrees C, ferritic steels are promoted as the candidate
materials for the intermediate-temperature SOFC interconnect due to their low
cost and ease of manufacture. However, under long-term stack operation, the
increase of contact resistance due to the formation of surface oxide layer(s)
and Cr migration to other cell components from the interconnects pose serious
issues for these otherwise promising materials. Novel conductive spinel phases
are investigated in this proposal as potential coatings to mitigate the current
limitations of ferritic steels. Electrical conduction mechanism in substituted
spinel phases will be assessed through systematic study of defect structure and
electrical conductivity in these oxides. Spinel coatings with optimized
composition will be fabricated, via sol-gel processing to form the coatings on
commercial ferritic steels. Another objective is to explore alloy design to
develop new-generation ferritic alloys capable of forming the desired spinel
layer upon proper thermal treatment. The research is also directed to enhance
the undergraduate/graduate curricula by familiarizing the students with
processing and characterization of both bulk materials and thin films/coatings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spinel phases exhibit a wide range of electrical
conductivity, ranging from insulating/semiconducting to metal-
like/superconducting. This research will provide insights into defect structure
and conduction mechanism in spinel phases, by combining various techniques and
approaches, such as thermogravimetric analysis, electrical conductivity and
Seebeck coefficient measurements, neutron scattering, synchrotron X-ray
scattering, and the associated modeling efforts. The methodology developed will
be directly applicable to a number of other important electron-conducting
ceramics. In addition to the intended SOFC interconnect application, the
developed sol-gel spinel coatings and new-generation ferritic alloys may also
find wide applications in other demanding, hostile environments. The integrated
educational activities will be aimed at exposing the high school students and
teachers in the Upper-Cumberland region of Tennessee by organizing a weeklong
summer materials camp each year, to the proposed fuel cell research activities
and state-of-the-art material research facilities at Tennessee Technological
University (TTU) and national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;