* 0238319
* CAREER: Investigating mathematics teacher preparation across five institutions of higher learning
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2003,09/30/2009
* Julie Cwikla, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 09/30/2009
* USD 489,367.00

This CAREER project would follow the teacher preparation efforts of five
community colleges in Mississippi. The investigator will examine the policy of
institutions, the classroom and teacher educator, and the learner's development
from student to teacher. The intent is to develop better knowledge of how
teachers develop mathematics ability and understanding by conducting a
longitudinal study of a cohort of pre-service teachers through various programs.
The study is intended to explicate what mathematics educations think is
important for students, how students are learning mathematics content and
pedagogy, and what ways to faculty develop across institutions as they
collaborate in defining goals, course content, and classroom practice. The study
will monitor 375 student teachers through their early courses in 4 community
colleges and the University of Southern Mississippi. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
career goals of the young investigator are three: To make a significant local
contribution to mathematics education in the State of Mississippi and guide her
own practice and pursuit of inspiring future teachers to critically analyze the
way they think about mathematics. To conduct research studies which contribute
to national conversation about teacher preparation and the importance of
mathematics reasoning. The researcher expects to help define and describe what
teacher preparation should look like. Finally, the researcher intends to
contribute to a state that is poor in wealth and human resources to help improve
the system of mathematics education. Her publications address both the practice
of preparing teachers in classrooms and the policies of institutions that
provide that guidance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;