* 0238406
* CARRER:     Empirical Methods for Machine Translation
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2009
* I.Dan Melamed, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 01/31/2009
* USD 424,886.00

The research supported by this five-year continuing award will attempt to
improve the quality and reliability of automatic ("machine") translation between
human languages. Although automatic translation services abound on the Web, they
are more often a source of entertainment than a source of useful information.
Real advances in this technology can promote communication and understanding
between people from different cultures, and grease the wheels of international
commerce.

The main vehicle for this research will be a new formalism called Structured
Models of Translational Equivalence (SMoTEs). SMoTEs express the translational
equivalence relation between the linguistic structures of two or more languages.
SMoTEs combine the best of the rationalist and empiricist approaches to building
machine translation systems. They are induced from real data, for broad
coverage, for graceful degradation, and for rapid adaptation to new domains.
Yet, unlike existing statistical translation models, SMoTEs explicitly represent
the structures hidden in linguistic data. By modeling linguistic structure,
SMoTEs can capture important linguistic generalizations that enable them to make
more accurate predictions in a wider variety of contexts. SMoTEs are based on a
new class of formal grammars, which is a multidimensional generalization of some
well-understood existing classes of grammars. The connection between the formal
foundations of SMoTEs and the formal foundations of much previous research lays
the groundwork for adopting many current and future monolingual techniques, such
as parsing and grammar factoring, in the service of multilingual applications.
Thus, SMoTEs have the potential to become a catalyst for rapid progress in
machine translation.

Long-term progress in machine translation will depend on future generations of
language researchers and engineers. For this purpose, an ambitious educational
program will complement the research supported by this award. The centerpiece of
this program will be several new courses in language engineering at NYU's
Department of Computer Science. Other educational goals include the creation of
a machine translation research group, and expanded community outreach through
the New York City NLP Forum.