* 0238514
* CAREER:    Modeling and Optimizing User-Centric Mixed-Initiative Spoken Dialog Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2010
* Shrikanth Narayanan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/28/2010
* USD 500,000.00

Conversational interfaces hold the promise of providing natural, easy, and
universal access to information. This project targets two specific problems in
conversational engineering under a unifying stochastic modeling framework: (1)
dialog interaction modeling (2) user modeling in spoken dialog. These problems
are related: user models are essential in designing optimal dialog strategies,
while discourse state information is essential for user behavior modeling.
Conversational participants -- humans or machines -- are modeled as stochastic
dynamical systems, interacting with one another over a noisy communication
channel. Noise in the channel may be due to errors in machine speech
recognition, language understanding, or other machine/user communication errors.
Algorithms based on mathematical game theory and robust design are formulated
for derivation of optimal mixed-initiative dialog control strategies. The
approach to modeling user behavior is data-driven with an emphasis on behavior
under error conditions and on the inclusion of automatic emotion tracking.
Again, a unified statistical framework provides a way for integrating multiple
sources of information (e.g., acoustic, lexical, nonverbal and discourse) based
on information-theoretic principles. The research development will be based on
annotated spoken language corpora from real human-machine dialogs from a variety
of real application domains including air travel and call center applications
and an immersive training system for military/security applications being
developed at the University of Southern California
(USC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component creates a new curriculum
in spoken language processing: a two-semester graduate sequence, developed for
simultaneous offering both on campus and on USC ``Distance Education Network"
will target basic speech processing through the latest advances in speech
recognition, speech synthesis, and spoken dialog. The courses are relevant to a
wide range of programs, in addition to core electrical engineering, including
computational linguistics, intelligent systems in computer science, integrated
media and creative technologies, phonetics, and psychology. In addition, a
unique interdisciplinary undergraduate course with a theme on human versus
machine processing of spoken language will be developed and implemented. The
research and education components are tightly integrated, with courses featuring
the latest research results through demonstrations and hands-on projects, with
an emphasis on `learning by doing'. Likewise, research serves as an effective
vehicle for education in terms of enabling the training of both undergraduate
and doctoral students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in spoken language
engineering is unique in terms of its scope and societal relevance, spanning
both fundamental and applied aspects of spoken language research, including an
industry perspective, and creating synergies with other activities within the
university in multimedia, natural language processing, and agent technology. It
will serve as a vehicle to promote cross-disciplinary graduate and undergraduate
research and education. &lt;br/&gt;