* 0238917
* CAREER:    Biomimetic Self-Assembling Hydrogels for Delivery for Bioactive Molecules
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Alyssa Panitch, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 12/31/2006
* USD 400,000.00

0238917&lt;br/&gt;Panitch&lt;br/&gt;This work focuses on the synthesis and
characterization of biomimetic, self-assembling hydrogels that are useful for
delivery of bioactive compounds. These hydrogels will be unique in several
respects: they are physical gels with the consistency of ointment that can be
polymerized in situ or spread onto an area; drug release from the gels is
dependant on the affinity of the drug for the gel; the affinity of the drug for
the gel can be tailored; and the dissolution of the gel can be controlled based
on the affinity of the constituents for one another. It is hypothesized that
physical gels formed by combining peptide-modified poly(ethylene glycol) star
polymers (PEG stars) and sulfated polysaccharides can be tailored to control
both dissolution of the gel and release of bioactive components. It is further
hypothesized that these gels will release bioactive components on a
physiologically-relevant time scale. To verify these hypotheses, gels will be
made with 4-arm and 8-arm PEG stars and heparin, chondroitin sulfate or dextran
sulfate. The gels will be complemented with four distinct polysaccharide-binding
peptides, and the release of the peptides will be studied. Finally, the
bioactivity and physiological application of the gel will be tested for the case
of vasorelaxation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to
develop a new class of hydrogel release systems. These release systems can be
polymerized in situ, are soft and pliable and can be used in clinical situations
where ointment-like materials with controlled release characteristics are
necessary. The first target application is a gel that promotes vasodilation in
an in vitro saphenous vein model. The proposed work lends itself to future work
in controlled release from both physical gels and covalent gels; biologically-
based and synthetic molecules can be tailored to release via similar schemes. In
addition, the scaffolds can be used as artificial extracellular matrices, which
are capable of sequestering factors, releasing factors and sustaining cell
growth and survival. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component consists of
curriculum development at ASU as well as outreach to Scottsdale Community
College. A survey course of Molecular, Cellular and Tissue Engineering will be
developed. This class will serve several purposes: the opportunity for graduate
students to become involved in course development and in teaching, the exposure
of community college students to bioengineering and the creation of laboratory
opportunities for undergraduate students from Scottsdale Community College.
&lt;br/&gt;