* 0238309
* CAREER:  Polarimetry in Remote Sensing, Communications, and Biological Sciences
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,03/31/2007
* J. Scott Tyo, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 03/31/2007
* USD 349,518.00

0238309 Tyo

Optical polarization is an important phenomenon in many aspects of remote
sensing, optical communications, and biological sciences. In remote sensing,
polarization can provide spatially distributed information about surface
features such as roughness, orientation angle, shape, and material composition.
Polarization sensitivity in both active and passive sensors can be used to help
improve image contrast under poor viewing conditions, as commonly occurs
underwater and in fog. Polarimetric techniques can be incorporated into both
passive and active systems, and can be employed in any region of the
electromagnetic spectrum. In the field of optical communications, polarization-
dependent dispersion is one of the most important limiting factors in the
performance of today's high data rate systems. When the differential group delay
between two principal polarization states is larger than the inter-symbol time,
the pulse dispersion is significant enough to cause high bit error rates. In
biology, many species of terrestrial and aquatic vertebrates and invertebrates
have demonstrated polarization sensitivity. This sensitivity implies that there
is information available in a variety of environments that can help us learn
more about the behavior of these animals.

This CAREER proposal supports the development of an integrated research and
education program in the field of optical polarimetry. This award will support
the enhancement of the PI's Multi-Dimensional Imagery Laboratory at the
University of New Mexico (UNM) and the creation of several polarization
instructional modules and tutorials that will be integrated into the
electromagnetics and optics curricula at UNM. Several research projects will be
undertaken in the MDIL, including studies to optimize and characterize active
and passive polarimeter systems, studies to investigate polarization properties
in scattering media, and the development of imaging and non imaging sensors for
remote sensing activities. One of these sensors will be designed for use at the
Albuquerque Aquarium to image the aquatic environmental exhibits to learn more
about the polarization phenomenology in nature. Finally, the facilities at the
MDIL will be used to develop a polarization mode dispersion (PMD) emulator for
optical fiber communications channels, and to study methods to compensate for
PMD over optical links.

The research and education program proposed here will have significant broader
impacts. Much of the research will be performed by undergraduate students from
UNM, which is a Federally recognized Minority Serving Institution with
significant populations of Hispanic and Native American students. Every effort
will be made to recruit from traditionally underrepresented groups, which make
up approximately half of the undergraduate student body in the Electrical and
Computer Engineering Department at UNM. The scientific results of the studies
that will be conducted under this CAREER program will be broadly disseminated
through scientific journals and technical conferences, and the educational
material will be made available through local web sites and through the
Polarization Technical Group of the International Society for Optical
Engineering (SPIE). The results of the underwater imager experiments will be
shared with to the local community with the cooperation of the Albuquerque
Aquarium and their educational outreach programs.

The program will promote the natural integration of teaching and learning
through mentoring at all stages in the research, and will provide the
opportunity to integrate current research topics into graduate and undergraduate
curricula. These activities will benefit the educational and research missions
of the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, the School of
Engineering, and the University of New Mexico, as well as the local community of
Albuquerque. At the end of the five year CAREER program, the PI will be well
established as an academic leader both at the University and in the scientific
community as a whole.

