* 0238674
* SBIR Phase II:  Green Solvent Mixtures as Alternatives to Environmentally Damaging and Toxic Solvents
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2006
* John Flanagan, NGIMAT CO.
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2006
* USD 1,047,994.00

This SBIR Phase II Project will develop software to aid formulation chemists in
the replacement of environmentally damaging and toxic solvents such as those
listed as hazardous air pollutants (HAP) in Section 112(b)(1) of the Clean Air
Act. Phase I provided successful proof of concept for MCT's approach to use
mixtures of "green" solvents that are tunable to obtain a wide range of solvent
characteristics. This approach allows for the replacement of a broad spectrum of
harmful solvents by using a small number of benign solvents. The system is
flexible, allowing end users to control factors such as the organic functional
groups present to fit their application. MCT will incorporate this method into
software to guide non-specialists through the selection of solvents and
optimization the mixture. MCT will collaborate with the research groups of
Professors Charles Eckert and Charles Liotta at the Georgia Institute of
Technology to develop a predictive model for the solubility of metal-organic
compounds in organic solvents. We will perform quantitative solubility
measurements on the systems initially studied in Phase I and use the resulting
data to verify and improve the solubility model. The resulting solubility model
will be incorporated in the solvent selection software.

The recent trend towards environmentally friendly products has caused an
increase in the use of green solvents in product formulations and industrial
processes. Regulations governing the use of solvents classified as Hazardous Air
Pollutants (HAP) or as Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) are forcing companies to
look for alternatives to solvents presently in use. Therefore, there is an
opportunity for the introduction of products that are designed to assist
companies that need to reformulate products or processes that use organic
solvents. The niche market for reformulation tools is estimated to fall into the
$30 million range. MCT's goal is to release a software product that meets these
needs within 3 years, and to gain the majority of the market share, producing
revenues of $10 million over a period of 6 years. MCT will license software
developed under Phase II to companies that manufacture chemicals and allied
products. Solvent replacement tools can be applied to find alternative solvents
almost anywhere solvents are in use, including coatings, pharmaceuticals,
printing inks, toiletries, cosmetics, adhesives, household and car care, rubber
and polymer manufacturing, industrial cleaning and degreasing, agrochemicals,
oil seed and food extraction and dry cleaning.