* 0238808
* CAREER:    Optical Sensors for the Detection of Vapor Phase Explosives Using Molecularly Imprinted Sol-Gel Materials:    Integration of Research and Learning Using Forensic Science
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Paul Edmiston, College of Wooster
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 04/30/2008
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award to Professor Paul Edmiston of the College of Wooster,
supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focuses on the
development of molecularly imprinted optical sensors to selectively detect gas
and solution phase high-explosives. Professor Edmiston and his undergraduate
students will use a hybrid covalent/non-covalent molecular imprinting strategy
to prepare binding sites in porous sol-gel materials. Binding by analytes such
as trinitrotoluene (TNT) to these materials will be detected by a change in
fluorescence or absorbance of solvatochromic optical probes directly attached to
sites adjacent to the imprinted binding pockets. These imprinted sol-gel
materials will be deposited as thin films on integrated optical waveguides to
provide fast response times without a loss in sensitivity. Imprinted sol-gels
will also be used to construct solid-phase microextraction devices for field
sampling applications that will be compatible with existing HPLC and GC/MS
technologies. The forensic science aspect of the research will be a central
feature of educational and outreach activities to non-science major
undergraduates and pre-college students. New laboratory experiences for non-
science majors will be developed that allow these students to be involved in the
process of scientific research. College of Wooster chemistry students will be
integral to outreach activities targeting inner-city Cleveland and rural high
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term goal of this project is
develop simple, inexpensive, but highly sensitive sensing technologies to
quickly detect explosives such as TNT. The presence of explosives will be
observed by optical means. The obvious forensic applications of the project will
be used as a focal point to expose non-science majors to chemical research. In
combination with these activities, an outreach program for high school students
(already in its beginning stages) will be expanded that allows undergraduate
chemistry majors to interact with the participants by demonstrating modern
analytical techniques used in forensics and chemical research.&lt;br/&gt;