* 0238962
* CAREER: Ordered Mesoporous Mixed Metal Oxides: An Integrated Research and Education Program
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Vadim Guliants, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2009
* USD 424,253.00

This objective of this career development plan is to introduce the concept of
molecular engineering of complicated mesoporous materials in both research and
chemical engineering education. In research, it aims at developing comprehensive
methods for designing mesoporous multicomponent V-Mo-M-O (M= Nb, Te, Sb, etc.)
oxides and elucidating the fundamental relationships between the molecular
structure and catalytic function. Model mesoporous V-Mo-M-O oxides will be
synthesized via two novel self-assembly approaches employing molecular and
nanocrystalline building blocks in the presence of mesoscale supramolecular
surfactant arrays and block copolymers. Various surface chemical probes will be
employed to elucidate the nature, number, structure and specific activity of
surface redox, acidic and basic sites present in these model mixed metal oxide
catalysts. The molecular structure-reactivity/selectivity relationships from
this research program will be used to assist in the design of improved catalysts
and the development of fundamental mechanistic models for alkane ammoxidation
over mixed metal oxide catalysts.

The education program is aimed at integrating molecular engineering of advanced
materials into traditional chemical engineering education and training chemical
engineers with a strong background in molecular engineering of chemical and
biological systems. This program includes development of two new courses on
molecular engineering for undergraduate and graduate students, implementation of
a molecular engineering research program for undergraduates, and outreach to
underrepresented groups. The outreach efforts will be directed towards improving
higher education opportunities for minority and women engineers by alerting them
to the graduate research opportunities in molecular engineering.