* 0238385
* PECASE: Bridging the Gap Between Theory and Practice in Teacher Education: Guided Interactive Virtual Environments (GIVEs) for Case-Based Learning
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2009
* Roxana Moreno, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 974,558.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: Bridging the Gap Between Theory and Practice in Teacher
Education: Guided Interactive Virtual Environments (GIVEs) for Case-Based
Learning Institution: University of New Mexico

The purpose of this PECASE proposal is to study how to help science teachers
prepare to think effectively and apply principles of educational psychology to
classroom experiences. The author expects it to contribute to understanding of
the cognitive processes that support the teacher efforts to solve novel and
complex problems in the classroom. The project also has implications for the
design of educational technology that promote student higher level reasoning
skills through case studies. In particular, this project is expected to help
show ways of meeting the needs of the New Mexico schools with large populations
of Native American and other minorities. She would develop virtual environments
for preparing teachers with case learning so that cognitive skills are learned
as concrete procedures in the context of everyday life. The virtual environments
allow a focus on a few issues at a time thus reducing the cognitive load on the
teachers. This study will explore several hypotheses about how case-based
methods provide higher order thinking skills that help students solve problems.
The researcher will collect data from teachers on student performance by
following three cohorts of students for 3-years each. The cohorts will be pre-
service teachers in year 3 of the project and will be followed into their
classrooms as teachers. One cohort will serve as a control group to the others
that will go through the training program developed by the investigator.

Education Plan The investigator's career plans are directly related to the
project outlined in this PECASE proposal. The investigator is interested in how
people think and learn and how to apply that knowledge to classrooms. This
project is very closely woven into the investigators career plans. As she noted
in an e-mail to L Suter on December 12, 2002, this project is a "direct
reflection of my interest in teaching, which stems from my commitment to
research how people think and learn." The materials will be incorporated into
the undergraduate curriculum that she teaches and she plans to offer special
graduate classes based on the result of her research.

This project was originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a
Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in
September 2004.



