* 0238451
* CAREER: Methanosarcina Acetivorans as a Model to Elucidate the Mechanism of DNA Replication in the Archaea
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2010
* Isaac Cann, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 01/31/2010
* USD 741,994.00

Life on the planet Earth is divided into three domains: Archaea, Bacteria, and
Eukarya. Each of the three lineages is propagated through transfer of genetic
material by DNA replication, a complex interplay of many proteins acting in
concert to duplicate the genome. While significant progress has been made in the
elucidation of the mechanisms involved in the replication of bacterial and
eukaryotic genomes, the current understanding of genome replication in the
archaea is rudimentary. Several genes encoding eukaryotic-like proteins known to
be essential at the replication fork have been identified in all archaeal
genomes sequenced to date. A few of the proteins have been shown to possess
predicted biochemical activities in vitro. However, the direct evidence for the
role of these proteins in archaeal cells is missing due to lack of reliable
genetic manipulation systems for the hyperthermophiles currently used as models
to study archaeal DNA replication. This career project will use Methanosarcina
acetivorans, an archeaon with a proven genetic manipulation system and a
completely sequenced genome, as a model to decipher the archaeal DNA replication
mechanism. Genetic methods will be used to identify genomic DNA fragments
capable of autonomous replication in M. acetivorans to determine the archaeal
origin/s of replication. The genes coding for the predicted proteins involved in
(a) origin recognition, (b) loading of the replicative DNA helicase (c) the
switch from origin recognition to initiation of DNA synthesis, (d) elongation
and (e) processing of Okazaki fragments will be disrupted in the genome to
determine whether they are essential for cell viability. These experiments,
together with in vitro biochemical characterization of each protein under study,
aside from enhancing the understanding of genome replication in the third major
domain of life, will provide a simpler model in the quest to completely unravel
the complex eukaryotic DNA replication machinery. The project will provide
training for a diversity of graduate and undergraduate students, and minority
high school students during summer, in (a) the use of computers to predict
protein function, (b) gene cloning and manipulation, (c) protein purification
and (d) biochemical characterization all aimed at assigning function to genes.
The project thus aims at preparing students to tackle one of the inevitable
challenges of the post-genomics era: assignment of function to the ubiquitous
hypothetical and conserved proteins in known genome sequences. In addition, the
content of the research serves as the teaching material for the microbial
functional genomics component of ANSCI 199 (Discovering the Genome) taught to
undergraduate students every spring semester.