* 0238584
* CAREER: The trajectory of early learning and its roots in early social interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Rebecca Gomez, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 06/30/2009
* USD 415,485.00

Research over the past two decades has revealed remarkable perceptual and
cognitive abilities in early infancy. There has been much debate over the
origins of this early knowledge, whether infants come equipped with fundamental
concepts or whether these are acquired. Recent research using miniature
artificial languages has contributed importantly to this debate by revealing
powerful learning abilities in infancy. Such findings have implications for our
understanding of how infant cognition arises and how it changes over the course
of development. However, we still know little about the trajectory of early
learning, making it difficult to determine the relative contributions of innate
and acquired factors. What are the learning abilities available to infants of
different ages? Do infants begin with specific default sensitivities or are they
sensitive to a broad array of information from the very beginning? Given several
sources of information in a learning situation, how do infants know where to
direct their attention? To what extent are they able to separate relevant from
irrelevant information and how does this ability develop? How specific are
learning abilities to particular learning domains? Additionally, learning
research has been far removed from the everyday experiences central to an
infant's existence, such as those involved in early social interactions. Yet,
the quality of these interactions is profoundly linked to later cognition,
raising important questions concerning the relationship between infants'
earliest social experiences and later learning. This career development plan
will investigate the scope and limits of early learning by exposing infants of
different ages to miniature artificial languages of varying degrees of
complexity. The PI will conduct initial studies with cross-sectional populations
and several later studies longitudinally. The research will investigate learning
in both auditory and visual domains to examine the domain-specificity of early
learning. The PI will also investigate the relationship between contingent
responsiveness in early social interactions and learning in the cognitive domain
to determine the impact of early learning experiences on later ones. An
additional critical component of this plan involves undergraduate training.
Students from underrepresented groups will be mentored throughout their
undergraduate training with the objective of preparing them for careers in
science and teaching. &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to obtain a fine-
grained description of early learning and its relationship to early social
experiences. A better understanding of the impact of early social interactions
on learning in the cognitive domain will have merit for parents and scholars
alike, especially given the growing recognition of the importance of the first
three years of life to later development. The training component will promote
teaching, training, and learning in a highly interactive research setting. It
will be instrumental in increasing diversity among teachers and scholars in our
universities, thus serving the needs of our changing
population&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;