* 0238820
* CAREER:  Strategic Choices During Institutional Transitions
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Mike Peng, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 10/31/2005
* USD 248,686.00

How do organizations make strategic choices during the time of fundamental and
comprehensive institutional transitions such as those sweeping emerging
economies? This project addresses this question both theoretically and
empirically. It first develops a two-phase model of market-oriented
institutional transitions. It then focuses on the longitudinal process to move
from a relationship-based, personalized transaction structure calling for a
network-centered strategy to a rule-based, impersonal exchange regime suggesting
a market-centered strategy. The central hypothesis is that as institutional
transitions progress, networks and connections, previously thought to be
imperative for business success, may become less important. Instead, competitive
resources and capabilities are likely to be more significant determinants of
firm performance.

Empirically, the project proposes three large-scale, multi-year studies. Study 1
will collect longitudinal case data from two partner organizations with
operations in over a dozen cities in China. Study 2 will employ a two-wave
survey methodology to collect data from approximately 300-450 firms in China,
separated by two years between each survey. Finally, Study 3 will replicate and
extend the China studies in two other important emerging economies, Thailand and
Russia, using a similar two-wave survey methodology. The project.s dynamic
integration of institutional and strategic choice theories and its longitudinal
and multinational empirical design promise especially interesting insights. It
synthesizes a diverse but scattered literature on emerging economies to form a
coherent contribution. It explains, predicts, and aims to empirically document
the mechanisms through which the importance of networks is gradually eclipsed by
the importance of capabilities. This project thus highlights the relative
decline of networks and connections (albeit still important) vis-a-vis
competitive capabilities during institutional transitions.

In terms of its broader impacts, the project advances discovery while promoting
teaching, training, and learning. The primary educational component includes the
development of three .Emerging Markets Field Study. courses, one for MBAs, one
for Executive MBAs, and another for undergraduates, that capitalize on the
learning from this project. It also allows me to infuse the excitement of
research into general courses/modules in International Business and Strategy at
the MBA, undergraduate, and executive levels. It also enhances infrastructure
for international research and education in Asia and Europe. It facilitates
broad dissemination through publications in practitioner-oriented journals and
online media as well as briefings to partner organizations and other
interdisciplinary outreach activities. Finally, it fosters connections between
discoveries and their benefits to the global society. Given the rising
importance of emerging economies, our research and teaching activities need to
move out of our familiar OECD mindset and pay more attention to emerging
economies, if we endeavor to remain globally relevant. This project aims to help
steer the research and education agenda toward focusing more needed attention on
emerging economies.