* 0238381
* CAREER: Integrated Fault Tolerance and Real-Time Support for Middleware Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2009
* Priya Narasimhan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 03/31/2009
* USD 434,800.00

This project exploits the CORBA middleware standard as a vehicle
for&lt;br/&gt;exploring the composition of real-time and fault tolerance
for&lt;br/&gt;distributed middleware applications. Although the initial
approach&lt;br/&gt;will apply to CORBA, the results will be applicable to
other&lt;br/&gt;middleware, such as Java. The primary scientific contributions
of&lt;br/&gt;this project are the description of the precise trade-offs that
occur&lt;br/&gt;when both real-time and fault tolerance support are required for
a&lt;br/&gt;middleware application, along with an architecture and strategies
that&lt;br/&gt;can be used to resolve these trade-offs. The primary
technical&lt;br/&gt;contributions of the project are a new set of practices and
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;for building real-time fault-tolerant systems, and tools
for&lt;br/&gt;sanitizing non-determinism in middleware applications, with the
aim of&lt;br/&gt;meeting both real-time predictability and fault-tolerant
consistency&lt;br/&gt;requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project furthers
our technical understanding of the precise&lt;br/&gt;trade-offs and complex
interactions between ``-ilities'' such as&lt;br/&gt;real-time and fault
tolerance, thereby helping to reduce the number of&lt;br/&gt;proprietary brittle
systems that continue to be built. The project&lt;br/&gt;has the potential to
influence the state of the art and the&lt;br/&gt;state of the practice, enabling
future COTS-based mission-critical&lt;br/&gt;applications to be developed with
simultaneous real-time and&lt;br/&gt;fault-tolerant support. Recognizing that
applications vary in their&lt;br/&gt;dependability needs, this project is unique
in that it provides&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms to mix-and-match the different fault
tolerance mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;in a manner that allows for the customization of
the system's&lt;br/&gt;perceived dependability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
participation in organizations such as the Object Management&lt;br/&gt;Group,
the results of this project will be made available to harden&lt;br/&gt;ongoing
and future standards on fault tolerance and real-time for&lt;br/&gt;middleware.
Elements of this project will be incorporated into&lt;br/&gt;curricula in order
to expose students to the cross-cutting concerns of&lt;br/&gt;both reliability
and real-time. Students who are exposed to not just&lt;br/&gt;one ``-ility'',
but to the conflicts and trade-offs between multiple&lt;br/&gt;``-ilities'',
will make better and more discriminating software/system&lt;br/&gt;architects
who can be entrusted to build the mission-critical systems&lt;br/&gt;of the
future.