* 0238987
* CAREER:  A Mechatronic-based Research and Educational Framework for Next Generation Actuators and Sensors Comprised of Functional Nanotube Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2009
* Nader Jalili, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 04/30/2009
* USD 440,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is to develop next-
generation functional materials by systemically engineering macroscopic
structures comprised of functional nanotubes. Nanocrystals and nanostructures
are often cited as candidate materials that can be engineered to exhibit
enhanced or entirely new properties for use in different applications.
Specifically in this project, the individual boron nitride (BN) nanotubes that
exhibit actuation mechanisms similar to that found in nature (i.e., slip-stick
fibrillar motion) will be assembled to create new functional macrostructures.
This novel concept originates from the newly observed piezoelectric (PZT) effect
in BN nanotubes, which can be utilized to fabricate ceramic piezoelectric fibers
with controllable expansion and contraction and astounding electrical and
mechanical properties. Such actuation of nanotube networks is poorly understood
at present, yet offers immense payoffs in the future if this property can be
harnessed to make lightweight, strong, multifunctional composites. To achieve
such development, this project will target: i) design and development of
functional nanotube-based composite fibers made of BN nanotubes, ii) design and
development of macroscopic actuators and sensors comprised of functional
nanotube composites, and ultimately iii) development of analytical models and
control experiment in order to be able to manipulate the nanoscopic properties
and fabrication parameters to arrive at the desired macroscopic performance. The
hypothesis here is that such systems theory-based approach will facilitate the
automation of an iterative design process for the final macrostructure
actuator/sensor subsystems and provide modularity and interchangeability between
different nanoscopic to macroscopic configurations.

This research project offers a promising new type of actuator/sensor
configuration that is based on dimensional changes and requires no dopant
intercalation, which tremendously increases the actuator stroke and stress
generation capabilities way above current technology. This actuator/sensor
configuration has the potential for: i) establishing some of the early
foundations for future nano-scale robotics via the utilization of nanotube-based
devices, ii) creating next generation nano-scale pumps and nano-engines via a
better understanding of the nanotube actuation mechanism, and (iii) utilization
in many scientific disciplines such as vibration control, biomedical
applications (drug delivery and tumor removal), and power generation
applications. The educational plan of this CAREER project is centered on
fostering the interdisciplinary aspects of the proposed research program through
involving high-school students, K-12 math, computer science and physics
teachers, undergraduate and graduate students. Specifically, this plan will
include new cross-disciplinary graduate course development and implementation on
nanotube-based actuators and sensors, retention and mentoring plan for
underrepresented minorities and under-privileged students through two award-
winning programs at Clemson University (PEER Program - Programs for Educational
Enrichment and Retention and the WISE Program - Women In Science and
Engineering), outreach program for secondary education through employing
inquiry-based cooperative learning program for high-school students and K-12
teachers utilizing two NSF-funded initiatives (Clemson GK-12 project and the
SMTG project of the AOP Hub of the South Carolina State Systematic Initiative),
and finally development of an academe-industry-government partnership through
Michelin Corporation and Solid State Division of the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory.