* 0238311
* PECASE: Investigation of Disease-Resistance Proteins in Flowering Plants
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Kimmen Sjolander, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2009
* USD 703,890.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: Investigation of Disease-Resistance Proteins in
Flowering Plants Institution: University of California-Berkeley

The focus of this PECASE award proposal is threefold: (1) teaching and training
in computational biology at the undergraduate and graduate levels; (2) continued
development of computational methods for problems in molecular biology, and (3)
new investigation, using these tools, into disease resistance proteins and
pathways, and their effector molecules in bacteria, viruses and fungi. The team
will apply new algorithms and software to the analysis and elucidation of key
determinants of innate immunity in flowering plants, to predict structure,
function, pathway and complex involvement, and so on, for these important
protein families. Biologist collaborators will investigate these predictions
experimentally, providing critical feedback.

Since plants cannot move to escape pathogen attack, they have developed
sophisticated strategies and defense mechanisms. Many of these strategies have
corollaries in insects and other animals, including human. Because of this,
research into plant disease resistance can be expected to produce insights that
are relevant not only for genetic engineering of new strains of plants with
improved disease resistance (and corresponding increased crop production, and
reduction of world hunger), but also to improve our understanding of innate
immunity in all eukaryotic organisms, and produce medical and pharmaceutical
advances important for human health. The biologists will provide critical
feedback, direction, and experimental validation of predictions of protein
function and structure. Software and database technologies will be developed to
enable the high-throughput classification and inclusion of new plant and
pathogen proteins as they are discovered. This synergistic collaboration is
designed to combine both hypothesis-driven and hypothesis-generating approaches
and the different domain expertise and background knowledge contained in the two
groups into a unified understanding of these important protein families and
pathways.

This project was originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a
Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in
September 2004.

