* 0238019
* CAREER:  Internet Tool for High-speed Machining Parameter Selection by Receptance Coupling Substructure Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2009
* Tony Schmitz, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 02/28/2009
* USD 435,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to obtain an improved understanding of pre-process dynamics prediction
for tool/holder/spindle/machine assemblies in high-speed machining applications,
leading to the development of an Internet-based software application. The
approach is based on substructure analysis methods where models or measurements
of individual components are combined analytically to predict the final assembly
response. The education objective is to attract students to manufacturing
careers through applied science-based research activities. An example of these
recruiting efforts is Jumbotron video presentations describing engineering
concepts in the language of football during University of Florida home football
games. Also, students will be involved in industrially relevant manufacturing
research, such as high-speed machining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
effort will lead to improved high-speed machining, which will impact many
manufacturing operations, such as aerospace manufacturing where the high
machining volume of both aluminum and titanium renders such advances important.
The ability to increase material removal rates and part quality using the
Internet-based software application should reduce reworked parts, scrap, and
cost and subsequently improve efficiency. Additionally, the education of new
manufacturing engineers will improve the infrastructure necessary for
technological advances in all research sectors.