* 0238299
* CAREER: Expecting the Unexpected: A Study of Network Vulnerabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Vishal Misra, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2008
* USD 424,790.00

This proposal is aimed at studying the resilience of the Internet. The
proposer's goal is to answer the question how easy (difficult) it is to break
(heal) current networks. Connectivity is a result of the interaction of two
mechanisms: the static topology of nodes, links, and routers and the various
protocols like routing and DNS that couple these nodes together. The research
will be a rigorous evaluation of the complex interaction of the static and
dynamic components of networks, the Internet in particular. Will also analyze
the recovery behavior of networks, i.e. once a (portion of the) network is
attacked or destroyed, how long does it take for the system to return to a state
of statistical equilibrium and how far off are the effects of the damage felt.
With the PI's prior experience in developing mathematical models for networks,
we believe the expected contributions of successful completion of our research
are:&lt;br/&gt; Dynamical models of routing mechanisms on the Internet like BGP,
OSPF, and IS-IS. &lt;br/&gt; Models for other coupling mechanism on the Internet
like DNS and various overlay routing mechanisms,&lt;br/&gt; Modeling and
analysis of the couplings between various layers of the Internet protocol
architecture&lt;br/&gt; Validation of the various models with
simulation/measurement studies; incorporation of the impact of hardware/software
implementation details into the models. &lt;br/&gt; Investigation of the
interaction of the mechanisms with real topologies.&lt;br/&gt; Development of a
mathematical theory of a "recovery index" for networks.&lt;br/&gt;The proposer
believe our efforts will greatly enhance our understanding of the resilience of
networks, and both the research as well as operational communities will benefit
with the insights gained. The research will be carried out together with a PhD
student directly funded by the grant. The PI and the PhD student will regularly
publish and give talks on results from the project. Additionally, money has been
budgeted for summer internships for undergraduates that will participate in
aspects of the project. The New York Academy of Sciences runs a summer program
called "Science Research Training Program", which is an 8 week research
internship for high school students. The PI is in touch with the program and
high school students will be mentored as part of the project under the program.
Columbia University also runs a successful outreach program for Bronx area high
schools, offering summer internships for minority and underrepresented groups
which we plan to participate in. The PI propose to conduct the simulation and
test bed evaluation component of the project with the aid of interested high
school students and undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;The PI teaches a graduate level
course on Modeling and Performance Evaluation and a senior level course on
Computer Networks on a regular basis. The analytical techniques and models that
will emerge as part of the project will be incorporated into the graduate
course. The PI has introduced a laboratory component into the undergraduate
networks course, and the testbed that is developed as part of the project will
be utilized to design novel and interesting lab exercises for the
students.&lt;br/&gt;