* 0238882
* SBIR Phase II:   Software Tools for Authoring American Sign Language
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2006
* Edward Sims, VCOM3D, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 01/31/2006
* USD 684,203.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
fully functioning prototype software tool that will allow educators,
interpreters, and linguists skilled in American Sign Language (ASL), but not in
computer 3-D animation, to create fully grammatical synthesized ASL. This
technology will provide language access for Deaf individuals to Internet web
pages and CD-ROM based media. This project builds upon the P.I.'s commercial
Sign Smith products, which were developed, in part, under an earlier NSF SBIR
grant. The current technology allows users to generate unique sentences composed
of signs that are in citation, or non-inflected form and to add facial
expressions. The resulting sign and sentence structure approximates English
grammar and therefore represents a transliteration, also known as Signed
English. Although Signed English does provide some access to digital media, the
absence of many elements of ASL grammar limits the use of the technology by the
larger segment of the Deaf population who require grammatical ASL for access.
These tools will enable the user to dynamically compose and inflect ASL signs
from parameterized components using several spatial frames of reference. These
sign types include pronouns, indicating and locative verbs, and classifier
predicates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final commercial product will be a new
integrated tool within the P.I.'s commercial Sign Smith Studio Authoring Tool.
This tool will allow educators and multimedia developers to create engaging,
grammatically correct, ASL animations for language access to digital information
on Web Pages and in CD-ROM titles. The software interface not only allows
authors to spatially inflect signs, but also it can be used to create signs as
well. This capability opens opportunities for quickly building libraries of
technical and scientific terms to be used in educational and scientific
curricula. It also affords the potential to create libraries of foreign sign
languages, therefore making it possible for the product to enter international
markets. Content can be viewed using a proprietary licensed software Player.
This product will increase access of Deaf and Hard of Hearing children and
adults to digitally based information and promote inclusive education and
employment approaches which accords with the language and intent of the New
Freedom Initiative, recent amendments to Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act
of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and Section 255 of the
Telecommunications Act. Not only does this technology have a viable commercial
market, it also has broad societal benefits for Deaf and Hard of Hearing
individuals in America and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;