* 0238515
* Microbial Observatories: Microbial Diversity of Procaryotes in Marine Sponges of the Class Demospongiae
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2003,09/30/2008
* William Fuqua, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2008
* USD 804,134.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. R. Hill of the Center of Marine Biotechnology
(COMB), University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute, to study the complex
microbial communities that live in marine sponges. Drs. F. Chen (COMB) and C.
Fuqua of Indiana University are co-investigators in this research. Molecular
techniques will be used to identify and characterize as yet undescribed microbes
in three sponge species from Key Largo, Florida and one from the Chesapeake Bay.
The stability of these bacterial communities between different individuals of
the same sponge species and at different seasons will be assessed. Typically,
less than 1% of sponge-associated microbes can currently be grown. Efforts will
be made to cultivate novel microbes shown to be present by the molecular
analysis. Culturable bacterial isolates will be screened for the production of
signaling compounds produced by the tightly-packed microbial cells within
sponges, and the role of these signaling compounds in the bacterial colonization
of sponges will be determined.

The project will advance understanding of microbial diversity and is likely to
result in discovery and cultivation of new bacterial species. The project has
significance for discovery and production of new marine bioactive compounds,
including those of pharmaceutical potential. Sponges are a prolific source of
these compounds, many of which may be produced by symbiotic bacteria. The new
methods that are developed for cultivating these sponge symbionts may be
applicable to symbionts that produce important drugs. Advances in understanding
of signaling compounds from bacteria will contribute to efforts towards
manipulating bacterial behavior by interference with signaling pathways in
industrial and medical applications. The project will address the national need
for scientists by training three graduate students and by offering two summer
courses in Marine Microbiology for minority undergraduate students.