* 0238874
* CAREER: Pathways to in situ Medication: Liposomal Encapsulation, Transport in Microchannels and Delivery via Liposomal Membrane Crumpling
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2003,12/31/2008
* Sahraoui Chaieb, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 12/31/2008
* USD 402,949.00

Abstract:

The main treatments of tumoral diseases such as cancer are radiation, which can
be damaging to healthy organs or surgery, which can be disfiguring. While with
chemotherapy only a small fraction of the administered dose reaches the site
whilst the rest is distributed throughout the body which limits the dosage and
prevents the method from achieving its function of curing. The objective of the
proposed research is to develop and study a system whereby cell-like objects
(liposomes) are filled with a drug, transported in microchannels and are
induced, by temperature, to deliver the payload at precise locations. The
project involves experimental and theoretical work at the forefront of research
on the behavior of biological materials where solid mechanics, fluid mechanics
and material sciences meet. This will be a cooperative effort with the
diagnostic group of the Hospital Products Division at Abbott Laboratories.

This problem will necessitate the creation of new directions in mechanical
sciences to treat various cases of deformation of liposomes: Instability-induced
deformation of large tubes to create small spherical vesicles. Flow induced
deformations during the transport of drug-laden liposomes and temperature-
induced deformations during the delivery of the drug. These ideas lay in the
coupling of elasticity with hydrodynamics. Experimentally we will use
fluorescence microscopy to monitor the local state of the liposomes and we will
use nano-indentation to probe mechanical properties of the liposomes. Techniques
in microfibration will be developed to study the transport of these objects in
microchannels.

This research project will be integrated with a curriculum being developed at
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign such as the newly developed
graduate program in bioengineering and the secondary option of biomechanics
newly introduced by the PI in the department of mechanics. The main interest of
this course is the study of cell and tissue mechanics where biologists are
exposed to engineering methods and engineering students are exposed to protocols
of cell biology.



