* 0238237
* CAREER:  Aging, Tooth Fracture and the Success of Restorative Dentistry
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Dwayne Arola, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 05/31/2008
* USD 412,000.00

0238237&lt;br/&gt;Arola&lt;br/&gt;Dentists generally accept that the revision
and replacement of failed restorations consumes the majority of their clinical
activities. Tooth fracture is the most detrimental form of failure and often
requires complete extraction. The fracture of restored teeth is currently one of
the primary obstacles to lifelong oral health. Recent studies reported in the
US, UK and Europe indicate that nearly 50% of the teeth in dentate adults aged
45 years and over have been restored. Therefore, in spite of a general decrease
in tooth decay among the young, dental restorations will be required and
necessitate repair more often over the next ten years. Older people today expect
longer, healthier lives and most wish for a functional and aesthetically
acceptable dentition over this period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general
hypothesis of the proposed investigation is that restored tooth fractures are
fostered by a change in the mechanical properties of dentin with aging. Dentin
is a hydrated, mineralized hard tissue that comprises the majority of the tooth
by volume. Research activities are aimed at characterizing the mechanical
behavior of dentin and correlating its fracture resistance with age utilizing a
hybrid approach. Based on preliminary studies, the fracture toughness of dentin
is expected to decrease with age of the tissue. To establish the significance of
aging on tooth fracture, double cantilever beam specimens will be prepared from
the dentin of extracted third molars according to 3 age groups. Monotonic wedge
loads will be used to initiate and sustain stable crack growth while the in-
plane displacements are monitored as a function of crack length using moire
interferometry. Full-field displacements from experiments will be used as the
benchmark solution for finite element models of the fracture process. Using an
inverse analysis the mechanics of fracture and their contribution to energy
dissipation will be obtained precisely from the numerical models. These
activities will be complemented with a microscopic analysis of the fracture
surfaces to both identify and quantify the influence of aging on the mechanisms
of fracture in dentin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities are
integrated with an educational plan that extends the impact of a new outreach
program for middle school students at the University of Maryland Baltimore
County(UMBC). Students who wish to further explore their interests in science
will continue as Research Scholars and engage in biomedical research within the
PI's laboratory during a 6-week summer program. The educational objectives are
to increase participation of underrepresented minorities from Maryland's schools
in dentistry and engineering, and promote oral health and science through
organized visits from the Research Scholars and their mentors to 7th and 8th
grade classrooms in Baltimore's schools. The educational program is supported by
a partnership between UMBC, the University of Maryland Dental School and the
Meyerhoff Scholars Program. Undergraduate and graduate students in Mechanical
Engineering and students from Dentistry will jointly mentor the Research
Scholars with their investigations. The Meyerhoff Program will provide
professional development activities and introduce the young Scholars to
biomedical research in other departments through an undergraduate seminar
series. &lt;br/&gt;