* 0238137
* CAREER: Synthetic Models of Nitrile Hydratase to Elucidate Electronic and Second Coordination Sphere Effects
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Craig Grapperhaus, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 01/31/2009
* USD 474,538.00

This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Prof. Craig A. Grapperhaus at the University of Louisville
to evaluate the potential roles of sulfur site oxygenation in the enzyme nitrile
hydratase. This enzyme catalyzes the hydration of nitriles to amides by using
iron in a non-redox role. A series of complexes that: (1) serve as an effective
structural and electronic mimic of the active site, (2) contain two thiolate
sulfurs cis to the substrate binding site that are reactive with oxygen, and (3)
are easily modified with respect to the exogenous, sixth ligand and
incorporation of second-coordination sphere functionalities on the ligand
framework will be developed. If successful, this study will not only further the
understanding of nitrile hydratase leading to the design of functional mimics,
but will also serve the fundamental goal of developing and understanding sulfur-
site reactivity and its ramifications on the properties and reactivity of a
coordinated metal.

The educational goals are focused on increasing undergraduate research
participation as a means to increase student retention, graduation rates, and
interest in graduate school in this traditionally under-performing region. This
approach focuses on four key components: a formal Undergraduate Research Mentor
Program to address local concerns, a regional, annual undergraduate research
symposium, the involvement of undergraduate students in the proposed research
and outreach to regional undergraduate institutions through site visits each
semester.

This research focuses on the design of metal complexes to understand sulfur-site
reactivity in an important enzyme. This will aid the development of functional
models for the industrially and environmentally important conversion of nitriles
to amides. The project will also increase the participation of undergraduates in
research as a way to increase student interest in science.