* 0238392
* CAREER:  Using Portfolios to Promote Knowledge Integration in Engineering Education
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2010
* Jennifer Turns, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 12/31/2010
* USD 532,503.00

The central idea of the proposed work is to explore portfolio creation as a
means of promoting (and studying) knowledge integration by engineering students.
The portfolio activities will build on existing strengths of the engineering
curriculum by providing students with opportunities to reflect on their
accomplishments, see and articulate connections between engineering and their
accomplishments, and develop more integrated conceptual structures associated
with engineering. Three objectives are to (1) document the nature of engineering
students' conceptual structures in their engineering discipline, with specific
attention to how integrated the conceptual structures are, (2) use what is known
about portfolios in education to develop an intervention that makes it possible
for engineering students to document and refine their conceptual structures in
engineering, and (3) identify the learning affordances and cognitive challenges
associated with the intervention. The work will be accomplished through a
longitudinal study and a series of classroom studies. In the longitudinal study,
two student cohorts will be set up in which each student will develop one
portfolio per year of participation. Longitudinal study participants will
construct portfolios as part of participation in an extracurricular program. In
the classroom studies, the effects of portfolio construction will be explored in
the context of individual courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education plan
builds on the portfolio and knowledge integration emphases of the work. The plan
includes commitments to: a) continue using portfolio assignments in the PI's
courses, b) support portfolio development by faculty and students interested in
portfolios, c) provide mentoring/research experiences for undergraduates, and d)
create teaching modules that build on the portfolios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
terms of the broader impacts of the project underrepresented minorities will be
over-sampled from the available student populations. The portfolios will
represent a unique and useful information source for employers, students, and
others with interest in engineering education. Also, the impact of the work will
be on the engineering graduates who are better prepared to contribute to the
engineering profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Engineering
Education &amp; Centers (ENG/EEC) has agreed to co-fund this project.
&lt;br/&gt;