* 0238602
* Acquisition of a Piston and Cylinder Apparatus to Expand the Capabilities of the UAF Experimental Petrology Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Jessica Larsen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2005
* USD 40,261.00

0238602&lt;br/&gt;Larsen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UAF Experimental Petrology
Laboratory is currently capable of performing experiments at conditions
characteristic of shallow crustal magma chambers, to depths of ~20km (at T ~850
degrees C) and temperatures to ~1100 degrees C (at P ~200 MPa). Funds from this
grant will support the acquisition of a piston-cylinder apparatus that will
enable us to perform experiments on crust and mantle-relevant compositions at
pressures up to ~4000 MPa and temperatures to ~2000 degrees C. Currently, many
researchers rely upon this type of apparatus to address important questions
relevant to understanding volcanic and tectonic processes, such as melt
generation in the mantle at subduction zones and mid-oceanic ridges, cation and
anion diffusion rates and element partitioning between minerals and melts, phase
equilibria of important deep crustal and mantle minerals, and studies on
materials appropriate for other planetary environments. The acquisition of the
piston-cylinder apparatus will serve an important purpose in extending the range
of experiments possible on existing NSF supported projects within the
volcanology group at the UAF Geophysical Institute. In addition, it will open
the door for those interested in other aspects of high-pressure research on
crustal and mantle rocks relevant to the Earth, as well as other planetary
systems. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;