* 0238354
* CAREER: The Assessment of Extinction Risk from Deleterious Mutation, Habitat Fragmentation, and Environmental Change
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2009
* Kevin Higgins, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 03/31/2009
* USD 630,000.00

Extinction is controlled by habitat destruction, disease, harvest, birth rate
and the genetic health of a population, among other factors. This study uses
high-performance supercomputing to realistically simulate the forces on natural
populations to understand which types of wildlife are most likely to face
extinction. To ensure that the project produces new knowledge of practical
importance on the causes of extinction, and new computational tools that will be
useful to managers of natural populations, the project will work closely with
Native American and Federal salmon biologists in the Pacific Northwest and
population biologists in Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is wide recognition
that life on Earth is undergoing a sixth major extinction event caused by human
generated forces. Preventing extinction has been a high priority of people for
many years. This project will help conserve natural systems by discovering new
scientific knowledge on the causes of extinction. Most previous theoretical work
on extinction focused on only one or two extinction forces at a time, for
reasons of mathematical tractability. However, the multiplicity of forces
controlling the fate of natural populations are inexorably
intertwined,&lt;br/&gt;operating simultaneously and synergistically. This
innovative project seeks to understand how extinction is governed by the
interplay of these forces by using mechanistic computer models that capture
essential levels of environmental and biological complexity.&lt;br/&gt;