* 0238929
* CAREER: Processing and Development of a New Ultra-Light High-Strength Material
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2010
* Afsaneh Rabiei, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 03/31/2010
* USD 458,250.00

This Early Faculty Career (CAREER) development plan will address the increasing
needs of the aerospace, naval, automotive, medical and other industries for
advanced materials to provide the lightweight and high strength components. A
new high strength ultra-light material will be developed, processed, and tested.
This research is divided into three main tasks: (1) new closed cell metallic
foam with a uniform cell structure will be processed using preform hollow
spheres. This will lead to an improvement of the cyclic lifetime of the
material. (2) Fiber reinforced metal matrix preform wires will be embedded into
the new foam structure with the goal of providing higher strength materials. (3)
The new fiber reinforced metallic foam will be mechanically tested and its
deformation behavior will be mapped. At this stage if the properties of the
material need any improvement, the processing techniques will be tailored to
address those issues. The results will be presented in a variety of conferences
and workshops.

The education plan for this project involves four complementary initiatives: (1)
Collaboration with international universities to expose the students to
international issues. (2) Course development in advanced materials, including
metallic foaming presented over the Internet for distance learning purposes. (3)
Recruiting underrepresented and/or female students in local colleges and high
schools. (4) Undergraduate students will become involved in this research
through an undergraduate Independent Research Project course. Graduate students
will be involved in coordinating the undergraduate research course and it will
contribute to the integration of undergraduate and graduate education. The
research project will work towards developing collaborations, new teaching
courses, presentations and seminars to strengthen not only the knowledge of the
participants, but also the broader audiences. The technical outcome of this work
is on producing new ultra-light, high-strength materials that eventually will
benefit the society through great impact on improved fuel economy, energy
consumption, safety and reduced maintenance of moving structures