* 0238550
* CAREER: Efficient Resource Management and Multi-Access Protocols for Bursty Traffic Over Wireless Networks: A Cross-Layer Design Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Junshan Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2009
* USD 428,525.00

Recent years have witnessed a tremendous growth in the demand for ubiquitous
information access. Current wireless networks, however, are still far from
meeting this demand. A central problem in the design of wireless systems is how
to efficiently transmit bursty multimedia traffic over wireless links. It is
expected that developing network-level solutions that take advantage of the
interplay between the communication channel and the upper protocol layers would
yield significant performance gains. Optimal design across multiple layers opens
a new promising area with many design issues unresolved. It is therefore of
vital importance to develop theory and methodology that help propel significant
advances and lead to revolutionary breakthroughs in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI proposes to take a cross-
layer design approach to devising a suite of resource allocation and multi-
access schemes, aiming to establish a comprehensive framework for transmitting
bursty traffic over fading channels. The proposed research is centered around
two areas: 1) bursty traffic over CDMA: a key goal of this thrust is to obtain
overriding principles for cross-layer optimization of bursty traffic
transmissions in interference-limited systems; and 2) "opportunistic" access
control for bursty traffic: this thrust aims at a deep understanding of how to
exploit traffic information for novel access control in opportunistic
communication systems (which are basically TDMA systems equipped with
opportunistic scheduling). A common thread encountered throughout is to
"exploit" (rather than "combat") traffic burstiness and channel variation. The
two thrusts are outlined as follows:&lt;br/&gt;1) Bursty traffic transmission in
CDMA networks: Building on the PI's recent finding that the multi-access
interference (MAI) is long-range dependent, the PI will&lt;br/&gt; a. conduct a
comprehensive study on the MAI long-range dependence and identify the predictive
MAI structure, and exploit the MAI structure to develop efficient measurement-
based interference prediction. The impact of traffic burstiness, fading, and
feedback delay will be examined;&lt;br/&gt; b. utilize interference prediction
to explore efficient resource allocation and access control.&lt;br/&gt;2) Bursty
traffic transmission in opportunistic communication systems: The PI
will:&lt;br/&gt; a. investigate traffic-aided admission control for
opportunistic communication systems;&lt;br/&gt; b. devise innovative
opportunistic scheduling for streaming multimedia to exploit multi-user
diversity gain embedded in both channel variation and traffic
burstiness.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;