* 0238167
* CAREER:    Ru and Cu Amido Complexes:    Aryl Coupling, C-H Activation and C-N Multiple Bond Metathesis Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2003,04/30/2008
* Thomas Gunnoe, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 04/30/2008
* USD 486,000.00

This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Dr. T. Brent Gunnoe of North Carolina State University to
exploit low valent ruthenium and copper amido complexes to break and form bonds
in transformations involving C-H and C-N bonds. For example, biaryl moieties are
prevalent in an array of important compounds including natural products (e.g.,
terpenes, lignanes, flavonoids, coumarins, tannins and various alkaloids) as
well as compounds for nonlinear optics, helical polymers, liquid crystals,
ligands for asymmetric catalysis and for use in redox reactions. The leading
methods for preparation of biaryl linkages involve cross coupling between aryl
halogen and organometallic aryl species; however, such reactions often suffer
from the requirement of multi-step syntheses of aryl halide and aryl
organometallic reagents, and, in some cases, the use of organometallic aryl
compounds results in the stoichiometric production of toxic byproducts. The
proposed chemistry seeks to study the details of ruthenium and copper-mediated
C-C coupling reactions that proceed via cleavage of C-H bonds. Oxidation of
well-defined ruthenium and copper amido complexes promotes such reactions, and
both detailed mechanistic studies and possible extension to catalytic sequences
will be pursued. In addition, the synthesis of polymers that contain
heteroatomic functionality is of current interest due to the ability to control
macroscopic properties. Ruthenium amido complexes have been used to cleave C-N
multiple bonds, and the proposed chemistry will explore these reactions in
detail including possible extension to polymerization methodologies.

The teaching plan describes a range of activities in both undergraduate and
graduate instruction including revision of the departmental curriculum and upper
level courses, working toward increased research opportunities for
undergraduates, and integration of a program into the graduate curriculum that:
(1) incorporates a graduate student-based outreach program to schools (grades
6th - 8th) whose populations are comprised primarily of groups that are
underrepresented in the sciences (2) exposes graduate students to current topics
of research ethics and (3) provides graduate students with a guided teaching
experience.

The proposed chemistry seeks to exploit the reactivity of metal complexes for
the construction of small organic molecules that form the foundation for many
useful products. The teaching plan involves both undergraduate and graduate
instruction including revision of the departmental curriculum and upper level
courses, increasing research opportunities for undergraduates and outreach to
local schools.