* 0238908
* CAREER: Integrating Geoscience Research on the Neogene of the Dominican Republic with the Science Education of Dominican-American Teachers and Students in New York City
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Ross Nehm, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 11/30/2007
* USD 453,669.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beginning with his undergraduate thesis (Nehm and
Geary, 1994), and continuing with his doctoral dissertation (Nehm, 1998), the PI
has been developing the marginellid gastropod genera Prunum and Volvarina as
model macroevolutionary research systems (Nehm, 2001a, b, c,&lt;br/&gt;d).
Previous NSF funding (NSF Dissertation Improvement Grant and NSF
International&lt;br/&gt;Postdoctoral Fellowship) has facilitated the PI's
construction of systematic, phylogenetic, and&lt;br/&gt;paleontological
foundations for his research program on evolution and development in tropical
American (primarily Dominican Neogene) gastropods. This CAREER proposal will
employ this well developed research system to explore new questions in
evolutionary-developmental paleontology. Specifically, this study will be one of
the first to analyze patterns and processes of shell microstructural composition
and development through speciation events in the fossil record.&lt;br/&gt;The
morphometric comparison of size and shape is the most common approach to
studying evolution and development in paleontology. This approach does not
elucidate the patterns and processes by which morphological structures are
constructed. Additionally, although structures may be similar in size or shape,
they can be constructed of different compositional materials or the same
materials in different spatial arrangements. Although similarity in size and
shape does not necessarily indicate constructional or compositional similarity,
such similarity is being used as the primary criterion for determining the mode
of developmental evolution in fossil invertebrates. Research is critically
needed in order to determine if shape-space similarity (or difference) coincides
with structural and constructional homogeneity. Although many investigations of
evolutionary changes in developmental timing (heterochrony) in fossils have
characterized morphological change in size and shape, they have failed to
investigate the composition and construction of these morphological
structures.&lt;br/&gt;Conclusions about the processes that produce developmental
evolution may be incomplete or inaccurate if we exclude information on how
morphological structures are constructed during ontogeny and what they are made
of. For these reasons, constructional morphology has great potential in
expanding our understanding of both patterns and processes of invertebrate
developmental evolution. Few (if any) invertebrate paleontological studies have
examined this question. This CAREER grant will permit the PI to continue his
research program and integrate morphometric analyses with constructional
morphological studies of developmental evolution in the fossil record using
marginellid gastropods.&lt;br/&gt;The PI has also been involved in science
education research and science teacher preparation for the past two years at
Columbia University (Nehm, 2001e). The educational component of this CAREER
grant will integrate the PI's Geoscience research on the Neogene of the
Dominican Republic (DR) with the science education of Dominican-American
teachers and students in New York City (NYC). Two broad goals are to: (1)
increase the quality of Geoscience education in District 6, NYC, and (2)
increase minority participation in Geoscience research. This project will
involve K-12 science teachers in DR Geoscience research, fieldwork, and the
development of educational modules for use in Dominican-American dominated
classrooms in&lt;br/&gt;District 6. The PI is well suited for this project
because his new position as Assistant Professor involves joint appointments in
the Dept. of Biology and the School of Education (Science&lt;br/&gt;Education
division) at the City College, C.U.N.Y. City College is located near the largest
concentration of Dominican Americans in the U.S. The PI's experience with
paleobiological research on the DR Neogene, his previous involvement in teacher
education, and his location near a Dominican American community with extensive
ties to the Dominican Republic provides a unique opportunities to increase
minority participation in the geosciences, improve the quality of teacher
preparation, and develop culturally-relevant science modules on the Dominican
Republic for District 6.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Americas Program of the Office
of International Science and Engineering is contributing the funds to support
the costs associated with the international travel/collaboration component of
this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;