* 0238407
* Microbial Observatories: Collaborative Research: Kamchatka, a Geothermal Microbial Observatory
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2003,01/31/2010
* Douglas Crowe, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 01/31/2010
* USD 843,450.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Wiegel, Crowe, and Romanek (University of
Georgia Research Foundation), Robb (University of Maryland Biotechnology
Institute) and Cady (Portland State University) to establish a unique
interdisciplinary, international microbial observatory to explore the exciting
microbial world in remote volcanic and geothermal areas of the Kamchatka
Peninsula, Siberia (Russia). The geological situation is unique, due to the
unusual concentration of active volcanoes and geothermal areas at a low
altitude, features that are different from the geothermal features at
Yellowstone National Park. The pristine location allows performing work that
cannot be done in the Yellowstone National Park. The primary goal of this
observatory is to find novel microorganisms, to elucidate the microbial
communities and subsequently characterize their phylogeny, biochemical,
microbiological, and biotechnological properties. Unusual biogeochemical
processes have been described in the Uzon Caldera, and the microbial communities
may be different from other geothermal areas. The presence of many novel
microorganisms is indicated by preliminary results. This will extend our
knowledge about the diversity of microorganisms in extreme conditions, and how
nutrients are cycled through the different microbial communities along
temperature and nutrient gradients. Microbiological and geochemical research
will combine in addressing some of the most rigorous terrestrial conditions
under which novel microbial communities exist, which may give insights into
extraterrestrial life.&lt;br/&gt; In addition to producing academically
important data, this grant will contribute significantly to the
interdisciplinary training of students contributing to the cadre of future
researchers who will address the new field of biogeochemistry. The project will
increase international cooperation and understanding between people from
different cultural and political systems, and will lead to the discovery of
microorganisms with high potential for various industrial applications.
Furthermore the strong outreach component of this project will inform the
general public about the existence and importance of unique regions such as
Kamchatka. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;