* 0238523
* CAREER: Real Time Digital Simulation Methodology for Next-Generation Distributed Energy Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Kai Strunz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 01/31/2008
* USD 418,000.00

The Gas Research Institute predicts that by the year 2030 distributed
generation, including fuel cells, wind energy converters and micro turbines,
will capture about 30 % of the energy market. This will result in a
transformation from a centralized toward a distributed energy system
infrastructure. It is expected that the proposed research on real time
simulation methodology will be of significant value for the demonstration of the
feasibility of this transformation and for key tasks such as research, design,
analysis, testing of equipment, and protection of the next-generation energy
systems. The combination of efficient formulation of parallel and sequential
equation solving, automatic generation and adaptation of numerical methods for
the diverse characteristics of distributed energy systems, exact tracking of
power electronic switching, and modular modeling of energy systems will
constitute the core of the proposed simulation methodology. The critical
problems of today's electromagnetic transients simulators concerning the
simulation of diverse waveforms and discontinuities will be solved and dramatic
improvements of computational accuracy and speed are expected. The research
results will be integrated in a novel course. To achieve effective teaching and
learning, the proposer will start new initiatives: support of underrepresented
minority students, international experience of students, innovative
interdisciplinary bridging of curricula and communities, industry-guided course
delivery, and modular research activity decomposition for active undergraduate
involvement. The proposer expects to reignite student interest in the
fascinating field of energy systems and make student motivation a decisive
factor for the success of this project.