* 0238539
* CAREER: Human Dimensions to Marine Resource Utilization in the Solomon Islands: Fostering Pacific Island Student Participation in Research and Educational Activities
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Shankar Aswani, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2009
* USD 411,109.00

0238539 Aswani Customary sea tenure occurs when identifiable groups of people
have rights to access resources that are in principle excludable, transferable,
and enforceable. This CAREER project is a five-year study that integrates
research on customary sea tenure institutions and marine resource utilization in
New Georgia, Solomon Islands, with a long-term educational program designed to
include American students of Pacific Island descent in research and educational
activities. The research focuses on key socio-cultural, economic, political,
environmental, and historical factors that affect human common property regimes.
The project will assess the major historical, social, cultural, economic, and
political conditions of customary sea tenure institutions in the region. This
will include the historical, social, political, economic, demographic, and
ecological factors that may allow some institutions to succeed and others to
fail in terms of environmental sustainability, social equity, and institutional
endurance. The institutional conditions best suited to adapt to contemporary
demographic, economic, political and social changes will be analyzed. Studying
the dynamics of common property institutions and the factors that enhance
cooperation amongst social actors in this case study will advance our
understanding of the conditions that encourage stakeholders to protect their
marine resources. The broader impacts of this research, aside from advancing the
career of a young social scientist, will be its value to conservationists and
policy makers in the Pacific Region. The new knowledge created by the project
will to help them understand which sea-tenure programs are likely to generate
successful management programs and which are likely to fail, which will help
them to formulate fisheries management initiatives like marine protected areas
(MPAs). The educational component of this research also has broad implications.
The involvement of Pacific Island students, a group that is often
underrepresented in the sciences and humanities, will give participants training
in qualitative and quantitative methods that expand across disciplinary
boundaries. This training will be invaluable for the participants' future
research careers in science, and will enhance the participants' environmental
awareness and education.