* 0238848
* CAREER:  Toward Efficient Evolutionary Algorithm Methodologies for Surface Water Systems Management
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2010
* Laura Harrell, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 06/30/2010
* USD 400,000.00

0238848 Harrell Intellectual Merit. The main theme of the proposed work is
investigation of innovative evolutionary algorithm (EA) techniques for
constrained problems and reliability-based problems related to surface water
systems management, and development of guidelines for EA techniques that show
promise of general applicability to surface water systems analysis. Development
of new techniques and guidelines for efficient, effective and widely applicable
methodologies will enhance the state-of-the-art methodologies in evolutionary
algorithms for applications to complex surface water resources and environmental
systems management problems.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The development of
guidelines for widely applicable, efficient methodologies for surface water
systems analysis problems will make broad contributions in the areas of
evolutionary computing and water resources and environmental systems management.
An interactive educational module will be developed for graduate students for
exploring genetic algorithms, including constraint-handling techniques, for
water resources systems analysis applications. This module will be distributed
to other educators, creating a broader impact on researchers and teachers in the
areas of systems analysis, genetic algorithms, and water resources management.
The elementary educational modules developed will provide learning materials and
interactive tools to introduce young students to exciting applications in water
resources and environmental management. The published details of these modules
will provide a broad impact on elementary education.&lt;br/&gt;