* 0238533
* CAREER: Research and Education in Renewable Distributed Generation Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Michael Ropp, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 12/31/2009
* USD 417,980.00

The United States is experiencing increasing difficulties with its electricity
supply infrastructure. Distributed generation (DG) can play a large role in
solving these problems and provide other benefits as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal details a five-year faculty career
development plan in DG technology. The research plan concentrates on: 1)
development of novel power conversion systems; and 2) development of a
comprehensive computer model of a power system with a high connection density of
distributed generators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of the
plan includes: 1) enhancement of an existing photovoltaics course; 2)
development of a wind energy course; 3) curriculum-wide use of the systems
approach; 4) integration of research-related systems into design projects for
undergraduate courses; and 5) development of a mini-course on renewable energy
for South Dakota's Native American citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
meets criterion 1, intellectual merit, because: a) the work involves novel
engineering design, and scientific exploration of an uninvestigated area; b) the
PI is qualified in this area; c) the work is of importance to several fields
within Electrical Engineering; d) the work plan and resource needs are clearly
stated and lead to the desired goals; and e) the needed resources are
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal meets criterion 2, broader impact,
because it includes: a) development of new educational materials; b) the
involvement of an underrepresented group, specifically Native Americans; c)
specific plans for partnerships between investigators, national laboratories,
and industry; d) a plan to broadly disseminate results; and e) significant
benefits to society at large.&lt;br/&gt;