* 0238654
* CAREER: Enhancing Conceptual Design Using Multi-Objective, Dynamically Encoded Genetic Algorithms to Optimize Structural Toplogy, Geometry, and Size
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Anne Raich, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 08/31/2007
* USD 488,600.00

This CAREER award supports research efforts focused on assisting designers in
exploring and exploiting design alternatives during conceptual design. A
conceptual design system will be developed that can be teamed with designers to
create, evaluate, and optimize diverse design alternatives. A design grammar for
representing complex, large-scale roof system design alternatives will be
developed in collaboration with professional engineers and implemented using a
specialized genetic algorithm (GA) that dynamically encodes the design
variables. To assist in exploring design alternatives, a GA-based multi-
objective (MO) method will be developed that obtains the s-Pareto frontier
within a single trial for designs having different structural configurations. To
select the best design from the s-Pareto set, a Kohonen neural network will be
used to capture the user's design preferences. This research will significantly
enhance a designer's ability to design efficient and novel structures and will
influence the way designers conceptualize the design process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER educational activities seek to provide students
with the skills and experience desired by their future employers. A new senior
capstone design course will allow architectural and civil engineering students
to collaborate on realistic problems defined by professional engineers. A new
graduate course in heuristic methods will meet the demand for training
interdisciplinary engineers to solve complex optimization problems. In addition,
experiential learning modules will be added to undergraduate courses. The
educational activities benefit students by increasing their knowledge of design
and optimization, strengthening their understanding of structural behavior, and
better preparing them to become future design innovators. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;