* 0238485
* CAREER:  Using Multimedia Digital Technology to Advance Understanding of the Achievement Motivation and the Life Stories of Successful African American Scientists
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Cynthia Winston, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 01/31/2009
* USD 799,997.00

The primary goal of the proposed project is to use digital technology to
construct the life stories of successful African American STEM professors at
Howard University, the largest producer of African American STEM Ph.D.s in the
nation, in order to develop psychological theory about motivation and
achievement. It can be argued that, within the field of psychology, research on
the achievement motivation of African Americans has failed to yield consistent
support for existing achievement motivation theories, suggesting that new
achievement motivation theory development is warranted. Although life stories
have been widely used in psychology to understand complex self and identity
processes, life stories have not been used to generate new knowledge about the
achievement motivation of African Americans, a group for whom identity,
particularly identity related to race, is extremely complex and not well
understood. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will be carried out using an
integrated education and research model developed by the investigator to
cultivate synergistic and sustained research collaborations between electrical
engineering and psychology researchers at Howard University. A multimedia
digital technology research and learning laboratory will be established. Within
this research and learning laboratory, engineering and psychology faculty and
students will collaborate on the development of new life story data collection,
processing, analysis, and dissemination. This model is structured not only to
facilitate an increase in understanding of the achievement motivation and life
stories of African Americans in STEM, but also advance the research and
mentoring training of graduate and undergraduate students at Howard University.
Moreover, it is a model that can be replicated within other institutions,
disciplines, and research projects. &lt;br/&gt;Among the potential broad impacts
of the project is the development of research instrumentation, analysis, and
findings, which will be disseminated in peer review engineering and psychology
journals. In addition, plans call for the life stories to be disseminated
broadly to teachers, parents, and educators through the National Science Digital
Library (NSDL) and will be archived at the Howard University Moorland Spingarn
Research Center (MSRC) for use by scholars who study African Americans.
Collectively, the integrated education and research activities of the project
will build a firm foundation for the early career development of the
investigator and would facilitate the establishment of a national center of
research on African American success in science at Howard University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;