* 0238663
* CAREER:   Mixed-Integer Nonlinear Programming Approaches for Hydrogen Production Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Edward Gatzke, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2009
* USD 474,859.00

Research:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the United States makes the transition to a
hydrogen economy, various technical challenges must be met. For vehicle fuel
cell applications, a need exists for efficient production of hydrogen from
liquid fuels. Liquid fuel reformer methods for hydrogen production must consider
thermal interaction, startup procedures, and operating condition changes before
these systems can become a truly viable energy alternative. Efficient operation
often requires that chemical processing systems work well in different operating
conditions and/or close to safety limitations. Chemical reaction systems may
exhibit varied dynamic behavior based on the current operating conditions
(nonlinear dynamics) and can sometimes switch to qualitatively different modes
of operation (hybrid dynamics). This project considers nonlinear hybrid dynamic
systems and with process safety constraints. The proposed methods require
computational solution of difficult numerical optimization problems involving
unknown variables that may take either continuous or integer values (mixed-
integer optimization). Specifically, development and application of
deterministic mixed-integer nonlinear optimization techniques for nonlinear
process control applied to hydrogen production systems are considered.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also examines integration of research and
education in the development of research-related educational tools and student
programs with student impact at both the national and local level. Process
control educational software will be developed for national dissemination. A
cross-disciplinary undergraduate process control laboratory will be developed
using a collaborative research-based environment. Here, enrollment would be
encouraged from an existing National Science Foundation sponsored undergraduate
research communication studio and student groups not normally drawn to systems
engineering careers such as the Society of Women Engineers and National Society
of Black Engineers. Finally, an outreach program will be started with graduate
students presenting engineering demonstrations in area high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development and application
of methods for improved operation of hydrogen production systems may have broad
societal impact, aiding the transition to a hydrogen economy by improving system
efficiency and speeding adoption of new technologies. In support of improved
hydrogen production operation, development of novel chemical process control
methods for complex nonlinear dynamic systems will be considered. Development of
these concepts may have lasting effects across the chemical industry, in
addition to improved hydrogen production system operation. Finally, development
of improved general purpose deterministic mixed integer nonlinear programming
solution methods may have impact across scientific and engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;