* 0238038
* CAREER: Networks with Multiple Transport Mechanisms
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Yang Yang, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2009
* USD 424,889.00

This project will perform a systematic analysis and design of a network with
heterogeneous transport mechanisms. Specifically, the proposer perform the
following tasks. First, by mapping all transport mechanisms into the same
function space, the proposer will compare the bandwidth received by different
transport mechanisms, under different router mechanisms. The following research
tasks will be carried out:&lt;br/&gt;1. Will propose and investigate the
effectiveness of router mechanisms to control the difference of the bandwidth
received by two transport mechanisms. Instead of designing router mechanisms
with indirect objectives, will use optimal control to design them. &lt;br/&gt;2.
Second, by using stochastic differential equations to model aggregated flow
dynamics, will analyze the stability and performance of such heterogeneous
networks. Will analyze the effects of the mixture of flows on network stability
and performance. Will investigate the effectiveness of using adaptive control to
control a network with unknown or changing flow dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;3. Third,
will design an end-to-end priority scheme using different transport. This scheme
is flexible and deployable because it does not involve modifications to the
routers. We will implement applications to demonstrate the usage. &lt;br/&gt;4.
Fourth, will investigate the transport issues in mobile ad-hoc networks, where
the limiting resources will be not only bandwidth as in wired network but also
energy. Furthermore, such resources will be managed by mobile nodes that will be
selfish. Applying an integrated optimization and game-theoretic approach, will
investigate heterogeneous transport systems for mobile ad-hoc networks.
&lt;br/&gt;5. Fifth, will also evaluate the effects of application requirements
and application adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be
integrated in an educational plan which seeks to involve graduate and
undergraduate students in the research effort. The PI will also a new class on
system modeling and analysis, and add new instructional materials to two courses
on computer networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;