* 0238967
* CAREER: Development of an Integrated Millimeter-wave Fourier Transform Spectrometer for Detection and Identification of DNA
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Nicolas Barker, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

0238967&lt;br/&gt;Barker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent trends in the proliferation
of biological warfare agents in addition to the obvious willingness of terrorist
organizations to attack non-combatants has increased the need for a portable
detection and identification device. Current methods for detection of biological
warfare agents use sensors that detect binding of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
and identification requires prior knowledge of the DNA of interest.
Unfortunately, these techniques may not be capable of detecting those biological
warfare agents that have been genetically altered. In addition, the search for
life on other planets would greatly benefit from the development of a device
that is capable of detecting the presence of DNA without relying on the use of
biochemical reagents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent investigations at the
University of Virginia have demonstrated that DNA has&lt;br/&gt;numerous
resonant modes in the millimeter and submillimeter-wave frequency range (30-3000
GHz). These resonant modes have been investigated using Fourier transform
spectroscopy and it has been discovered that the position and strengths of these
vibrational modes are sensitive to the specific structure of the DNA. Thus, it
is possible through the tabulation of the frequency response of relevant DNA
sequences to detect and identify DNA by spectroscopic measurements in the
millimeter and submillimeter-wave frequency range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary focus of this CAREER proposal is to investigate the possibility of
integrating the interferometer of a millimeter-wave Fourier-transform
spectrometer on a single chip. This will be made possible through the
application of microelectromechanical system (MEMS) devices to the development
of a true-time delay phase shifter. Specifically, a multibit distributed MEMS
transmission line phase shifter will be developed from 100-200 GHz and
integrated with a set of Lange couplers to form the integrated interferometer.
This chip will be assembled with a broadband frequency source and a detector
that are being developed by other researchers at the University of
Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Virginia chapter of the
National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE) has an active community outreach
program called the "Garret Square Program." This program seeks to positively
impact the community by having students share of themselves and their knowledge
with the children of Garret Square, a public housing development in downtown
Charlottesville. Through this program, the students hope to instill self-worth,
academic excellence, and a sense of community by serving as role models. The
outreach focus of this CAREER proposal is to develop an interactive multimedia
demonstration that can be used by the NSBE in the Garret Square Program. The
demonstration will cover the search for life on other planets and the use of
MEMS systems such as the integrated Fourier-
transform&lt;br/&gt;spectrometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;