* 0238765
* CAREER:    Study of E-waste Environmental Hazards and Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Yadong Li, Jackson State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 06/30/2009
* USD 420,398.00

0238765 Li The rapidly growing electronic waste (E-waste) stream consisting of
such items as obsolete computers, TVs, printers, and cell phones has raised an
unprecedented challenge for environmental protection. E-waste already
constitutes 2-5% of the municipal solid waste (MSW) in the U.S., and its volume
is increasing three times faster than the MSW stream. Most components in the
E-waste stream contain toxic substances including heavy metals and halogenated
organics. Currently, the majority of E-waste is either stored in homes and
offices waiting for disposal or dumped in landfills without proper treatment.
This poses potential hazards to human health and the environment. The objectives
of this project are to quantify the leaching potential of the toxicants from the
popular components in the E-waste stream and to develop a high-pressure
compaction pretreatment method for reducing their leaching toxicity. Extensive
experimental study, theoretical analysis and modeling will be included.
Integration of education and research activity is emphasized in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;The implementation of this project will result in significant
new knowledge and data on the potential hazards of E-waste. The experimental
methods, models, and theories developed through this project will be valuable
for researchers and legislators to understand the mechanism of E-waste pollution
and to develop environmentally-sound E-waste management systems This project
will provide an excellent education and training opportunity for students of all
levels from K-12 to graduate and will greatly enhance the engineering education
at one of the nation's largest historically black colleges and universities
(HBCUs) Jackson State University (JSU). JSU is also an EPSCoR institution
designated by NSF. The majority of JSU students are African Americans who are
underrepresented, especially in engineering education and practice. The School
of Engineering at JSU was just launched in fall 2000 and currently has only two
departments. This project will help strengthen the newborn engineering program
at JSU and attract minority students to participate in engineering education.
The new environmental labs will be enhanced and the engineering courses will be
enriched by integrating the research and teaching and by incorporating the
findings of this project in the syllabi and lectures. The dissemination of the
findings of this project will raise the awareness of the public and promote
environmentally conscious practices in handling E-waste to benefit society at
large.&lt;br/&gt;