* 0238121
* CAREER:    Watersheds and Fisheries as Foci of Human Impacts and Ecological Responses:    A Research and Teaching Agenda
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2010
* Karin Limburg, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2010
* USD 605,750.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Karin Limburg's five-year CAREER award will
establish a highly integrated and interdisciplinary research and education plan
to develop research and learning experiences in settled watersheds and connected
receiving waters (including fresh, brackish, and coastal marine). Guiding
thematic questions include the role of societal drivers in land use change, how
such change affects watershed ecosystems and especially their receiving waters,
how altered watersheds and receiving waters affect fish habitat and fisheries,
and how we can determine thresholds in metastable ecosystems beyond which they
will undergo a change to an alternate stable state, particularly one that is
inimical to society and ecosystem services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Limburg
proposes a bold agenda for integrating ecosystem science with fisheries and
societal drivers in linked teaching and research projects. The programmatic
theme that unifies the elements is watershed science, which is emerging as a
major focus at SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry (ESF). All of
these questions are ones the PI has begun to work on, but for which much remains
to be done. The PI's expertise in fisheries, ecosystem analysis and ecological
economics will be brought to bear and further developed by collaborative
projects, teaching, mentoring, and workshops. The proposed program will
interface well with extant ESF programs in Hydrosystems Science, Fisheries and
Aquatic Science, Ecological Economics, and Urban Ecology. By working with the
Department Chair and a suite of mentors both internal and external to ESF, the
PI will assess the success of the program in its ability to produce meaningful,
life-long learning and scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Too often today,
research and teaching are splintered into narrow disciplines, and as a
consequence, students and researchers often find it difficult to deal with
complex environmental problems. This program will enable a new generation of
interdisciplinary scientists to be trained in a combination of a wide array of
subjects, including fish migration, the use of biochemical markers and
ecological economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;