* 0238301
* CAREER:  The Listening Machine - Sound Source Organization for Multimedia Understanding
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2009
* Daniel Ellis, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2009
* USD 499,897.00

This is a 5-year continuing award. The goal of the Listening Machine project is
to develop techniques that can analyze everyday sonic environments into objects
and events similar to those perceived by human listeners. Rather than viewing an
audio file as an opaque, undifferentiated dataset, we want to be able to treat
it as a combination of sound-source objects with more or less specific
characteristics - for instance, the voice of a particular person plus background
hum plus door closing followed by footsteps, etc. The kinds of recognition
analyses to be developed by the PI will make possible rapid browsing of
recordings, by segmenting and summarizing them in terms of the sounds of the
objects contained - discussion with multiple people, ride inside a vehicle,
outside on the street etc. Analyzing such recordings in terms of separate
objects is particularly challenging, because the sounds almost always overlap
and interfere. It is not adequate simply to train a recognizer on the sound of,
say, a telephone ringing, because that sound changes completely when it is heard
against a background of music on the radio. Instead, the PI will adapt and
develop emerging techniques from speech recognition that classify signals based
on partial observations, simultaneously recognizing subsets of the time-
frequency information and inferring a segmentation into regions dominated by
different sound sources, to maximize the probability that the explanation
matches the observations. The techniques to be devised will support a new range
of applications in which machines can stand in for human listeners, including
new ways to search online multimedia content, interactive robots with a human-
like awareness of their environments, and prosthetic devices for the hearing
impaired. The educational contributions of the project will center around a
Laboratory for Recognition and Organization of Speech and Audio (LabROSA), which
the PI will establish with a unique focus on intelligent analysis of general
audio. In addition to supporting students working within the group, research
results will feed into course- and project-based educational activities in the
form of new topic content and new tools and demonstrations. The immediacy of
audio illustrations developed as part of this work will make these ideal demos
for Columbia University's outreach to local high school students through
periodic Engineering Open Houses.