* 0238351
* CAREER:    Representation of Natural Auditory Scenes
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Michael Lewicki, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas H. Fisher
* 02/29/2008
* USD 493,006.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award. Its goal is to
develop a multidisciplinary research and educational program for investigating
the underlying theoretical and computational principles of how biological
systems represent the natural environment. Biological sensory systems have
evolved to survive in a sensory environment that is complex and dynamic, and
even the simplest organisms can perform remarkable feats of signal processing.
The motivation of the program is to advance our scientific understanding of
biological sensory systems and to improve our design of artificial sensory
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general aim of this research program is to
gain theoretical insight into auditory sensory codes and processing using
information theoretic models that have thus-far been applied primarily to
vision. A further aim is to extend these theories to address some of their
important limitations and deal with computational problems specific to audition.
The research projects are designed (1) to determine if efficient coding of
natural sounds predicts response properties and population characteristics of
auditory nerve fibers; (2) to determine how different sounds classes, such as
speech or music, influence the properties of the theoretically optimal code; (3)
to determine if efficient coding theory capture non-stationary acoustic
structures using a spike timing code; and (4) to extend the theoretical
framework to incorporate gain control and noise level in order to account for
important non-linear properties of auditory sensory coding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will provide a fundamental
theoretical understanding of the nature of the auditory code and its relation to
the acoustic environment. This project aims to offer insights into the
organization of the population of auditory nerve tuning and phase-locking
properties, the acoustic cues for auditory stream segmentation, the neural
representation of sounds such as musical notes and speech phonemes, and the role
of feedback via the outer hair cells. These advances will also have impact
beyond the auditory system and many of these results will also have application
to theories of visual sensory coding. The results of this research will provide
deeper insights into the information theoretic principles of sensory coding, and
ultimately will contribute to the creation of functional and robust artificial
sensory systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award recognizes and supports
the early career-development activities of a teacher-scholar who is likely to
become an academic leader of the twenty-first century. The broader impacts of
this project include development of interdisciplinary curriculum uniting
computer science, neuroscience, and cognitive psychology. A new course will
teach advanced undergraduates and graduates advanced aspects of perception,
scene analysis, and recognition in both the visual and auditory modalities,
concentrating on aspects that are essential for interacting with natural,
complex environments. The scientific results of the research will contribute to
improved computer technology capable of better recognizing sounds from the
natural environment.&lt;br/&gt;