* 0238376
* ITR:  NSF Workshop on NanoComputing, Oct. 15-17, 2002
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Paul Franzon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2003
* USD 33,000.00

The goal of the workshop is to bring together a multidisciplinary group of
researchers to identify and explore promising research directions in the
alternatives to CMOS, that is, nano-based technologies. The researchers come
from diverse communities including computer science, design automation, computer
architecture, device physicists, and physical designers. The workshop aims at
pinpointing the areas in which computer scientists and engineers can make
important contributions to the technology of nanoelectronic computers.
Researchers are to present position papers followed by discussions and breakout
groups in which everyone participates. Sample questions being addressed
are:&lt;br/&gt;How will design sciences change in order to design, build and
program future computers based on nanoelectronic principles?&lt;br/&gt;What are
the enabling abstractions that permit productive research on the design of nano
computers?&lt;br/&gt;What technologies from computer science and engineering are
needed by the nanotechnology community?&lt;br/&gt;What investments are needed
and when to foster proper development of computing technologies for nano
computing?&lt;br/&gt;In order to provide a broad input to the workshop, there
will be a workshop website. Prior to the meeting, comments from interested
parties about the workshop topics can be posted on the website. A draft workshop
report will be prepared at the meeting, posted on the workshop website and
commentary from researchers solicited. &lt;br/&gt;