* 0238461
* CAREER:  Coordinated Control from Deformable Virtual Structures with Dynamic Communication
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Kristi Hill, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2009
* USD 406,803.00

The use of multiple vehicles for the achievement of a joint
task&lt;br/&gt;produces an operational setting with greater flexibility,
robustness&lt;br/&gt;and coverage for a lower cost than is possible with single
vehicles or&lt;br/&gt;stationary sensing networks. When the operational
environment for&lt;br/&gt;such vehicles is complex, dynamic or contains
operational hazards,&lt;br/&gt;individual vehicles must have the ability to
respond quickly and with&lt;br/&gt;a high level of maneuverability. The focus of
the work in this&lt;br/&gt;project is the development and implementation of
control theoretic&lt;br/&gt;methods for coordination of groups of agile vehicles
coupled through&lt;br/&gt;communication and operating in dynamic environments.
The need for&lt;br/&gt;development of these methods arises when traditional
design&lt;br/&gt;methodologies fail due to the operation of autonomous systems
in the&lt;br/&gt;presence of a strong coupling between dynamic information flow
and&lt;br/&gt;underlying system dynamics. The work will be primarily driven
by&lt;br/&gt;challenges arising in the coordinated control of agile
underwater&lt;br/&gt;vehicles, however, the results will also have high impact
for tasks&lt;br/&gt;such as vision-based reconnaissance with aircraft in
hazardous urban&lt;br/&gt;environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The particular
combination of agility, dynamic communication and&lt;br/&gt;operational
uncertainty requires that the communication and&lt;br/&gt;coordination elements
of coordinated control be considered jointly&lt;br/&gt;rather than
independently. The objectives of this project are (1)&lt;br/&gt;develop a
deformable virtual structures approach to cooperative&lt;br/&gt;control which
simultaneously captures the constraints imposed by&lt;br/&gt;limited
communication and by vehicle constraints, and (2) develop&lt;br/&gt;dynamic
communication structures that are sufficient to guarantee&lt;br/&gt;stability
and coherence of the virtual structure. The group of&lt;br/&gt;vehicles is
treated as a virtual, deformable body which is
effectively&lt;br/&gt;underactuated due to velocity and motion constraints on
the&lt;br/&gt;constituent vehicles and the physical constraints necessary
to&lt;br/&gt;maintain communication between the vehicles. The constituent
vehicles&lt;br/&gt;then become shape actuators for the evolution and motion
planning for &lt;br/&gt;this new class of virtual mechanical systems with
lumped, dynamic mass&lt;br/&gt;properties. The communication structure of the
vehicles is assumed to&lt;br/&gt;be dynamic with the transmission connections
treated as control&lt;br/&gt;variables. Construction of communication patterns
is addressed via&lt;br/&gt;periodic sequences chosen using geometric and graph
theoretic tools.&lt;br/&gt;The governing equations for the resulting virtual
structure then&lt;br/&gt;describe an underactuated mechanical system with both
discrete time&lt;br/&gt;actuation and oscillatory dynamics. Analysis and
construction of&lt;br/&gt;feedback control for such systems is addressed by
developing a new&lt;br/&gt;notion of averaging and state feedback.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research targeted to applications and implementation in
underwater&lt;br/&gt;autonomous vehicles provides a captivating venue for
education at all&lt;br/&gt;levels. The issues arising in such settings have
broad theoretical&lt;br/&gt;implications as well as the appeal of hands-on
experience. To&lt;br/&gt;strengthen and broaden interaction between control
theory and fields&lt;br/&gt;such as biology and computer science, undergraduate
courses in control&lt;br/&gt;theory will be redesigned to make the tools of
control theory&lt;br/&gt;material accessible to students with non-traditional
engineering&lt;br/&gt;backgrounds. Additional graduate courses will also be
developed that&lt;br/&gt;provide not only a rigorous theoretical background in
individual&lt;br/&gt;elements of control theory or communications but that also
provide &lt;br/&gt;tools for developing interdisciplinary methods and
application of&lt;br/&gt;those methods. Closely integrated with the research and
educational&lt;br/&gt;components of the project are mentoring and outreach
activities based&lt;br/&gt;around the construction of an interactive web site.
This component&lt;br/&gt;involves not only undergraduate and graduate students
as developers,&lt;br/&gt;but K-12 students and educators as active users and
participants in&lt;br/&gt;the research lab. The site will contain scientific
information about&lt;br/&gt;the different components of autonomous vehicle
design and control as&lt;br/&gt;well as interactive tools for exploring
application of control and&lt;br/&gt;communication methodologies to lab
vehicles. &lt;br/&gt;