* 0238790
* CAREER:    Polynuclear Lanthanide-Oxo/Hydroxo Clusters - Design, Preparation, and Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Zhiping Zheng, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 12/31/2008
* USD 480,000.00

This CAREER award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports research by Professor Zhiping Zheng at the University of
Arizona to design and synthesize a novel class of polynuclear lanthanide
complexes, to study the properties of these substances, and to explore their
biomedical and advanced technological applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal is to develop a fundamental understanding of lanthanide
coordination chemistry under physiological or higher pH conditions with a
variety of ligands, including those that are biologically relevant. These
efforts are aimed at producing a variety of unprecedented lanthanide clusters
featuring highly bridging oxo and hydroxo groups and at elucidating the factors
governing the formation of these novel substances. The potential applications to
be explored include contrast agents for biomedical imaging, luminescent
materials for liquid crystal displays, and magnetooptical data storage. The
broad scope and modular nature of the work involves cross-disciplinary
collaborations and provides diverse opportunities for training of students at
all levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In line with the proposed research,
educational activities are proposed aimed at establishing a well-defined program
in Materials Chemistry integrated into the undergraduate or graduate curricula
at the University of Arizona. The ultimate goal is to produce scientists who are
capable of designing, synthesizing, characterizing, and testing new materials to
meet the challenging demand for advanced-performance materials in the next
century. This educational program will also serve as a vehicle to disseminate
chemical science to the general public. &lt;br/&gt;