* 0238035
* CAREER: Capacity-Driven Design of Large-Scale Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Mingyan Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sajal Das
* 08/31/2010
* USD 421,853.00

The proposed research centers on a design methodology for large-scale wireless
sensor networks used for data gathering that uses fundamental capacity limit
studies as guidelines. The motivation is that a large sensor network can
potentially consist of thousands or tens of thousands of sensors densely
populated, with strict energy and complexity constraints. Therefore the design
of any protocol or algorithm should come with precision and a quantifiable
measure, and be based on a good understanding of the ultimate scalability limit.
This proposal aims at bridging the gap between the fundamental limit studies and
practical protocol design. The goal of the proposed research is to (1) derive
capacity limits critical to the large class of data gathering sensor network
applications; (2) develop practical distributed algorithms that use these limits
as guidelines and can approach these limits; and (3) examine the actual
achievable performance of these algorithms in a real sensor testbed setting.
Consequently, there are three parts to the proposed research: fundamental
capacity limits, distributed algorithms, and testbed experiments. A central
theme of the proposed research is to bridge the gap between the theoretical
achievability of fundamental limits and the optimality of practical network
designs. The proposed design methodology is thus driven by capacity limit
studies via novel modeling techniques. It provides a novel and powerful tool in
the study of network scalability and feasibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under
fundamental capacity limits, will study two capacity notions: the throughput
capacity, defined within the context of many-to-one communication as the maximum
achievable throughput when all nodes are communicating with a single receiver
via either a single hop or multiple hops; and the lifetime capacity, defined as
the maximum amount of data deliverable by a sensor network until the first
sensor dies (due to energy depletion) or till a pre-specified percentage of
sensors die. The study of these two capacity notions has direct implications on
organizing communications within a network, e.g., whether clustering should be
used and how big a cluster should be, how many data collecting base stations
should there be and where should they be placed. This study will progress from
simple idealized scenarios to increasingly more realistic and complex.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under distributed algorithms, will apply the capacity
analysis to the design of distributed algorithms of energy efficient data
dissemination, optimal clustering and efficient sensor sleep schedules. These
algorithms will be designed to approach or approximate network capacities. Under
the proposed research will also develop an experimental wireless sensor testbed
for implementation and measurement purposes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research has a strong education aspect and involves collaboration with two
research centers at the University of Michigan. Will seek close collaboration
with the Wireless Integrated Micro-systems (WIMS) Center, an NSF ERC at the
University of Michigan, and University of Michigan's Wu Manufacturing Research
Center (WuMRC). Will incorporate state-of-the-art MEMS sensors currently being
developed at WIMS and intelligent infotronics agent sensors being developed for
automation systems by WuMRC into our sensor testbed. Collaboration with them
will allow the PI to apply design methodology to different application contexts
with realistic physical devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;