* 0238484
* CAREER:  Formal Methods for Silicon Complexity in Nanometer VLSI Design
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2011
* Hai Zhou, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2011
* USD 406,000.00

The VLSI design productivity crisis, that is, the fact that the number
of&lt;br/&gt;available transistors grows much faster than the ability to design
them&lt;br/&gt;meaningfully, has become the greatest threat to the growth of
semiconductor&lt;br/&gt;industry. Silicon complexity, which refers to the impact
of previously &lt;br/&gt;ignorable physical phenomena, is at the center of this
crisis. Based on our beliefs that&lt;br/&gt;the only effective way to improve
productivity is to maintain design complexity&lt;br/&gt;at a manageable level,
and that formal methods are the right techniques for&lt;br/&gt;complexity
control, the objective of this research is to improve
design&lt;br/&gt;productivity by applying formal methods to silicon complexity
problems such as&lt;br/&gt;inductive/capacitive couplings and process
variabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research develops methodology, models,
and algorithms to handle silicon&lt;br/&gt;complexity through the application of
formal methods. By treating timing &lt;br/&gt;analysis as extracting semantics
of a circuit, a timing analysis system is developed &lt;br/&gt;that handles both
inductive and capacitive coupling delay variations. The
system&lt;br/&gt;develops and uses a range of inductive coupling models with
different accuracy&lt;br/&gt;and complexity. Based on that, timing macromodels
for coupling delays are &lt;br/&gt;created for library characterization and IP
specification. Clock scheduling and &lt;br/&gt;retiming algorithms are developed
to separate signal switching times for coupling delay&lt;br/&gt;optimization.
Signal switching time information is also explored in routing
and&lt;br/&gt;placement to minimize coupling between sensitive wires. For
process &lt;br/&gt;variability, statistical models are developed and combined
into the timing analysis &lt;br/&gt;system to compute the statistical
performance of a circuit, and stochastic &lt;br/&gt;optimization is used to
optimize the statistical performance. The integrated education
&lt;br/&gt;activities aim at two aspects of computer engineering education: 1)
educating students in&lt;br/&gt;formal methods, especially their applications to
nanometer VLSI design, thus&lt;br/&gt;bringing needed mathematical rigor into
the discipline; 2) introducing students&lt;br/&gt;to silicon complexity and its
impacts on VLSI design so that they are equipped&lt;br/&gt;with necessary
background for modern high performance VLSI
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;