* 0238614
* CAREER:  Passive Site Remediation for Mitigation of Liquefaction Risk - From Concept to Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Patricia Gallagher, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* John Daniel
* 06/30/2009
* USD 490,338.00

"Passive Site Remediation for Mitigation of Liquefaction Risk - From Concept to
Technology" The overall objective of this CAREER award is to demonstrate the
practical feasibility of a new concept using passive remediation to mitigate the
risk of soil liquefaction at critical facilities and lifelines; and concurrently
to incorporate education and outreach activities that will increase public
awareness, and especially that of female students of the challenges of
engineering in general, and geotechnical and geoenvironmental engineering in
particular, and to engage the students' excitement and creativity in solving
complex engineering problems.

Passive site remediation is integrally related to groundwater processes,
including transport of stabilizers through the groundwater (the inverse of
contaminant transport). The idea is to slowly inject a stabilizing material at
the up-gradient edge of a site and deliver the stabilizer to the liquefiable
area using the groundwater flow. Extensive soil liquefaction occurred in the
1995 Kobe earthquake, especially at the Kobe Port. The cost of repair has been
estimated to be more than $11 billion, and the port operations were essentially
halted for months. Of particular concern are developed sites where traditional
ground improvement methods are difficult or impossible to implement.

The aim of the project is to demonstrate the practical viability of passive site
remediation by conducting laboratory and pilot-scale experiments; developing
implementation technology for its deployment; investigating verification tools
to assess the improvement achieved; modifying a numerical modeling code for use
with gelling fluids; and upon successful completion, producing a design manual
for practical application. The practical feasibility is being investigated using
column and pilot-scale experiments. The column experiments are done to determine
the optimal geochemical and physical conditions where passive site remediation
could be employed. A cross-disciplinary pilot-scale research facility will be
constructed at Drexel University for 3-dimensional modeling of passive site
remediation techniques. It will be used to develop optimal methods for
stabilizer delivery, and evaluate verification tools for assessing the
improvement achieved. The contaminant transport code RT3D will be modified to
account for variable-density, variable-viscosity gelling fluids, and
subsequently used for numerical modeling. The code will be calibrated using the
data from the column and pilot-scale experiments, and used to conduct predictive
modeling, and eventually be used to develop design and analysis procedures. The
ultimate goal of the outreach and education is to promote creativity and inspire
imagination among several groups: undergraduate engineering students, the Drexel
student chapter of the Society of Women Engineers (SWE), and elementary school
girls from the Philadelphia area.

Passive site remediation techniques could have broad application for developed
sites susceptible to soil liquefaction, and to many environmental remediation
problems.