* 0238864
* CAREER:    Optimization of Biopharmaceutical Production by Combinatorial Cellular Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Eric Shusta, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 03/31/2008
* USD 503,738.00

The use of protein therapeutics for the treatment of a variety of diseases
including cancer and AIDS is a rapidly expanding industry. One of the major
hurdles in the development of a protein therapeutic is production of the
recombinant protein at a level that can meet demand in an economically feasible
manner. Present methods for the optimization of protein secretion strains
involve either random mutagenesis of a host strain followed by laborious
screening or ad hoc cellular manipulation. In this proposal, a novel
technological platform for protein production optimization will be developed.
Yeast genetics will be combined with yeast surface display technology to
engineer cells for increased production of a model therapeutic protein. Yeast
surface display will provide a quantitative assessment of protein expression
level on a single cell basis and make the rapid screening of combinatorial
libraries of yeast variants possible. A yeast gene overexpression library and
gene disruption library will be screened for yeast cells having increased
protein expression using flow cytometry. The functional roles of yeast cellular
proteins extracted in these screens will be investigated by subcellular
localization studies and by yeast two-hybrid analyses. In coordination with the
research objectives, a composite classroom and laboratory course will be
developed and implemented to introduce molecular and cellular level design
strategies. This course sequence will train undergraduate and graduate students
in modern combinatorial methods for the engineering design of RNA, DNA,
proteins, and cells.