* 0238633
* CAREER: Spatially Resolved, Continuous Monitoring of Transient Processes Using Novel Optical Sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Scott Sanders, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 07/31/2008
* USD 409,400.00

&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan is centered
around two techniques, both of which employ a Ti:sapphire laser and new
wavelength-scanning techniques. A larger portion of the effort is devoted to
two-photon direct absorption of xenon. In this technique, rapidly tunable
ultraviolet light is used to monitor a xenon absorption feature in much the same
way tunable diode lasers have been used to monitor water absorption in the near
infrared. However, because the two-photon absorption in xenon is a nonlinear
process, it occurs only where laser irradiance is high. Thus, in a focused laser
beam, the process occurs only near the beam focus and not along the entire beam
path. This property is exploited to extend standard direct-absorption techniques
to enable spatial resolution. Spatial resolution in a line,&lt;br/&gt;plane, or
volume are accomplished by rapidly scanning the laser focus through space using
galvanometers. The technique monitors one property: xenon number density.
However, because xenon is inert and easy to seed in a variety of environments,
xenon number-density information is much more useful than it might seem on the
surface. For instance, whenever pressure is known, gas temperature can be
calculated from the xenon number density. In addition, by seeding xenon into one
of multiple fluids in a mixing experiment, the xenon can be used to track that
fluid even through chemical reactions that change its composition. The second
technique uses new wavelength-scanning approaches to monitor Raman scattering
spectra. This technique complements the xenon technique by offering more
property information (e.g., simultaneous concentrations of multiple species) at
the cost of lower signal levels. Applications in liquid and spray systems
relevant to combustion are described. Although combustion sensing is of primary
interest, both techniques are expected to be valuable for sensing in other
environments as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
research and teaching plan for the next five years is laid out, designed to
build a firm foundation future efforts. The research plan extends new laser
wavelength-scanning concepts developed by the PI to provide continuous,
spatially resolved gas and liquid property measurements of an unprecedented
nature. Such data are obtained in fundamental and applied systems relevant to
combustion, with the goal of dramatically improving the understanding of the
governing processes. The research inspires the inclusion of active learning
techniques into the undergraduate thermal-fluid science curriculum. Balanced by
a traditional lecture-based format, these techniques are intended to foster
creative thinking and physical familiarity with course material. Concept
inventories are used to guide and assess the active learning exercises. In
addition, undergraduate researchers (including students of under-represented
groups), a graduate class in optical techniques, and outreach activities are
integrated with the research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;