* 0238521
* CAREER: Constraint-based Adaptive Simulation of Deformable Objects
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Min-Hyung Choi, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 01/31/2009
* USD 415,855.00

The goal of this research is to develop robust and effective techniques to
model, simulate and interact with soft objects. The physical modeling of
deformable objects is one of the fundamental and crucial components of many
graphics and scientific visualization application providing an effective way to
display and interact with virtual objects that better represent true physical
nature, beyond unrealistic rigid-body approximation. Soft object modeling has
been studied extensively using both discrete models and continuum mechanics-
based models. However, two major issues still pose a significant challenge.
First, the conflicting demand between computational efficiency and biomechanical
realism directs us to take trade-offs or to sacrifice one for the other. Second,
the robust treatment of interaction between soft objects and intuitive control
is often overlooked, being represented by a single point of contact or given
external forces. The PI will address issues in the following areas: 1) domain
decomposition method to represent a complex object structure; 2) adaptive
refinement and simplification of the model while preserving overall dynamic
behavior; 3) robust constraint-based collision and contact analysis between
deformable objects; 4) constrained manipulation for intuitive and flexible user
interface; and 5) fast cluster computing environment and associated parallel
algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this project
includes 1) development of a new physically-based modeling and simulation
curriculum, 2) development of a realistic tissue deformation model for a virtual
surgery system which will be used for training medical students and surgeons, 3)
development of functional anatomy online visualization system for K-12 students
and the general public, and 4) hosting "How Things Work" workshop and animation
contest to foster research experiences for undergraduate and graduate students
in their early academic careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;