* 0238053
* RUI: Secreted alpha-amylase and stress-related starch metabolism
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2008
* Jonathan Monroe, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald A. Berkowitz
* 02/29/2008
* USD 337,063.00

Starch is an important energy-storage compound for plants and makes up a
significant portion of the human diet. In leaves, starch accumulates in
chloroplasts during the day and is broken down at night to provide energy for
the plant. The full details of the enzymatic pathway for starch degradation are
not understood but it probably involves a-amylase, b-amylase, debranching
enzyme, a-glucosidase, and starch phosphorylase. Interestingly, much of the
activity of these enzymes is located outside the chloroplasts and, as such,
probably plays no role in normal starch metabolism. Several plants contain a
secreted a-amylase that is induced by biotic and abiotic stress. The Arabidopsis
thaliana genome contains three a-amylase genes, one of which (AtAMY3) has a
predicted signal sequence targeting it to the secretion pathway. The primary
goal of this research is to understand the function of this secreted a-amylase
in Arabidopsis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant pathogens and abiotic stress (e.g.
salt, heat, drought, heavy metals, and ozone) cause a number of changes to plant
tissues including inhibition of phloem transport, accumulation of carbohydrates
(including starch), and increased respiration. When the stress is severe, cells
generate reactive oxygen species that can induce programmed cell death. During
cell death membranes disintegrate, allowing the mixing of molecules from
different compartments. It is in these dead cells that the secreted a-amylase is
thought to act on starch. The resulting sugars would then be available to meet
the increased respiratory demand of the neighboring cells that will ultimately
survive the stress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are 1)
to purify and characterize the properties and regulation of the secreted
a-amylase, and 2) to identify the function of the enzyme. Purification of the
enzyme from mustard (Brassica juncea) and Arabidopsis will make use of
cycloheptaamylose affinity chromatography. Wild type plants will be treated with
various forms of stress to observe the effects on induction of the secreted
amylase, starch accumulation and subsequent degradation, and on cell death. An
Arabidopsis mutant with a T-DNA insertion in AtAMY3 will be used to confirm the
link between the AtAMY3 gene and the apoplastic a-amylase, and to test the
hypothesis that the enzyme plays a role in survival of a severe stress.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of the proposed work are three. First, the PI
hopes to define the role of a leaf amylase that has been known for some time but
whose function has been a mystery due to its location in cell walls. If it can
be demonstrated that the enzyme plays a role in the response to severe stress,
the results will add to a growing body of knowledge that is directly beneficial
to agriculture. Second, the grant will help to train a number of undergraduates,
many of which pursue careers in science, and a teaching/research postdoctoral
fellow choosing to pursue a career at a predominantly undergraduate institution.
Third, the grant will enable the PI to continue his activities of developing
investigative laboratories for undergraduate courses and mentoring younger
faculty at predominantly undergraduate institutions through the Council on
Undergraduate Research and the American Society of Plant Biologists.&lt;br/&gt;