* 0238356
* CAREER: Fundamentals of Multicomponent Diffusion in Multiphase Alloys - Advances in Phenomenological Descriptions and Experimental Techniques
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Yongho Sohn, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 01/31/2008
* USD 393,677.00

This project seeks to advance the understanding of multicomponent diffusion in
multiphase alloys through development of phenomenological expressions,
analytical methods and experimental techniques. The goal is to study
multicomponent systems of current interest, namely Ni-Pt-Al and Fe-Ni-Al for
high temperature coatings and structural applications. Based on innovative
transformation of phenomenological expressions, accurate and efficient
analytical methods to determine multicomponent diffusion coefficient will be
developed. Evolution of diffusion structures involving stability of interphase
boundaries and multiphase-layer formation will be examined and analyzed
quantitatively by obtaining accurate experimental data using advanced
characterization techniques. Both undergraduate and graduate students will be
educated about diffusion in multicomponent-multiphase alloys through an
integration of fundamental laboratory research and course revision with "hands-
on" laboratories. These research and educational activities are designed to
harvest materials scientists and engineers with exceptional knowledge and
competence in diffusion in solids, while advancing the science of diffusion in
multicomponent-multiphase alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sequentially designed
laboratory modules will be implemented for a course entitled "Diffusion in
Solids." The project aims to disseminate the basic understanding of diffusion
and its importance in materials science for public at large, particularly for
K-12 teachers and students as well as blind and visually impaired children, with
assistance from the Orlando Science Center (OSC) and the Center for Independence
Technology and Education (CITE). Undergraduate and graduate students involved in
laboratory research will actively participate in these rewarding activities, and
have a chance to mentor and interact with K-12 students including those
handicapped.&lt;br/&gt;