* 0239837
* CAREER:  New Ferromagnetic Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Dong-Kyun Seo, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 01/31/2008
* USD 465,039.00

This CAREER project is focused on giant and colossal magnetoresistance (GMR and
CMR) materials, and in particular on the discovery and characterization of new
bulk half metals and GMR materials with increased structural and chemical
complexities in a broad range of compounds, including chalcogenides, the Zintl
compounds and intermetallics. For example, the half-metallic state in the
thiochromates, such as ACrS3, A2CrS4, A2/3Cr2S4, A4CrS7 and A6Cr2S11 (A = rare-
earth and/or alkaline-earth metals), will be obtained by chemically controlling
the mixed-valence states and double exchange interactions between chromium ions.
It is also proposed to induce the GMR effect in LnMn1-xSb2 and LnMnSi2 (Ln =
rare-earth metals, Mn=manganese, Sb=antimony, Si=silicon), whose structures are
formed by alternate stacking of magnetic and nonmagnetic layers. Finally, by
strategically reducing the covalent bond strength around the transition metals
and/or changing the electron concentrations, we will explore new magnetic
intermetallics. By carrying out these projects, students will acquire an
excellent understanding of chemical and electronic structures of materials, and
of experimental skills required for the preparation and characterization of
solid sate compounds. More importantly, the students will learn where various
materials properties come from in chemical terms, so that they will be capable
of rational design of new functional materials in their synthetic research.
Overall, success in our research will provide new functional ferromagnetic
materials that can be utilized in fabrication of novel electronic devices, and
also will produce young materials researchers that will eagerly tackle
interdisciplinary problems in materials sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In our
modern society, advances in technology depend more than ever on the discovery
and development of useful new materials, and solid-state chemistry has played an
important role in the areas of catalytic, electronic, magnetic and optical
materials research. This project in experimental solid-state chemistry will
provide new magnetic materials with great promise for new devices with
unprecedented functionalities, collectively under the name of "spin-
electronics." Spin-electronic devices not only control the electrical signals
(conventional electronic devices), but also manipulate the electron spins, a
fundamental quantum mechanical property of electrons, which can immensely
increase the capacity of data processing and storage even with current
semiconductor manufacturing technology. Novel magnetic materials such as giant
magnetoresistance (GMR) materials and half-metals which have much desired
characteristics for spin-electronics applications will be discovered. By
carrying out this research, students will acquire a good understanding of
structure-property relationships of materials, as well as experimental skills
for preparation and characterization of solid sate materials. More importantly,
the students will learn where various useful materials properties come from in a
"chemical" language, so that they will be capable of designing and synthesizing
new functional materials in their future synthetic research. Overall, success in
our research will provide new functional ferromagnetic materials that can be
utilized in fabrication of novel electronic devices, and also will produce young
materials researchers that will eagerly tackle interdisciplinary problems in
materials sciences. &lt;br/&gt;