* 0239607
* CAREER:  Cationic Microporous and Layered Metal Oxides for Anion-Based Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Scott Oliver, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 200,000.00

This CAREER award seeks to develop a new class of microporous inorganic
materials, where the charge of the material is positive. Microporous materials
(see, for example, http://www.bza.org/zeolites.html) are extremely important
industrially, with a global market of several million tons per year. They are
used primarily to convert heavy petroleum to fuel, or to soften or purify water.
In water softening, for example sodium or potassium inside the pores are
exchanged with "hard" magnesium or calcium. Despite their enormous significance,
all such materials known to date are negative in charge and the species in the
pores can only be cationic. They would be considerable scientific and industrial
interest in obtaining a new class discovery would lead to new applications based
on the anions that reside in the pores. For example, anionic pollutants could be
trapped by the material, releasing an environmentally benign species in the
process. Separations of anionic mixtures, exchange for making new compounds, as
well as new catalytic where the size and shape of the template complements that
of the material. Preliminary work has been successful in making the switch. Our
cationic material can exchange for a variety of other anions in high capacity.
It may be possible to "recycle" these anion-exchangers or absorb priority
anionic pollutants, such as arsenates. The research plan is integrated with the
educational plan. A series of laboratory experiments and lecture course modules
will be developed that study advanced physical techniques for characterizing
these materials. The target courses range from freshman to graduate levels. This
project is highly interdisciplinary, encompassing chemistry, physics, materials
science and engineering, and will give excellent training to graduate and
undergraduate students.

This CAREER award seeks to develop a new methodology for the synthesis of
cationic, inorganic microporous hosts. Layered and microporous metal oxides are
a class of materials central to a wide variety of industrial and environmental
processes, but currently all hosts are anionic or neutral in charge. This
project focuses to create a new class of cationic hosts using anionic structure
directing agents (SDAs). The size and shape of the SDA will allow us to tune the
channel size and porosity of the cationic host. The potential for scientific and
industrial payoff is considerable, opening up a range of possible anion-based
applications, including environmental trapping of pollutants, anion-exchange,
separation and catalysis. Preliminary work with anionic SDAs has been successful
in obtaining our first cationic layered materials, which is highly stable and
can exchange for a variety of other anions in high capacity. It may be possible
to "recycle" these anion-exchangers by reversing the intercalation, or absorb
other priority anionic pollutants, such as arsenates. Expertise and experience
gained in the research plan will be incorporated into the educational plan,
building upon the PI's past and present experience in microporous materials. A
series of laboratory experiments and lecture course modules, ranging from the
freshman to graduate levels, will be developed based on open-frameworks and
advanced characterization techniques. This project is highly interdisciplinary,
encompassing chemistry, physics, materials science and engineering, and will
give excellent training to graduate and undergraduate students. The project will
allow the PI to make a significant contribution to materials chemistry, research
and education over the course of his career.