* 0239475
* CAREER:     Polyolefin-Inorganic Hybrid Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Edward Coughlin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2007
* USD 405,000.00

The main objective of this award will be the synthesis of novel polyolefin
inorganic hybrid copolymers. Investigation of the physical and mechanical
properties of these new materials will also be undertaken, and the findings from
these studies will then serve to further direct synthetic efforts. By
copolymerizing molecularly precise nanometer-scale inorganic particles with
simple vinyl monomers development of the fundamental understanding necessary to
exploit the resulting structure-property correlation will emerge. Thus, it
should be possible to enhance the physical properties of the resulting copolymer
hybrids through the anticipated sizable intermolecular interactions that occur
between the nanometer-scale particles and through their attachment to polymer
chains. These hybrid materials are of great interest in that it may be possible
to expand the general utility of commodity polyolefins beyond their current day
use. For example, improvement of the strength, toughness, or upper temperature
stability of isotactic polypropylene into the realm of engineering resins would
allow for use of these hybrid materials in applications that are today dominated
by more expensive materials. Pursuit of a chemistry based "bottom-up" approach
to the formation of polyolefin nanocomposites will permit harnessing the
beneficial thermodynamics associated with self-assembly processes. This will
reverse the unfavorable thermodynamics typically encountered in the melt
extrusion "top-down" approach to the generation of polymer nanocomposites. Self-
assembly processes will thus be used to advantage for generating desired
configurations of inorganic particles dispersed in a polyolefin matrix.

Research is the vehicle through which some of the most important learning takes
place. Research projects offer students the opportunity to not only learn
technical skills, experimental techniques, and the process of scientific
discovery, but also about how they approach and solve problems and face
challenges. This coupled with classroom and other educational opportunities will
greatly aid students entering the modern workforce. A new graduate level course
will be developed entitled "Industrial Polymers." This course will take a
beginning-to-end approach of the chemistry and engineering that are necessary to
successfully produce polymeric materials. This is intended to give the students
a good technical grasp of the production of a selected set of industrial
polymers. This research and development process is what many students will be
participating in following completion of their graduate studies. Further
leveraging of teaching and outreach activities will also occur through combining
efforts with the NSF-sponsored Research Site for Educators in Chemistry (RSEC)
on Polymer Chemistry in Western Massachusetts that is in the Polymer Science and
Engineering Department at the University of Massachusetts. The goals of this
program are (i) to modernize curricula by introducing interdisciplinarity to
undergraduate research and education and (ii) to involve faculty and students
from local institutions in frontier research in polymer science. The immediate
and long-term impacts of this program will be profound. Approximately 60
Bachelors degrees in Chemistry are awarded each year from the participating
institutions (nearly 90% women and underrepresented minorities). Teaching
modules on polymer chemistry that are appropriate for inclusion in the curricula
of the participating institutions will be developed and tested in the classroom.
The approach does not advocate a complete change in the curriculum of Chemistry
Departments but rather an injection of modern materials chemistry. Successful
teaching modules will be disseminated nationally to chemical educators.