* 0239070
* CAREER: A Design/Test Environment with Integrated Experimental and Computational Simulation of Unsteady Wind Loads for Mitigation of Wind-Related Natural Hazards
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2010
* Frederick Haan, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 02/28/2010
* USD 490,956.00

Research and education activities in this project pursue the mitigation of wind-
related natural hazards-the most costly natural hazards faced by the United
States. The first objective is to establish a design and testing environment
(DTE) in which a diverse collection of participants can learn, design, and test
new concepts in wind-resistant design. Second, computational simulation tools
will be developed based on discrete vortex methods (DVM). Third, experimental
and computational tools will be integrated in such a way that as designs are
tested, the models and tools are continuously being validated and improved.
&lt;br/&gt;From a research standpoint, the DTE will facilitate interaction among
researchers, students, and industry for conceiving novel concepts in wind-
resistant design. These concepts will be tested using both experimental and
computational tools. Research is therefore conducted to search for improved
aerodynamic designs and to improve computational techniques. As an educational
tool, the DTE will accommodate research and design participants from a wide
range of backgrounds working at an appropriate level. All the activity of the
DTE-submission of designs to be tested and reporting test results-will be
accessible via the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual merit derives
from the integrated experimental and computational nature of the simulations and
the foundation of discrete vortex methods. The project's broader impacts include
new wind resistant design development, new computational tools for design, a
database of aerodynamic loads accessible to anyone designing a structure, and a
framework that fosters participation by people from a broad range of
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;