* 0239876
* RUI: A Marriage of Equals, the Scientific Lives of Joseph and Maria Goeppert Mayer
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2003
* Karen Johnson, Saint Lawrence University
* Standard Grant
* Keith R. Benson
* 12/31/2003
* USD 44,065.00

Nobel Prize winner and physicist Maria Goeppert Mayer and her husband, chemist
Joseph Mayer, worked in different disciplines, pursued different fields of
research, and rarely published collaborative work. A close scrutiny of their
scientific careers reveals, however, that over time Joseph Mayer began to
approach the study of chemistry from the perspective of a physicist in his
attempts to incorporate statistical mechanics into physical chemistry, and Maria
Goeppert Mayer began to approach physics from the perspective of a chemist in
her development of the nuclear shell model. This intellectual interaction
illustrates a form of collaboration in science that has not been adequately
explored in the historical literature. Historians of science have tended to
focus on the evolution of scientific theories in two different ways: either as
intellectual history, emphasizing the intellectual paths followed by individual
scientists, or as a social phenomenon transcending the intellectual life of any
individual. Neither of these approaches can adequately describe the multi-
dimensional matrix of informal interactions among scientists that shapes the
distinctive work of individual scientists, and results in the kind of synergy
found in the work of the Mayers. The principal investigator requests RUI support
during her sabbatical year 2002-2003 to write a dual scientific biography of
Joseph and Maria Goeppert Mayer. This biography will constitute a comprehensive
examination and analysis of the lives, careers, and choices of two of the
preeminent scientists of the twentieth century. It will also contribute
significantly to current investigations into the ways in which individual
scientists are influenced by informal interactions with their colleagues, will
present an example of a successful woman in physical science and provide a rare
example of cross-gender interdisciplinary collaboration in science, and will
serve as a case study of the intersection of the public and private spheres in
the lives and careers of a married couple. The RUI award will enable the PI to
deepen her scholarly activity, while enriching and informing her teaching and
curriculum development, and will serve as a model for undergraduate students in
history of science.