* 0239724
* CAREER:  Atomic-Scale Engineering and In-situ Analysis of Materials for Spin Electronics
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* William Bailey, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 02/29/2008
* USD 572,194.00

This CAREER project addresses fundamental materials science issues associated
with spintronics materials systems, magnetic ultrathin films in proximity to
insulators and semiconductors. The approach is to develop coordinated UHV in-
situ probes of spin polarized transport and surface structure. UHV deposition
techniques will be used to control atomic-scale roughness and inter-mixing in
films whose transport properties will be measured in-situ. Measurements will be
com-pared with ab-initio calculations of spin-polarized transport to understand
atomic structure-properties relationships. One of the project aims is to
ascertain and develop the potential of giant-magnetoresistive (GMR) spin valves,
used widely in ultrahigh density magnetic recording. Over-all, the proposed
research strives to demonstrate a path from atomic-level materials understand-
ing and design to enhanced device performance in information storage.
&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research issues in
electronic/magnetic materials science hav-ing technological relevance. An
important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on educa-tion, and the
integration of research and education. The research program provides excellent
op-portunities for hands-on experience in the use of sophisticated scientific
equipment, and the in-terdisciplinary approach and technological focus proposed
for the research will carry over into undergraduate and graduate Materials
Science curriculum development at Columbia, and into outreach activities at
local K-12 schools. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;