* 0239144
* PECASE:  Understanding Sunlight-mediated Inactivation of Pathogens in Water - An Integrated Resarch and Education Career Development Plan
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Kara Nelson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Clark C. K. Liu
* 06/30/2008
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: Understanding Sunlight-mediated Inactivation of
Pathogens in Water - An Integrated Research and Education Career Development
Plan Institution: University of California-Berkeley

The research described in this proposal aims to measure the rates of
inactivation of a range of bacterial and viral waterborne pathogens and
indicator organisms due to each of these sunlight-mediated mechanisms under
laboratory and field conditions, and to use the information to develop models of
pathogen inactivation in surface waters. A series of controlled laboratory
experiments is proposed in which a rigorous scientific approach is applied to
identify, characterize, and quantify the individual and combined inactivation
caused by the three inactivation mechanisms. In particular, a focus of the
research is to quantify damage to organisms by exogenous photo-oxidation, and to
define the conditions under which this mechanism is important in aquatic
environments. Ultimately, the goal of this research is to improve our ability to
protect public health in the industrialized and developing world. A quantitative
understanding of the persistence of pathogens in surface waters, such as
drinking water sources and recreational waters, will be useful for reevaluating
water quality standards, optimizing monitoring programs, and interpreting
microbiological water quality data. In particular, pathogens resistant to
sunlight inactivation and appropriate indicator organisms for a range of aquatic
environments will be identified. The results will also allow the design of
better treatment processes to reduce the discharge of pathogens to the
environment, as many engineered processes rely on natural mechanisms for
pathogen inactivation (e.g., wastewater stabilization ponds, constructed
wetlands). Finally, the results will be useful for understanding the
epidemiology of waterborne disease; in particular, the inactivation rates can be
used as input to quantitative risk analysis models. The proposed research and
educational plan will encourage and support the participation of young
scientists and engineers in international research and education, especially in
developing countries, through developing long-term research and educational
opportunities and collaborations with universities in developing countries,
networking with public and private organizations that employ environmental
engineers to work in developing countries, and incorporating topics relevant to
engineering in developing countries into existing undergraduate and graduate
courses.

This project was originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a
Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in
September 2004.

