* 0239080
* PECASE: Harnessing Electrokinetic Flow Instabilities for Next Generation Microfluidics
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2008
* Juan Santiago, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 02/29/2008
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: PECASE: Harnessing Electrokinetic Flow Instabilities
for Next&lt;br/&gt;Generation Microfluidics&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the greatest engineering challenges of the
century are the development of technologies that will enable massively parallel
drug discovery efforts, biomedical device design, fundamental genetics research,
proteomics, and rapid and miniaturized biological weapon detection. On-chip
microfluidics has an important and expanding role in the realization of such
tools and offers the potential of massively parallel chemical laboratories on a
chip. Electrokinetic (EK) devices, in particular, combine "work-horse" processes
such aselectrophoresis, binding assays, and electro-chromatography with a
precise control of sample streams in compact, easy-to-fabricate devices with no
moving parts. Recent experiments performed in the Stanford Microfluidics
Laboratory demonstrate that there is an important class of EK flows that are not
well understood and largely undocumented: EK flow instabilities that arise in
heterogeneous property liquid streams. These instabilities occur in a variety of
geometries relevant to on-chip assays, and flows with ionic conductivity
gradients are particularly susceptible. The research plan is integrated closely
with undergraduate and graduate teaching and the recruitment and retention of
students of underrepresented groups in engineering at the high school,
undergraduate, and graduate level. NSF funding will enable several key efforts.
First is a significant expansion of an ongoing effort to convert teaching
material from three engineering classes into a multimedia format that leverages
screen-projected and animated notes as well as digitized movie clips for
effective lecturing. Funding will also be used to expand the student base of a
newly-developed course on Fluid Flow in Microdevices by making the course
available to other institutions (including industry and government labs) via the
Stanford Instructional Television Network. Third, NSF funds will be used to
recruit students of underrepresented groups by leveraging a collaboration with
the Foundation for a College Education (FCE) to conduct a series of workshops to
advise high school students on planning for college, completing college
applications (e.g., help with college essays), and introducing them to the many
rewards of careers in science and engineering. At the undergraduate level, NSF
funding will be used to increase student involvement in research by expanding a
collaboration with Stanford's Office of Engineering Diversity Programs. At the
graduate level, the award will help the applicant expand his role in actively
mentoring and motivating graduate students from&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented
groups in the developing field of microfluidics
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was originally funded as
a CAREER award, and was converted to a Presidential Early Career Award for
Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in September 2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;