* 0239908
* Information Economics, Confidential Settlement Bargaining and Judicial Decision-Making
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Andrew Daughety, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye Husbands Fealing
* 08/31/2005
* USD 169,128.00

This research will use methods from game theory and information economics to
examine two important aspects of the legal system and their implications for
market and judicial efficiency. One topic is the impact of confidential
settlements on performance in markets for goods and services. This research will
address the market implications of this settlement option as well as alternative
private and public policies to address what has come to be a significant
concern: that allowing confidential settlement protects and encourages bad
behavior by agents in a variety of markets. Alternatively, banning
confidentiality may also compromise important values, such as personal privacy
and the protection of intellectual property via trade secrecy; without the
ability to conclude confidential settlements, some important cases may never be
brought, and fewer of those brought are likely to settle. It is important to
identify these tradeoffs and their implications for market performance in order
that sensible public policy can be pursued (by judges and legislators). The
second topic concerns how differences in information among litigants and judges
affect the outcomes of individual cases and, ultimately, the evolution of the
law. The judicial process is inherently passive: suits must be filed and appeals
made in order for courts to be able to clarify rules and make/interpret law.
When law is made, or interpreted, by a sequence of courts (as is true in our
system), the effectiveness of correctives (such as appeal) may be attenuated by
problems of insufficient resources or unwieldy
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will address a number of important
policy issues. In the context of confidential settlements, does allowing
confidential settlements adversely affect pricing and safety? Are there private
responses to such inefficiencies that firms can make (e.g., can firms credibly,
and profitably, commit to eschew confidential settlements?), or is new public
policy necessary (such as banning confidentiality)? Does current law, such as
the doctrine of vicarious liability (wherein, for example, corporations are
liable for harms caused by employees' job-related actions), ameliorate or
exacerbate the use of confidential settlements to hide the bad behavior of
economic agents? In the context of modeling decision-making by courts, how does
information get aggregated in hierarchical court systems? What competitive
forces determine which cases receive higher-court review (essentially, how does
the "market for certiorari" operate?)? To what degree will judicial inefficiency
be systematic and persistent, or when will institutionalized correctives (such
as judicial dissent) work to promote judicial efficiency? This research on
information aggregation by courts contributes to understanding how courts
function, how the law evolves, what may contribute to judicial inefficiency and
what actions or policies may remedy such problems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;