* 0239995
* Nonstandard Work and Asset Accumulation
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Lisa Keister, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2006
* USD 69,637.00

SES- 0239995 &lt;br/&gt;Lisa Keister &lt;br/&gt;Ohio State University Research
Foundation &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
investigates the effect of nonstandard work on worker asset accumulation.
Researchers have documented extreme inequalities in asset ownership, but the
processes that create these inequalities are not well understood. One
potentially important contributing factor that has attracted little attention is
a rise in nonstandard work. Part-time, temporary, and contract work can be
flexible and may allow workers to evaluate a potential job before accepting a
permanent position. Yet compensation and benefits can be relatively low for many
nonstandard workers, altering the saving patterns of these workers. This project
explores (1) whether nonstandard workers accumulate assets differently than
traditional workers, (2) whether demographic traits, work histories, and
workplace traits of nonstandard workers affect their patterns of asset
accumulation, and (3) the implications of these patterns for aggregate-level
wealth inequality and related public policies. The research will test numerous
hypotheses drawn from social and economic theory to understand the relationship
between nonstandard work and asset ownership. A unique contribution of this
study is an effort to understand the relationship between nonstandard jobs and
assets during specific working years, as a trajectory or path over time, and
projected at retirement. The PI will synthesize data from three survey data sets
and use simulation modeling to exploit these data, to investigate distributional
outcomes, and to examine policy implications. Multiple outcomes will be used to
explore these relations, including asset ownership, pension ownership,
accumulation trajectories over time, projected well being during retirement, and
aggregate-level wealth inequality. The study holds promise for evaluating
theories about inequality and well being, for expanding understanding of the
consequences of nonstandard work, and for anticipating the need for new policies
designed to protect nonstandard workers during retirement. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;