* 0239415
* CAREER:     Complex Hierarchical Self-Assembly Templated by Block Copolymers:     Phase Structures, Nano Fabrication and Nano-Electrooptic Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Christopher Li, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2008
* USD 410,000.00

Hierarchical self-assembly is an essential part of nanotechnology and it offers
one of the few practical strategies for making ensembles of nanostructures.
Structure complexity in the hierarchical structures is of particular importance
since it provides a practical means to combine different functionalities within
a single material. The aim of this CAREER development plan is to achieve complex
hierarchical self-assembled structures via combining two-dimensional (2-D)
liquid crystalline (LC) ordering and block copolymer microphase separation
process. The proposed research activities include: (1) Design, synthesize, and
systematically investigate a series of bent-core liquid crystalline (BCLC)
diblock copolymers in order to achieve novel complex hierarchical structures
including LC columnar phase (Col) in block copolymer lamella (Col-in-Lam), Col
in cylinder (Col-in-Cyl) and Col in sphere (Col-in-Sph) structures, etc. (2)
Fabricate well-defined nano building blocks (such as nano porous plates, rods,
spheres, etc.) using these hierarchically self-assembled diblock copolymers as
templates. (3) Explore the nano-electrooptic properties of these novel
hierarchical structures. Unique lamellar thickness controlled ferro-
antiferroelectric properties will be realized in the proposed diblock copolymer
system. Electric field tunable nanostructures will also be investigated. The
proposed research will, for the first time, incorporate 2-D LC ordering into the
ordered nanospace created by block copolymer microphase separation. The
resulting hierarchical structures possess complex natures at both 1-5 nm and
10-100 nm length scales. From a scientific point of view, this system provides a
unique opportunity to explore the complex phase geometry, small phase size and
large interface effects on LC as well as block copolymer phase behaviors. LC
phase stability might be altered in these small environments and novel phase
structures might be generated. From the technological point of view, the
hierarchical structures could be used as templates for nano fabrication
applications. Well-correlated structures at different length scales might also
provide a solution for the transfer of the novel properties at the nanoscale
into a higher length scale. Furthermore, these hierarchical structures can serve
as a scaffold for further nanoscience and nanotechnology research, particularly
for nano device manufacturing due to their specific structure complexity. The
structural complexity and hierarchies might also hold the key to designing
synthetic materials that can mimic the elegant living systems. The educational
component of the proposed CAREER development plan includes (1) Address the needs
for the education of modern developments in polymer nanoscience and
nanotechnology by developing a new course entitled Polymers and Nanotechnology.
(2) Involve high school students and teachers, particularly under-represented
populations, in the proposed polymer nanotechnology research activities. (3)
Develop long-term collaborations between the PI's laboratory and industry
through Drexel's Co-op system. These proposed education activities impose a
broader impact. First, the proposed plan will help to bridge the existing gap
between levels of educational developments by involving high school students and
teachers in research activities through a number of mentorship programs.
Secondly, due to the high population of under-represented groups in the
Philadelphia region, the proposed out-reach program will be specifically geared
towards encouraging the participation of under-represented populations. Thirdly,
the proposed research results will be widely disseminated through publications
in scientific journals, product development resulting from collaborations with
industry and, as a natural outgrowth of gained knowledge resulting from
involvement in research activities, more highly trained secondary education
teachers. Lastly, through the establishment of collaborations with national
laboratories and school districts in the surrounding Philadelphia region, the
proposed plan will dramatically enhance the infrastructure for research and
education. Combined with the "start-up package" supplied by Drexel University,
the proposed plan will also enable the PI to establish a state-of-the-art
polymer characterization center that will benefit both Drexel University and
nearby industry.

