* 0239013
* CAREER: Transport and Stability in Biocatalytic Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Scott Calabrese Barton, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/2007
* USD 429,596.00

&lt;br/&gt; The mission of this CAREER program is (1) the creation of
&lt;br/&gt;electrode structures that enhance the reactivity and stability of
&lt;br/&gt;enzyme bioelectrocatalysts as implemented in high power-density
&lt;br/&gt;biofuel cells, and (2) the integration of these and other fuel-cell
&lt;br/&gt;devices into a broad spectrum of education and outreach to promote
&lt;br/&gt;concepts of engineering product design and new energy systems in
&lt;br/&gt;communities, schools, and universities.&lt;br/&gt; Biocatalytic fuel
cell technology has the potential to &lt;br/&gt;provide electrical power in
conditions where conventional fuel cell &lt;br/&gt;and battery technologies
fail. While key characteristics of redox &lt;br/&gt;enzymes, including
selectivity and room temperature activity can be &lt;br/&gt;exploited in, for
example, physiologically implantable fuel cells, &lt;br/&gt;implementation of
current biofuel cells is hindered by low catalytic &lt;br/&gt;activity and low
stability of biocatalytic electrodes. This program &lt;br/&gt;addresses both of
these issues. &lt;br/&gt; The model system to be studied is an oxygen-reducing
&lt;br/&gt;electrode comprised of porous carbon coated with a crosslinked
&lt;br/&gt;electrostatic adduct of laccase, an oxygen-reducing enzyme, and an
&lt;br/&gt;electron-conducting redox polymer hydrogel. Engineering the porous
&lt;br/&gt;support and its interface with the mediator/enzyme hydrogel to
&lt;br/&gt;maximize gel distribution will improve enzyme utilization and
&lt;br/&gt;increase current density. Support structures with porosities near
&lt;br/&gt;95% and fiber diameter of order 1 micron or less, consisting of
&lt;br/&gt;carbon nanotubes or electrospun carbon nanofibers, will be evaluated
&lt;br/&gt;for impact on catalytic activity of the enzyme-hydrogel adduct.
&lt;br/&gt;Gas-diffusion electrodes will be developed which take advantage of
&lt;br/&gt;high-rate oxygen mass transfer in the gas phase to further increase
&lt;br/&gt;electrode catalytic activity. The issue of stability will be
&lt;br/&gt;addressed by encapsulation of the biocatalysts in porous silica or
&lt;br/&gt;other metal oxide by means of sol-gel, aerogel, and wet gel
&lt;br/&gt;processing. Through-film electron mediation will be enabled using
&lt;br/&gt;carbon nanotubes and redox polymer mediators.&lt;br/&gt; Successful
introduction of fuel cells to the marketplace &lt;br/&gt;depends on an available
workforce of qualified scientists and &lt;br/&gt;engineers, and the acceptance
of fuel cells by energy consumers. &lt;br/&gt;Moreover, the chemical engineering
discipline as a whole is currently &lt;br/&gt;undergoing a transition from
process-oriented design to design of &lt;br/&gt;chemical products, of which fuel
cells are an excellent example. &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER program addresses these
needs through educational &lt;br/&gt;activities emphasizing new energy systems
and engineering product &lt;br/&gt;design. Educational programs will include (a)
A community-based, &lt;br/&gt;hands-on after school program in Energy Systems
for disadvantaged &lt;br/&gt;high-school students; (b) An enhanced introductory
Chemical &lt;br/&gt;Engineering course for first-year engineering students
presenting the &lt;br/&gt;concepts of product design through reverse-engineering
and team-based &lt;br/&gt;design projects; (c) An advanced Electrochemical
Energy Systems &lt;br/&gt;course for graduates and senior undergraduates; (d)
Immersive &lt;br/&gt;research training for secondary, undergraduate, and
graduate &lt;br/&gt;students. &lt;br/&gt; This program advances the knowledge
and understanding of &lt;br/&gt;biofuel cell design while promoting training and
learning of chemical &lt;br/&gt;product engineering in the context of energy
systems.