* 0239819
* CAREER:  Path Integral Simulations of the Electronic, Optical, and Magnetic Properties of Semiconductor Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2003,12/31/2008
* John Shumway, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research on the
electronic and optical properties of semiconductor nanostructures. The PI will
develop new simulation techniques based on Feynman path integrals and apply them
to nanostructures. The research is complementary to approaches that involve the
solution of Schrodinger's equation to include quantum mechanical effects.
Simulation techniques will be applied to detailed models of semiconductor
structures for direct comparison to experiment with a primary focus on self-
assembled quantum dots. Chemical and strain environments in and around the dots
can strongly localize charge carriers (electrons and holes), giving the dots
interesting transport and luminescence properties. Path integral simulations
will enable accurate and efficient calculation of spectra and radiative
lifetimes of excited dots, and will help elucidate the properties of systems of
interacting dots. Quantum dots may be building blocks of future nanoelectronics,
and their properties may be useful for lasers, detectors, data storage,
computing, and quantum algorithms. The path integral algorithms will have a
supporting framework that allows information from growers and microscopists to
be used to quickly generate detailed predictions of optical or transport
properties. This interplay of experiment and theory is essential to understand
semiconductor nanostructures and develop new technologies. This research relies
on algorithms for fast numerical evaluation, and is based in part on earlier
simulations of liquid Helium and other quantum systems. Algorithmic advances
will be shared with the physics community as open source software and
interactive Java applets. The education component involves incorporating the
applets together with other web technologies to develop tutorials and other
materials to improve education in quantum statistical mechanics. Possible
tutorials include Bose condensation of helium, condensates in atomic gas traps,
and the quantum dot systems studied in the research thrust of this
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research on semiconductor nanostructures using Feynman-path-
integral techniques. Path integrals are an intriguing and intuitive approach to
quantum and statistical mechanics, but their mathematical expressions can only
be evaluated analytically for the simplest problems. This research will develop
algorithms for fast numerical calculation of optical and transport properties,
and is based in part on earlier simulations of liquid helium and other quantum
mechanical systems. The education component of this proposal involves developing
and incorporating web-based tools to develop tutorials to improve education in
quantum statistical mechanics. Possible tutorials include Bose condensation of
helium, condensates in atomic gas traps, and the quantum dot systems studied in
the research thrust of this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;