* 0239683
* PECASE: BUILDING AN INTERDISCIPLINARY PROGRAM IN CULTURE AND COGNITION
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Joseph Henrich, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 04/30/2008
* USD 420,017.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: BUILDING AN INTERDISCIPLINARY PROGRAM
IN&lt;br/&gt;CULTURE AND COGNITION&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Emory
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the variety of popular accounts about
"socialization" and "enculturation," and their relationship to adult behavior,
very little is known about the details of the learning processes through which
children and adults acquire their ideas, beliefs, norms, values and mental
models (notions of how things work, like ecological systems or machines).
Questions such as: Who do people pay attention to for learning the concepts,
theories, practices, techniques, habit and categories that govern their
behavior? Do children, for example, principally learn from their parents,
siblings, friends, or other 'popular' children? Are they conformists? (and if
so, to what degree?) Does 'who they learn from' or their degree of conformity
vary with age? What is the relative importance of teaching, role model
imitation, conformity and punishment in transmitting cultural beliefs, values,
etc? For adults, how much are their changes in beliefs, practices, values and
goals influenced by prestigious peers, conformism to the most popular beliefs or
individual experience? How do individual characteristics like social status and
gender affect the relative importance of these different sources of influence?
The nature and complexity of modern life (many social groups, TV, etc.) makes
this question extremely difficult to address with anything but superficial
survey research or 'out-of-context' laboratory manipulations. However, by
focusing on a population on a small island in a remote part of the Fijian
archipelago, this project takes advantage of an analytically simpler context to
gather both cross-sectional and longitudinal data (initial grant is for 5 years)
on the process of cultural learning in cultural domains related to social
relations (moral norms) and ecological knowledge. Using detailed observation,
interviews and experimental techniques, the researchers will be able to chart
but the distribution of culturally learned beliefs, etc. and the pathways of
learning. Combining these data with recently developed (and developing)
analytical techniques, the researchers will be able to quantitatively address
the above questions and more. Educationally, this research program will also
provide training and research experience for young and aspiring scientists. The
educational component is designed to integrate both across disciplinary
boundaries (e.g., anthropology, biology and psychology) and across universities,
as well as to provide students with a unique combination of field experience and
methodological tools for studying the processes of cultural learning. More
broadly, this research has substantial implications for public policy and
education. Policy makers at many levels and across a variety of areas are
interested in designing programs and interventions to change people's beliefs
(e.g., about STD transmission), practices (whether to use genetically modified
seeds), and values (about drugs, crime or 'the environment'). This research goes
to the core of the issue, by developing rigorously grounded theories about 'who
influences whom' (and when, developmentally) in populations. Such knowledge
could be essential for making constructing more targeted interventions (e.g.,
for spreading novel practices) in fields as diverse as public health,
agriculture and conservation. Further, in addition to the scientific knowledge,
the research program will contribute to training the next generation of
researchers to see beyond the usual disciplinary
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was originally funded as a CAREER
award, and was converted to a Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and
Scientists (PECASE) award in September 2004. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;