* 0239138
* CAREER:  Nano-Biomechanics of Living Cells using Atomic Force Microscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Kevin Costa, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 06/30/2008
* USD 402,053.00

0239138&lt;br/&gt;Costa&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this CAREER proposal are (1) to
develop the atomic force microscope as a nano-tool for advancing the field of
cell biomechanics and (2) to create an integrated hands-on educational program
in cellular biomechanics in conjunction with these research efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological tissues are comprised of cells, and the
mechanical properties of these cells directly impact on their fundamental
functions including cell migration, proliferation, viability, and remodeling of
the extracellular matrix in response to altered loading conditions. From a basic
science standpoint, knowledge of cell mechanical properties is required to
elucidate the mechanisms of cell function. Moreover, certain forms of heart
disease, cancer and arthritis have been associated with altered mechanical
properties of the cells of those tissues. Thus, characterizing cellular
mechanical properties may enhance the ability to screen for disease and evaluate
potential gene therapies and other treatments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atomic
force microscopy (AFM) is a recently developed technology that has rapidly
gained popularity for measuring cell mechanics. AFM has advantages over
alternative techniques including relative ease of use, ability to combine
imaging and indentation capabilities, and it is commercially available. However,
in contrast to the extensive engineering analysis of e.g. micropipette
experiments, relatively little has been done to analyze the AFM experiment. The
standard accepted AFM analysis assumes the cell behaves like a simple piece of
rubber. Most biological tissues, on the other hand, exhibit complex nonlinear
elastic and viscous properties that often vary regionally and have preferred
axes of symmetry. These characteristics may extend to the cellular level as
well. Therefore, this CAREER application proposes the most sophisticated
analysis and validation of the AFM indentation problem to date. Finite elements
will be used to simulate the full-scale 3-D AFM indentation experiment,
incorporating detailed cell topography and probe geometry. Alternative
constitutive models relating stress and strain within the cell, including
effects of viscoelasticity, anisotropy, nonlinearity, and heterogeneity of
material properties, will also be evaluated. In addition, a number of
technological enhancements are proposed to optimize the AFM as a nano-tool for
cell mechanics applications. The insights gained will be used to guide cell
indentation experiments, to improve data analysis, and to help realize the
tremendous potential of this powerful technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Connected
with the research activity, a new course module in Biomechanics of Cells is
proposed in the Department of Biomedical Engineering at Columbia University. The
goal is to expose students to biomedical applications of nanotechnology as
applied to the field of cell mechanics. Specifically, students in this graduate
/ advanced undergraduate course will use the AFM to gain hands-on experience
interacting with materials at the cellular and sub-cellular scale. New advances
in the research program will be integrated into the course and will also be
incorporated into an outreach Summer High School Program. In addition, a
multimedia web-based training tool will be developed and published on the
National Science Digital Library so that it is always available educators and
researchers interested in mechanical testing of cells and other biological
materials using AFM. The website will include theoretical foundations, detailed
methods, and practical "tips for success" enhanced by multi-media content.
Through these combined research and educational activities, the PI aims to
further the science of nano-scale biomechanics and stimulate interest in this
new and exciting field. &lt;br/&gt;