* 0239504
* CAREER: Statistical Mechanics of Particulate Systems Far from Equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2003,12/31/2008
* Hernan Makse, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research and education
on "jammed" systems of particulate materials, such as emulsions and granular
media. These systems are inherently far from their equilibrium state. This work
seeks to test and further develop a unifying thermodynamic framework which
promises to lead to a common understanding of a wide range of systems with
collective relaxation dynamics. In particular, study will focus on two soft-
matter systems: densely packed granular matter and highly concentrated
emulsions. If a thermodynamic framework can describe the behavior of systems far
from equilibrium, than an effective temperature with a true thermodynamic
meaning exists as a key parameter in characterizing the material's properties.
In order to examine the validity of this concept, the PI will perform computer
simulations- using high-performance numerical algorithms in serial and parallel
architectures- and develop an appropriate theoretical basis to describe the
observed behavior. The PI will test whether the application of thermodynamic
concepts may provide the framework for understanding slow granular rheology and
nonlinear elastic phenomena. The work has potential broader impacts on the
petroleum, pharmaceutical, and processing industries and on fundamental science
through the exploration of the theoretical idea that a statistical ensemble for
closely packed particulate systems could be an example of a true generalization
of the application of statistical mechanics of Gibbs and Boltzmann to systems
out of equilibrium. The educational component involves curriculum development
and innovation, attraction and retention of underrepresented minority students,
and dissemination of our results to a wide audience through an educational web
site. It entails the development of a series of interdisciplinary courses on
modern, soft-matter physics and computational physics topics, which will be
tightly integrated with the research plan. Involving undergraduate and graduate
students in research environments early on in their careers will be a priority
of this program. The PI will draw an excellent pool of minority undergraduate
and graduate students from physics and chemical, civil and mechanical
engineering backgrounds. %%% This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research and education on "jammed" systems of particulate
materials, such as emulsions and granular media. In particulate materials, a
"jammed" system results if particles are packed together so that all particles
are touching their neighbors, a possibility provided the density is sufficiently
high. It has been postulated that the behavior of systems experiencing such a
state of structural arrest, a state that is inherently far from the equilibrium
state, can be described by equilibrium thermodynamic concepts and the existence
of an effective temperature. This work proposes to test and further develop a
unifying thermodynamic framework which promises to lead to a common
understanding of a wide range of systems. The work has potential broader impacts
on the petroleum, pharmaceutical, and processing industries and on fundamental
science through the exploration of the theoretical idea that a statistical
ensemble for closely packed particulate systems could be an example of a true
generalization of the application of statistical mechanics of Gibbs and
Boltzmann to systems out of equilibrium. The educational component involves
curriculum development and innovation, attraction and retention of
underrepresented minority students, and dissemination of our results to a wide
audience through an educational web site. It entails the development of a series
of interdisciplinary courses on modern, soft-matter physics and computational
physics topics, which will be tightly integrated with the research plan.
Involving undergraduate and graduate students in research environments early on
in their careers will be a priority of this program. The PI will draw an
excellent pool of minority undergraduate and graduate students from physics and
chemical, civil and mechanical engineering backgrounds. ***