* 0239105
* CAREER:  Utilizing Nonlinearity - Leverage to Global Synthesis of Inherently Nonlinear Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Chunjiang Qian, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2008
* USD 420,200.00

In this project, we propose an intensive program to develop new controller
design&lt;br/&gt;methodologies for a variety of inherently nonlinear systems,
and to apply the findings to&lt;br/&gt;the control problems of underactuated
mechanical systems, mobile robots with flex link,&lt;br/&gt;and other practical
systems with various uncertainties. The systems under consideration
do&lt;br/&gt;not have a controllable linearization that is a common requirement
of existing control&lt;br/&gt;schemes. Therefore, most of the control problems
for these systems are still open and&lt;br/&gt;indeed bring new challenges to
the control engineering. In this project, we concentrate on&lt;br/&gt;the
development of both theoretically sound and practically useful controller
design&lt;br/&gt;schemes, which enable us to solve the difficult problems of
global stabilization, adaptive&lt;br/&gt;regulation, and output feedback
control, for inherently nonlinear systems that cannot be&lt;br/&gt;adequately
controlled using the existing methods.&lt;br/&gt;Our primary approach relies on
the adding a power integrator technique developed by the&lt;br/&gt;proposer and
collaborators, which fully utilizes the nonlinearity of the systems
to&lt;br/&gt;effectively control the inherently nonlinear systems. The recent
research work based on&lt;br/&gt;this tool has led to new solutions to a number
of control problems for systems with&lt;br/&gt;uncontrollable linearization, and
suggests that very promising advances can be achieved by&lt;br/&gt;this research
program.&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this CAREER development plan
aims at developing and reshaping&lt;br/&gt;courses, introducing innovative
teaching techniques, mentoring undergraduate and graduate&lt;br/&gt;students,
setting up new laboratories, and creating research-oriented projects
and&lt;br/&gt;hands-on experiments. With all these efforts, we believe that the
research program can be&lt;br/&gt;effectively integrated into the academic
curriculum of the University of Texas at San&lt;br/&gt;Antonio. Moreover, while
exposing the students to state-of-the-art techniques, the&lt;br/&gt;education
plan will also help bridge the gap between theoretical research and
engineering&lt;br/&gt;practice, and therefore stimulate students' interest in
control engineering.