* 0239744
* CAREER:  Proteins Containing Non-natural Amino Acids as Building Blocks for Novel Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2010
* Kristi Kiick, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 05/31/2010
* USD 420,000.00

This project focuses on the engineering of biopolymeric materials for
application in materials science and biology. Nature regularly uses precise
control of macromolecular structure to impart function; the exquisite
information storage, hierarchical assembly, and catalytic properties of natural
molecules such as nucleic acids and proteins have long been admired by the
polymer chemist. Despite the many advances in the chemical synthesis of
polymers, no synthetic method offers the sequence and structural control
afforded by protein polymer production by in vivo methods. Additionally,
important advances in protein engineering have made possible the multisite
incorporation of non-natural amino acids into proteins in vivo, which markedly
expands the chemical versatility of genetically directed methods. This research
program capitalizes on the structural and sequence control of biosynthesis,
combined with the novel chemical function of non-natural amino acids, to create
new polymeric materials with exceptional architectural control. Specific targets
include the controlled presentation of groups such as saccharides, peptides, or
electroactive moieties for applications in sensors, biomaterials, and
nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The highly interdisciplinary nature of
this research program will provide diverse opportunities for training in the
research environment, and research concepts in this program will also be
integrated into the materials science and engineering curriculum in courses such
as polymer synthesis and advanced biomaterials. Integration into undergraduate
programs will include the implementation of biotechnology research and special
topics discussion groups. In addition to these educational contributions at the
university level, a novel outreach program, The Science of Art, will be
implemented at a regional high school. The combination of these scientific and
instructional programs will be the basis of innovative contributions to
materials research and education.&lt;br/&gt;