* 0239343
* CAREER: Integrated Circuits for Ultra High Speed Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Ali Hajimiri, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

0239343&lt;br/&gt;Hajimiri&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is widely accepted that high-
speed communications will remain one of the major fields of studies in the
foreseeable future. Communications (wireless or wireline) are affected by many
parameters, but it is essentially the limitations of the physical layer that
determine its speed and flexibility. While a large amount of effort has been
dedicated to development of new substrates and techniques at the physical layer,
high speed and low power communication systems and circuits are facing the
physical limitations of the devices and substrates used. This is particularly
the case, in integrated systems and circuits, where non-dominant effects of the
past are becoming dominant to haunt Moore's law for high-speed circuits. While
the number of on-chip transistor increases, the inevitable limitations of the
scaling process are creating limitations that cannot be easily remedied. These
effects have completely changed the design space and have made it more difficult
to substantially increase the bandwidth and the speed of such systems using the
conventional design techniques. These limitations are partly due to the levels
of abstraction defined to facilitate the design process in the past, that have
unfortunately lost their effectiveness in the light of the new constraints.
Still the silicon-based technologies are the most promising technology for the
next generation of ultra-high speed communication systems operating at tens of
gigaherz. However, before this promise is realized in a practical system, a set
of key research challenges need to be addressed. In this proposal, the PI plans
to investigate several of the system, circuit, device, and simulation
challenges, as well as the general impact of the integration of communication
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the five year span of this proposal, he
will continue to study many aspects of ultra high-speed silicon-based integrated
circuits, emphasizing both their relevance to the practical integrated
communication systems and circuits that will be developed in the near future, as
well as their ability to develop new science and knowledge with implications
beyond the initial problem. The main topics to be studied include: 1. noise
processes in integrated communication systems, 2. distributed circuits for ultra
high-speed wireless and wireline communications, 3. new transceiver
architectures and concepts, 4. new device structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI joined academia because of his strong belief that education is perhaps the
only real long-term solution to the primary problems faced by human society.
Education is one of the primary human activities making learning and teaching
two sides of the same coin. Thus, as an educator, whether in the classroom,
solving theoretical research problems with graduate students, or in the
laboratory helping a student create her complicated setup, the PI has had and
will have the opportunity to teach and learn, and to broaden the vision and
horizons of, and create new possibilities for, both his students and himself.
His philosophy towards his career primarily as an educator is that every form of
human interactions can and should be viewed as an opportunity to learn and
educate. He has been and will continue to be able to make a broader impact by
training and preparing students for their future careers, so that they may take
on leadership roles and contribute to society at large. The primary reason for
his joining Caltech is the unique opportunity to be a part of the strong link
between its tradition in research and an extremely active and energetic student
body. Caltech's excellence as a research institution, as well as its unwavering
commitment to undergraduate education, make it an excellent place for such an
endeavor. Also, the vigor and strength of its undergraduate body combined with
the Institute's courage to challenge boundaries make it a perfect place to
experiment with difficult and progressive approaches to teaching and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of his educational plan are:
1. to continue teaching undergraduate and graduate level courses, emphasizing
the fundamental concepts, encouraging creativity, and focusing on fundamental
engineering trade-offs, 2. to continue curriculum development for all levels,
trying to address as large an audience as possible, considering the needs of the
department, institute, and society at large, 3. continue undergraduate and
graduate advising by empowering students to realize their full
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;