* 0239363
* CAREER:    Discovery of New Enantioselective Dipolar Cycloadditions From Small Ring Heterocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Jeffrey Johnson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2008
* USD 470,000.00

The focus of this research is to develop new synthetic methodology for
stereoselective [3+2] reactions based on Lewis-acid promoted ylide formation for
the preparation of complex heterocycles. The project will focus on carbonyl
oxides and azomethine ylids produced by conrotatory 4-pi ring opening of
epoxides and aziridines in the presence of Lewis acidic metals and
enantiomerically pure ligand systems. Applications will include the synthesis of
non-racemic mixtures of diols and the synthesis of (-)-kainic acid. The focus of
the educational effort will be the introduction of team-based learning
approaches to chemistry. Dr. Johnson has delineated new approaches for the
education of advanced organic students at U.N.C.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
CAREER award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
research and educational efforts of Dr. Jeffrey S. Johnson of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. Professor Johnson
will focus his research on the development of new methods for the construction
of complex molecules that have potential for broader impact in the
pharmaceutical industry. This work focuses on obtaining only one enantiomer
(chiral isomer) of an organic compound where the potential for the formation of
two isomers exists. These new methods could have important implications for the
design of medicinally important compounds. The educational activity of the award
revolves around improved ways to teach organic chemistry to undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt;