* 0239000
* Allosteric Effects of DNA on Bacteriophage 434 Repressor Function
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Gerald Koudelka, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 05/31/2007
* USD 449,000.00

The DNA sequence to which a protein binds can profoundly affect the ability of
the protein-DNA complex to participate in gene regulatory processes. Hence, DNA
is more than a passive platform onto which proteins assemble, it can play an
active, second role as an allosteric effector of protein function. The
allosteric effect of DNA is a recently discovered phenomenon. Thus, the goal of
understanding how DNA influences the form and function of the transcriptional
regulatory protein represents the leading edge of the work on the function of
DNA binding proteins.&lt;br/&gt; The repressor of bacteriophage 434 appears to
undergo two conformational changes, one as it dimerizes in the presence of
nonspecific DNA and another as the repressor dimer binds to a specific DNA
binding site. The structure and function of the 434 repressor-DNA complex may
vary with the identity of the DNA sequence to which it binds. Among other
changes these distinct structural forms vary in their abilities to form higher
order oligomeric complexes. The conformational differences between these
complexes influence 1) sequence recognition by the repressors; 2) cooperative
interactions between DNA bound repressors and 3) the interaction of the
repressor with RecA.&lt;br/&gt; In light of these findings, the basis for the
allosteric effect of DNA on repressor function will be determined. Having
established the nature of DNA allostery, this information will then be used to
probe the allosteric effect of DNA on repressor tetramer formation to provide
insight into the mechanism of DNA-dependent cooperative binding of repressor. In
addition, this information will guide experiments aimed at providing an
understanding of how the distribution of the various oligomeric forms of
repressor can be regulated by interaction with other proteins and DNA in the
host cell. Insights gained from these results will further the understanding of
the critical determinants of function in these and other sequence-specific
protein-DNA complexes. &lt;br/&gt; In addition to being an archetypal system in
which the effect of DNA sequence on function can be investigated, the lambdoid
bacteriophages provide a conceptually and practically accessible system in which
to study the role of protein-protein interactions in gene regulation. These
features have allowed students at all levels, including those at the high school
level, to significantly contribute to the battery of observations and
understanding in this system. By working in this system, students at the
graduate, undergraduate and high school levels, have learned how to ask
important biological questions, and used their observations to make important
contributions to the understanding of gene regulatory mechanisms. The elegant
simplicity of the system ensures that others will do the same.