* 0239800
* CAREER: Advancing MS For Peptide/Protein Sequencing
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Michael Van Stipdonk, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 02/28/2009
* USD 462,000.00

This CAREER award to Professor Michael Van Stipdonk of Wichita State University
is supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division. In this project, mass spectrometry will be further developed and
refined for identification of peptides and proteins, a crucial step in efforts
to understand metabolic pathways, cellular signaling, and the biochemistry of
disease. The sequence of amino acids, the order in which they are linked
together, ultimately identifies a peptide or protein. Before mass spectrometry
can be used for high-throughput and high-accuracy sequencing directly (i.e.
without resorting to library or database searches), a clear understanding of the
"rules" that govern peptide and protein dissociation in the gas-phase is
required. The project includes a comprehensive investigation of factors that
guide dissociation reactions, including the importance of cation choice (proton
or metal ion), peptide sequence, tautomerization, cyclization and intramolecular
proton transfer. The work will lead to an optimized and validated mass
spectrometry approach to peptide/protein identification that can be applied to
proteome analysis, biochemistry and molecular biology.

The project has, and will continue to include undergraduate students as integral
participants in research. From their experiences, new experiments for the
determination of amino acid sequence in peptides will be condensed and
transformed into novel educational exercises. With regard to the K-12 system, a
new program will be developed to address the important issue of science teacher
preparation and retention. The PI and several representatives of area public and
private high schools envision a comprehensive resource to support science
teachers, including the training of new teachers through the Wichita State
University Alternative Certification program. In particular, lesson plans,
teaching strategies, and exercises in critical thinking will be developed and
shared among many new teachers; already, more than 90 teachers have expressed
interest in the program. Opportunities will also be extended to high school
teachers to spend summer months conducting research at Wichita State University,
strengthening their mastery of chemistry content knowledge, and better preparing
them to translate and transfer the excitement and relevance of science to their
students.