* 0239380
* Taxation and Social Security
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Peter Diamond, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/2007
* USD 91,587.00

Both the income tax and the estate tax have deductions for charitable donations.
The theoretical literature that examines how progressive taxes should be to
accomplish different societal goals does not consider the role of donations. The
project will develop the theory of how progressive taxes should be designed to
take into account their effect on gifts and donations. In addition to
considering incentives for both work and donations, the analysis will consider
the foundations of normative criteria for evaluating outcomes when there are
voluntary gifts and donations. The analysis will relate optimal taxation to
different definitions of societal goals. The end product should be increased
understanding of the treatment of charitable deductions in the income tax and
the estate tax. Also considered will be transfer programs, such as unemployment
insurance, which affect gifts from others.

Social Security affects both income distribution and retirement decisions. An
important aspect of both effects is the diversity in life expectancy in the
American public. This diversity also affects the demand by retirees for
annuities. Also varying in the public is the approach to savings, with some
people showing consistency over time in their planning, while others do not.
This project will examine the role of Social Security with different
formulations of individual savings and annuitization behavior and different
insurance market structures. Analysis of the impact of Social Security on
behavior will be an input into normative analysis of the design of Social
Security program parameters.

