* 0239461
* CAREER:    Environmental Dechlorination Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Kristopher McNeill, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 05/31/2008
* USD 517,350.00

This award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports work by Kristopher McNeill in the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Minnesota to implement a research and teaching plan centered on
environmental chemistry. Motivated by the widespread contamination of US
drinking water supplies with chlorinated solvents, the research component of
this plan has as its two goals the development of new, highly active
dechlorination catalysts and the elucidation of mechanisms of metal-promoted
dechlorination reactions. A variety of cobalt, nickel, and iron complexes will
be examined, and the mechanistic principles that are uncovered will be used to
rationally design synthetic dechlorination catalysts that have superior
properties to naturally occurring catalysts such as vitamin B12 and F430. The
proposed experiments will lead to an improved fundamental understanding of
dechlorination reactions and will bring about the discovery of synthetic
catalysts that will be useful for remediation. The educational activities in
this plan include development of environmentally themed general chemistry and
freshman seminar courses. A distinguishing feature of the proposed educational
activities is its assessment plan, which will be developed and conducted with
collaborators in educational psychology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By uncovering the
working principles of metal-mediated dechlorination reactions and developing
synthetic catalysts, this work will help provide solutions to an important
environmental problem: contamination of drinking water with chlorinated
methanes, ethylenes and arenes. This study will enhance the environmental
science understanding of undergraduate students, helping them to make informed
decisions as individuals and as voters. It will also provide an ideal training
opportunity for undergraduate and graduate researchers that will enable them to
become future leaders in environmental research and teaching. &lt;br/&gt;