* 0239008
* SBIR Phase II:  Nanocrystalline Fe-Co For Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) Suppression
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2003,11/30/2005
* T. Sudarshan, Materials Modification Inc.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 11/30/2005
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project focuses on developing
nanocrystalline soft ferromagnetic materials for various end use applications
such as Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) suppression, magnetic bearings and
inductors. Phase I clearly established the feasibility of producing these
materials via a patented microwave plasma technique. In addition, these
nanomaterials were consolidated to near theoretical densities using a patented
plasma pressure compaction technique and the compacts exhibited high magnetic
strength and low coercivity. During Phase II, the process will be to develop
these materials for specific applications. Our Industrial partners will evaluate
the produced materials to evaluate parameters, which are critical for
transitioning the technology to an immediate useful product. In addition, an IP
protection and various avenues to commercialize the&lt;br/&gt;technology will be
sought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are numerous applications for nanocrystalline
soft magnetic materials with superior magnetic and mechanical properties and low
core loss. This includes EMI prevention components, generators, transformers,
data communication interface component, magnetic bearings (commercial high-
performance applications in the domain of rotating machinery), magnetic
recording heads, motors, sensors, and reactors. MMI plans to focus on three
market segments including (1) EMI suppression (2) Magnetic Bearings and (3)
Inductors.&lt;br/&gt;