* 0239183
* SBIR Phase II:   The Use of Gestural Interface and Robotics Technology to Facilitate Language Development
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Corinna Lathan, ANTHROTRONIX, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 01/31/2007
* USD 1,107,315.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to enhance
functionality and clinically evaluate an interactive robotic system to
facilitate receptive and expressive language development of children with
disabilities. Developed by Anthrotronix, Inc., a rehabilitation engineering,
consulting, and product development company, this child-friendly robot is
controlled by various interfaces adapted to individual needs, regardless of
physical limitations. The child controls the robot via gestures and voice
activation. Gestures may include reaching for a button, operating a joystick, or
activating wearable sensors through body movement. The child can play and record
sound and movement commands and interact with the robot in the context of
programmed games. The robot allows the child to interact with its environment.
The controlling software can be updated so that the robot continues to hold the
child's interest and imagination over time. This robotic technology is designed
to provide reinforcements and motivation for learning and therapy. Objectives
are to (1) finalize the design and manufacture of the robotic systems hardware
and software and (2) evaluate the systems ability to provide interventional
activities, motivation, and positive reinforcement in speech/language
therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 10% of all children have one or more
disabilities. The number of children with speech and language impairments is
higher than that for any other disability. A total of 1,050,975 students between
the ages of 6 and 17 have a primary speech and language impairment and another
441,410 students have a secondary diagnosis of speech and language impairment.
Anthrotronix is addressing the market need for therapists to have effective
tools that support an approach that integrates speech/language development with
children's educational development and social development, such as communication
and interpersonal skills. There is a clear opportunity for products that enable
therapists to provide increased motivation and education of children with
disabilities while performing therapeutic functions.&lt;br/&gt;