* 0239600
* CAREER: Knot Theory and Dynamics in Contact Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,01/31/2007
* John Etnyre, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 01/31/2007
* USD 402,023.00

Proposal DMS-0239600 PI: John Etnyre, University of Pennsylvania Title: CAREER:
Knot Theory and Dynamics in Contact Geometry

ABSTRACT



The focus of this proposal is to study the relation between topology and contact
geometry in all (odd) dimensions and to apply contact geometric techniques to
questions in hydrodynamics. Many of the connections between topology and contact
geometry are mediated by Legendrian knots (these are knots that are tangent to a
contact structure), thus the first main theme of the proposed research is
Legendrian knots. As part of this proposal the general structure of Legendrian
knots will be studied. The expected outcome will be various classification
results for certainLegendrian knots and contact structures; and, moreover, a
betterunderstanding of Legendrian surgery (an important surgery construction of
contact structures). Legendrian knots in higher dimensions will also be studied
using contact homology. There is very little known about contactstructures, or
Legendrian knots, in dimensions above three. By investigating Legendrian knots
in these dimensions the nature of contactstructures should be illuminated, just
as the corresponding study revealed much about three dimensional contact
structures. The final part of the proposed research centers on the connection
between contact structures and hydrodynamics discovered a few years ago by the
Principal Investigator and R. Ghrist. Here work with Ghrist will continue with
the aim of understanding when, and what type of, closed flow lines occur in
fluid flows. We shall also study hydrodynamic instability from the contact
topological perspective. This naturally leads into the study of energy
minimization for fluid flows and relations between contact and Riemannian
geometry.

Contact structures are very natural objects, born over two centuries ago,in the
study of geometric optics and partial differential equations. Through the
centuries contactstructures have touched on many diverse areas of mathematics
and physics,including classical mechanics and thermodynamics. In everyday life
oneencounters contact geometry when ice skating, parallel parking a car,using a
refrigerator, or simply watching the beautiful play of light ina glass of water.
Many great mathematicians have devoted a lot of their work to this subject but
only in the last decade or two has it moved into the foreground of mathematics.
This renaissance is due to the recent remarkable breakthroughs in contact
topology, resulting in a rich and beautiful theory with many applications. The
most remarkable feature of all this recent work is the intimate connections
between contact structures and topology in dimension three. Thus by studying
this abstract notion of a contact structure one can learn many subtle things
about the universe in which we live. For example, the study of contact geometry
has recently lead to some unexpected advances in our understanding of the flow
of idealized fluids. The Principal Investigator will explore connections between
contact structures and topology in all (odd) dimensions, continue his study of
idealized fluid flows (hydrodynamics) via contact geometry and analyze
intriguing new conjectures concerning string theory and contact geometry. The
Principal Investigator will also engage in several educational endeavors,
including the support and encouragement of graduates students and the creation
of introductory and survey materials to bring the rapidly developing field of
contact geometry to a wider audience.

