* 0239165
* CAREER:  Cellular control through the development of engineered gene circuits
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Jeff Hasty, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 02/29/2008
* USD 402,200.00

0239165&lt;br/&gt;Hasty&lt;br/&gt;Many fundamental cellular processes are
governed by a genetic circuitry that employs protein-DNA interactions in
regulating function. The biochemistry of the feedback loops associated with
protein-DNA interactions leads to nonlinear effects, and the tools of nonlinear
analysis become invaluable. In this project synthetic gene oscillator is being
modeled and constructed in bacterial cells. The PI intends to couple the
oscillator to an intrinsic periodic cellular process, which could lead to
possible strategies for entraining or inducing network oscillations in cellular
protein levels, and prove useful in the design of networks that interact with
cellular processes that require amplification or precise timing. A multi-gene
memory-based synthetic network that can function as a sensor of multiple
transient signals, and thus form the basis for general control schemes requiring
an "if/then" structure, will also be designed and constructed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed engineered gene circuits will lead to
testable predictions regarding the current understanding of complex biological
networks. This ability to design synthetic gene networks offers the exciting
prospect of extracting carefully chosen subsystems from natural organisms, and
focusing both modeling and experimental effort on determination of the behavior
of the subsystems in isolation. The long-range goal of such work would be to
assemble increasingly complete models of the behavior of natural systems, while
maintaining at each stage the ability to test models in a tractable experimental
system. The power of this approach is that it can be used to study simplified
systems in order to gain insight into the general "modules" of gene regulation.
These modules include sub-networks that act as switches or oscillators, as well
as networks that act to communicate across a population of cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work stemming from this proposal will impact education
through the following projects: (i) Development of systems biology curricula for
the Bioinformatics Program. To this end, research from engineered gene circuits
will be used to form the basis for the systems biology curricula for
undergraduate and graduate students. (ii) Development of an elementary school
science program. This program will be developed in a school with a large
minority component within the San Diego Unified School District. (iii)
Recruitment of REU students. The PI will actively recruit two students per
summer from the NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Program.
&lt;br/&gt;