* 0239331
* SBIR Phase II:   Environmentally Benign, High-Pressure Plasma Cleaning Tool for Photoresists
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Steven Babayan, Surfx Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 01/31/2005
* USD 511,999.00

This SBIR Phase II project focuses on the development of a cleaning tool for the
removal of tenacious organic residues from 200 mm wafers. These residues arise
from ion bombardment of the photoresist films during processing. Organic residue
removal encompasses approximately half of the cleaning operations in a
semiconductor manufacturing plant. Surfx Technologies has developed a novel
high-pressure plasma cleaning process that uses environmentally benign reagents
and generates minimal waste. Results from Phase I indicate that ion-implanted
resists may be stripped away in 5 min at 125 C, without any film popping and
particle contamination as is normally observed during dry processing. The Phase
II project will thoroughly research and optimize the process chemistry. In
addition, a prototype cleaning system will be developed that meets all the
technical criteria established by the semiconductor industry for organic
cleaning operations.

This SBIR Phase II project has broad commercial and societal impact.
Semiconductor equipment devoted to organic residue cleaning represents a mult-
ibillion dollar market. If our environmentally benign, high-pressure plasma
cleaning tool can achieve all the technical objectives outlined in the proposal
than it stands a good chance of garnering a significant share of this market.
Moreover, it will replace current water-wasteful and hazardous wet cleans with
an innovative process that uses non-toxic reagents and generates minimal waste.
This will substantially benefit our society by mitigating the environmental,
health and safety impacts of semiconductor manufacturing.