* 0239055
* SBIR Phase II:   A New Technology for Rapid Identification of Aluminum Metals
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Edward Sommer, National Recovery Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2006
* USD 1,036,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
new technology for rapid identification and sorting of aluminum and its alloys
from a mixture of non-magnetic metals and will provide a new high quality source
of these valuable materials for industrial manufacturing processes. This project
plans to complete development of an innovative new optoelectronic sensing method
integral to the new technology and then design, construct, and test a near
commercial scale prototype metals processing system based upon the new
technology. The prototype system will be integrated into an existing pilot plant
test facility located on-site at the commercial partner's metals recycling
facility and will be tested on metal feed streams derived from an automobile
shredder processing line located at the recycling facility. A primary objective
is to develop an environmentally friendly computerized dry process which can be
situated locally and which can rapidly and cleanly sort aluminum scrap from
mixtures of nonmagnetic metals at low cost to replace large, costly, and
environmentally burdensome heavy media processes and smelting processes for
mixed metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial and broader impacts of this
technology will be to reduce the amount of scrap aluminum alloys that are
discarded each year in landfills because recycling of these materials are
neither technically nor economically practical. Existing methods of sortation
use visual examination and hand sortation, or hand-held/bench-top analyzers that
are cumbersome and slow in speed. Heavy media separators and smelting facilities
for mixed metals are polluting and expensive to build and operate. Using
advanced optoelectronic detection techniques, including computer analysis, the
proposed technology will sort aluminum alloys from mixed nonferrous metals
automatically at speeds never before attainable. If the approach is successful,
the impact to increased scrap utilization, increased scrap value and reduced
environmental pollution is enormous. The potential worldwide market exceeds $2
Billion annually. &lt;br/&gt;