* 0239334
* CAREER:  Improved Hydrologic Drought Forecasting Using Climate Information
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Thomas Piechota, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

Hydrologic droughts have economic, environmental, and social implications that
can be mitigated if advanced warning is provided. Recent research has shown that
global oceanic and atmospheric circulation patterns are linked to hydrologic
extremes; however, this knowledge has not been effectively translated into
improved hydrologic drought forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action supports
a CAREER-project that addresses two key research needs identified by the
National Research Council (NRC, 2001a, 2001b): (1) to develop a better
understanding of changes in hydrologic patterns as related to climate
variability; and (2) to develop improved methods to forecast hydrologic droughts
several months in advance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives are to
(1) develop a comprehensive understanding of the relationship between climate
variability and hydrologic drought, (2) determine the appropriate uses of remote
sensing data for predicting hydrologic drought, (3) develop a framework for
integrating climate and remote sensing information into long-range hydrologic
drought forecasting, and (4) apply the long-range hydrologic forecast model to
river basins in the southwest United States. The different modes of climate
variability will be identified based on climate indices and global sea surface
temperatures. The relationship between hydrologic drought and climate
variability will be investigated using statistical procedures, and a long-range
hydrologic forecast model will be developed and applied to the Colorado River
Basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research and education are integrated through
service learning that infuses the community service experience with student
learning. The educational goals are to (1) implement service learning in the
curriculum, (2) develop improved assessment skills, and (3) develop educational
tools for water resources of the Colorado River. Service-learning activities
will include freshman-engineering students working with K-12 students, and upper
division undergraduate and graduate students working with local organizations to
meet water resource needs in the community. The information obtained for the
Colorado River will be developed into an educational tool that is accessible to
the general public and students at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit and new contributions are a comprehensive understanding of
how hydrologic drought is influenced by other short- and long- term climate
variability, a better understanding of how remote sensing data can be used to
improve hydrologic drought forecasts, and the development of a tool that
decision makers and the public can use to determine water resource allocation.
The broader impacts include improved drought planning, which has direct economic
and societal benefits, a better understanding by students of their role in the
community through service learning, and an increased public awareness of the
drought issues in the Colorado River Basin.&lt;br/&gt;