* 0239997
* Microbial Observatories:  Eukaryotic Microbial Communities of the Old Woman Creek National Estuarine Research Reserve
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Robert Duff, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2007
* USD 220,574.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Peter Lavrentyev and Robert Duff of the
University of&lt;br/&gt;Akron to examine taxonomic composition of planktonic
protists in relation to their key functions&lt;br/&gt;at the NOAA Old Woman
Creek National Estuarine Research Reserve (OWC NERR). Samples&lt;br/&gt;will be
collected from four stations along the stream-Lake Erie transect at monthly
intervals in&lt;br/&gt;conjunction with the ongoing long-term monitoring.
Microbial community structure,&lt;br/&gt;distribution, and dynamics will be
examined under different hydrologic and climatic conditions&lt;br/&gt;using
molecular, digital video, flow-cytometry, and microscopic methods. This study
will&lt;br/&gt;generate a library of protistan images and ribosomal DNA
sequences which will contribute novel&lt;br/&gt;taxonomic and ecological data to
the scientific community and publicly accessible databases.&lt;br/&gt;The
taxonomic survey will be supplemented by field experiments, which will examine
the effect&lt;br/&gt;of differences in microbial community composition on two
functional aspects of the community:&lt;br/&gt;growth and
grazing.&lt;br/&gt;Protists (unicellular eukaryotic microorganisms) play an
important role in aquatic ecosystems&lt;br/&gt;by regulating bacterial and
primary production and regenerating the bulk of inorganic
nutrients&lt;br/&gt;but the relationship between their diversity and functions
remains poorly understood. This study&lt;br/&gt;will increase our knowledge of
microbial life in critical estuarine/coastal wetland environments&lt;br/&gt;and
improve our ability to predict complex and dynamic microbial processes in the
Great Lakes&lt;br/&gt;and the coastal ocean. On a yet broader scale, the study
will provide new insights about the&lt;br/&gt;relationship between biodiversity
and function in natural communities. Finally, this study will&lt;br/&gt;have an
impact on the infrastructure of education within the PIs institutions and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;Students at UA and FIU involved in the project will experience
a wide range of professional&lt;br/&gt;activities and will be involved in all
aspects of the research enterprise. In addition, this project&lt;br/&gt;will
provide information for the OWC NERR visitor center exhibit and thus contribute
to the&lt;br/&gt;general public understanding of the importance of preserving
biodiversity and estuarine/wetland&lt;br/&gt;environments. The results of this
study will be invaluable in informing decisions on conservation&lt;br/&gt;and
environmental management these important habitats that have become increasing
threatened.