* 0239213
* CAREER: Deposition of Metal and High K Dielectric Thin Films by Plasma Enhanced Atomic Layer Deposition for Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2009
* Tonya Klein, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 04/30/2009
* USD 412,368.00

The objective of this research is to develop a better fundamental understanding
of the physics and chemistry of solid interfaces that are crucial in modern
electronic, magnetic, and photonic devices. Within the nanoscale environments of
these devices, bulk thermodynamic properties no longer apply for predicting
stability, and diffusion and kinetic phenomena are not well understood. In this
research project, an innovative approach to establishing a better understanding
of interfaces will be developed by concentrating on an advanced thin film
fabrication technique, plasma enhanced atomic layer chemical vapor deposition,
to produce nanometer scale thin films. The design of dielectric gates or
magnetic tunnel junctions and metallic spin valves, optical coatings, diffusion
barriers, or interconnect liners can greatly be enhanced using this technology.
The abrupt interfaces that will be produced will permit fundamental physical
phenomena such as electron scattering to be examined in significantly more
detail. Deposition of the nanoscale thin films will be monitored using in situ
x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, attenuated total reflection infrared
spectroscopy, and quartz microbalance techniques. &lt;br/&gt;The education
portion of the work will focus on development of a new undergraduate curriculum
in association with a state-of-the-art MEMS microfabrication facility at the
University of Alabama. A diverse research group will be obtained through the
recruiting and retaining of minority and under-represented students and teachers
through an NSF REU and RET program. A broad range of devices can potentially be
fabricated using this technology. &lt;br/&gt;