* 0239448
* CAREER: Reactive Etching of Silicon Surfaces by Halogens with Novel Electrostatic Bond-Order Potentials
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Steven Stuart, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 03/31/2008
* USD 492,000.00

Professor Steven J. Stuart of Clemson University is supported through a CAREER
award by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to develop
classical potentials, which allow for the investigation of halogen-based etching
of silicon surfaces. He will follow a framework, which has been successfully
used for the development and application of hydrogen/carbon bond-order
potentials. An additional complication, absent in the previously developed
potentials, is to include electrostatic interactions which arise due to
differing halogen/silicon electronegativities. Temperature-accelerated dynamical
methods will be used to simulate multimonolayer etching processes. Direct one-
to-one mentoring of undergraduate and high school students is coupled to the
research.

Plasma etching of silicon wafers is the primary means for fabrication of
microelectronic devices and chips and is accomplished by spraying the wafer
surface with a hot gas containing a significant amount of chlorine of fluorine.
The atomic scale chemistry, which leads to wafer etching, is currently only
understood empirically and computer simulation of these processes is necessary
for a complete understanding. A more complete understanding may allow lower
concentrations of chlorine and fluorine, which would lead to cleaner and cheaper
processing. Also, enhanced understanding could allow for finer-scale etching
processes that could further reduce the size of devices or fabrication costs.
Parts of the computational methodology developed and applied here is useful to
other simulation efforts in the areas of physical chemistry. The research is
carried out with a very strong connection to the training of future scientists
and addresses outreach to high schools as well as undergraduate, graduate and
postgraduate