* 0239877
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research on Thermal Adaptation and Trophodynamics of Earth's Hottest Animal, the Pompei Worm 'Alvinella pompejana'
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Charles Phleger, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/2004
* USD 20,000.00

0239877&lt;br/&gt;Phleger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
international collaborative research on the mechanisms of thermal tolerance of
deep-sea hydrothermal vent organisms. Professor Charles Phleger and graduate
student Amy Groce of San Diego State University will travel to Australia to work
with Dr. Peter Nichols and John Gordon of the CSIRO Division of Marine Research
in Hobart, Tasmania. The project will also involve Matthew Nelson, a US graduate
student studying at the University of Tasmania. They will work to determine the
cell membrane characteristics that allow animals to survive in the high
temperatures found near hydrothermal vents. This will involve profiling the
signature lipids of selected species collected in 2001 using the deep-sea
submersible Alvin. The CSIRO laboratory of Dr. Nichols is particularly well
equipped for lipid analysis. Their study organisms include the pompei worm
"Alvinella pompejana", which is the animal believed to be able to withstand the
highest temperatures of any animal on earth. Their particular interest in lipids
is based on the fact that a number of vent organisms consume large amounts of
Archaea, a microorganism that makes up a significant portion of the biomass near
vents. Archaea contain heat-tolerant cell membranes comprised of ether-linked
lipids. This confers on these organisms an extraordinary capability to live in
extreme environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance of this
research lies in understanding the biochemical and physiological mechanisms of
adaptation which allow this worm and others to be studied to not just survive
but grow luxuriantly at environmental temperatures approaching the boiling point
of water. If it turns out that their membranes are composed of ether lipids
obtained by eating Archaea, this brings new complexity and implications to how
the food chain in extreme environments is constructed. In any case, the
knowledge gained may have applications in some industrial settings where
fermentation is required at high temperatures and pressures. A second area of
significance is that it will provide the opportunity for a US graduate student
to gain international experience in a highly regarded and well equipped marine
laboratory in Australia.&lt;br/&gt;