* 0239125
* CAREER:    Mathematical Modeling of Microfluidic Dynamics and Transport
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Thomas Witelski, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2009
* USD 541,362.00

This project will investigate mathematical problems in the fluid dynamics of
thin viscous films spreading on solid surfaces. The basic mathematical models
for such lubrication flows with strong surface tension effects are fourth-order
nonlinear partial differential equations. These equations yield certain singular
behaviors that make them problematic. In this work, these difficulties are
overcome through the use of physically-motivated generalized models that include
interaction forces between the liquid film and the solid substrate. These so-
called disjoining-pressure or ``dewetting-film'' models will be used as the
basis for the study of an array of interconnected problems. The goals of this
research project are: (i) to mathematically establish that dewetting film models
can provide faithful representations of the important physical effects in
coating flows, and (ii) to extend this basic research to the design of
microfluidic devices. These goals will be carried out using a combined
computational and analytic study of the nonlinear partial differential equations
for the dewetting models. Applying numerical simulations and similarity
solutions to the two-dimensional version of the models, the dynamics of flows in
structured geometries will be obtained; this work will be combined with a study
of mechanisms used to drive thin film fluid flows and their
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on mathematical models for
describing the motion of drops of fluids on solid surfaces. The impact of this
work lies in its role as basic research supporting advances in biomedical
engineering and microfluidic technology. A major focus of this project is the
use surface-tension effects for active transport of liquids. Using carefully
controlled changes in the local environment, we can create surface tension
forces to manipulate fluid droplets in any desired manner. This approach is a
key element used in the designs of microfluidic devices for the next generation
of biomedical research tools. The project will also examine how material
properties of the solid surfaces influence the motion of more complicated
fluids. This work will serve as the basis for understanding the important
physical factors in the formulation of drug delivery bio-gels used in
physiological coating flows and other biologically-motivated fluid flow
problems.