* 0239513
* CAREER: Connecting Natural and Analogue Systems in Petrological Research and Instruction
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Paul Asimow, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2008
* USD 559,039.00

Asimow&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0239513&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is conceived as
an integrated teaching and research approach to completing the connection
between the natural and the analogue traditions in petrology. A successful
thermodynamic model is a way to systematize observations and experiments and to
generate and test hypotheses, either in natural or in analogue situations.
Thermodynamic treatments that function well in both domains are therefore a key
element of completing the link between understanding of the complex and the
simple cases. Yet most thermodynamic models of petrological systems, and in
particular those presently available for silicate liquids, function on only one
side of the divide. The research component of the project focuses on development
of a solution model for silicate liquids that is able to fit both natural system
experiments and the detailed constraints in bounding subsystems, yet remains
manageable to calibrate and to use. A similar idea underlies the approach to
teaching of phase equilibria underlying the instructional component of the
project. Although the simple phase diagrams often taught may seem poorly
connected to observations of real rocks, the idea that rock systems evolve
towards thermodynamic equilibrium is essential. Hence phase diagrams must be
understood as representations of thermodynamic stability relations. The
development of easy-to-use computerized visualization tools that represent
simple energy relations or calibrated models of real systems will allow the
student to see, explore, and understand the topology of free energy minima and
to build the framework that connects elementary concepts to predictions about
the real petrological world. Broader impacts include utility to chemistry and
materials science students and the introduction of computers as essential tools
in research at a beginning stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;