* 0239325
* PECASE:    Synthesis, Optical, and Magneto-Optical Spectroscopies of Diluted Magnetic Semiconductor Quantum Dots
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Daniel Gamelin, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 01/31/2008
* USD 553,184.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: Synthesis, Optical, and Magneto-Optical
Spectroscopies&lt;br/&gt;of Diluted Magnetic Semiconductor Quantum
Dots&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
PECASE award supports research into the physical and chemical properties of
nanoscale diluted magnetic semiconductors (DMSs). Efforts will focus on doped
chalcogenide and oxide semiconductors recently shown to be suitable spin-
injection materials in prototype spin-based light emitting diode devices and to
support room-temperature ferromagnetism. The research will combine innovations
in chemical preparative methodologies with physical investigations involving
sophisticated spectroscopic and magnetic instrumentation, with emphasis on
ligand-field electronic absorption and magnetic circular dichroism
spectroscopies. These studies will allow correlations to be explored between
synthesis, electronic structure, and magnetism. Fundamental research in these
areas will yield new insights into the properties of nanoscale DMSs that may
contribute significantly to the way such materials are made and applied
technologically in the future. This multidisciplinary research will prepare
participating students with advanced expertise in the areas of physical,
inorganic, and materials chemistries. These research activities will be
complemented by synergistic educational activities having the common theme of
enhancing the opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students at the
University of Washington to study materials chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
PECASE award supports research into the synthesis and characterization of
nanoscale diluted magnetic semiconductor (DMS) materials important to the field
of spin-based electronics ("spintronics") technologies. The central objectives
of the research project are (a) to synthesize high-quality nanoscale DMSs and
(b) to study these materials by optical, magnetic, magnetooptical, and
electrochemical methods. This research will emphasize the development of room-
temperature solution methods for preparing, handling, and performing chemistry
upon high-quality internally doped oxide and chalcogenide DMS nanocrystals.
Exploratory research into the design and construction of prototype magnetic
superstructures involving DMS nanocrystals as building blocks will also be
initiated. This multidisciplinary research will prepare participating students
with advanced expertise in the areas of physical, inorganic, and materials
chemistries. These research activities will be complemented by synergistic
educational activities having the common theme of enhancing the opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students to study materials chemistry at the
University of Washington. The educational activities will involve a balanced
combination of new course development, departmental program development, and
regional advocacy of materials chemistry studies among academic institutions in
the Pacific Northwest. This project is supported jointly by the Chemistry
Division and the Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project was originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a
Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in
September 2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;