* 0239232
* CAREER:  Dynamic Contact Modeling and Experiments on Miniature Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2009
* Andreas Polycarpou, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 04/30/2009
* USD 441,765.00

The performance and durability of microdevices in sliding contact is
&lt;br/&gt;strongly dependent on interfacial phenomena like adhesion, friction,
wear, &lt;br/&gt;and friction/vibration interaction. It is becoming increasingly
recognized &lt;br/&gt;that problems of stiction, adhesion and other critical
phenomena such as &lt;br/&gt;bouncing vibrations occur dynamically in the
presence of time-varying loads &lt;br/&gt;and motions. As high-speed contacts
operate under ever more challenging &lt;br/&gt;conditions, contact or sticking
can, in principle, occur at any time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
In this research, a systematic approach to dynamic &lt;br/&gt;contact studies of
microsystems will be performed based on system &lt;br/&gt;independent
interfacial models that are coupled to the system dependent &lt;br/&gt;dynamics
of the interface. A unique feature of the proposed approach is &lt;br/&gt;the
direct incorporation of the intermolecular (adhesion) forces and
&lt;br/&gt;kinetic friction models based on continuum mechanics into a
dynamically &lt;br/&gt;moving contact interface. This will enable contact length
scales from &lt;br/&gt;micrometer to millimeter range and beyond to be covered.
Also, two unique &lt;br/&gt;microtribometers will be built to measure key
dynamic properties of &lt;br/&gt;realistic miniature systems, and to conduct
dynamic contact and friction &lt;br/&gt;experiments for model verification and
for studying such phenomena in &lt;br/&gt;HDI's, and MEMS. The outcome of this
research is to: (a) Develop a &lt;br/&gt;rigorous kinetic friction model for
microdevices; (b) Use the model to &lt;br/&gt;predict interfacial forces,
damping and kinetic friction, thus providing a &lt;br/&gt;powerful tool for
controlling adhesion, friction and wear in microsystems; &lt;br/&gt;(c) Predict
the motions of contacting and pseudo-contacting HDI's and MEMS &lt;br/&gt;as a
function of design parameters like roughness, material properties, and
&lt;br/&gt;system dynamic properties, thus avoiding large vibrations and impact
forces &lt;br/&gt;and the associated catastrophic
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research plan will
advance the knowledge of tribology &lt;br/&gt;and microtribolgy, while the
education plan of this research will &lt;br/&gt;disseminate it outside the
research group and beyond the University. The &lt;br/&gt;educational goals of
increasing the awareness of micro/nanotribology and &lt;br/&gt;engineering in
general, will be accomplished by: (a) establishing an &lt;br/&gt;outreach K-12
program targeting students grades 1 through 5 (cub-scouts) &lt;br/&gt;and high
school students, (b) enhancing a basic tribology course using &lt;br/&gt;modern
teaching techniques and also recruiting underrepresented students to
&lt;br/&gt;work on projects and disseminate the information to the public, (c)
&lt;br/&gt;developing a new graduate class in friction/vibration for miniature
systems &lt;br/&gt;(microtribodynamics) that will include current research
findings, and (d) &lt;br/&gt;actively participating in local and professional
societies to promote &lt;br/&gt;engineering and
tribology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed integrated research and education
plan will advance further &lt;br/&gt;the development of micromachines, which has
a major potential impact on &lt;br/&gt;society through transformation of a wide
range of technologies, and at the &lt;br/&gt;same time increase the awareness
and significance of friction and tribology