* 0239840
* PECASE: Real-Time Supply Chain Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Erica Plambeck, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 02/29/2008
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: Real-Time Supply Chain Management&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PECASE award will show how to
exploit real-time information with optimal dynamic control of pricing and
production. Information technology is enabling firms to monitor consumer demand
and production processes throughout the supply chain in real-time. The
following, specific, pressing issues in estimation, dynamic control, and supply
chain coordination will be addressed in this project: 1) How can a manufacturer
use real-time information about orders and cancellations to estimate true demand
and customers' sensitivity to delay, in spite of double bookings? 2) In an
assemble-to-order system, what is an effective dynamic policy for pricing,
leadtime quotation, sequencing orders for assembly, and control of component
inventory? 3) Supply contracts are often renegotiated in response to changes in
the business environment. How does this affect the structure of an optimal
supply contract? 4) What is the effect of sharing real-time information on
relational contracts (informal agreements sustained within a long-term
relationship)? The analysis will involve a fusion of cooperative and non-
cooperative game theory, statistics, stochastic processes, adaptive control,
heavy traffic queueing theory, and dynamic programming. Results will be
developed and disseminated through collaboration with managers in the Stanford
Supply Chain Forum, Lucent, nthOrbit, Rapt, Lonza, etc., and tested with data
from Cisco, Hewlett-Packard, and GM. PhD students in the Stanford Business
School and Engineering School will be engaged in this process, and will become
leaders in academia and industry. Research insights and learning about current
business practice will be incorporated into teaching materials for&lt;br/&gt;MBA
and PhD students, and published in academic journals. At present, very few firms
are exercising real-time control of their business processes, but the potential
for widespread productivity improvement is great (1). In a specific example, the
automobile industry wastes $65-$80 billion per year building inventories of
unwanted cars (2). Qualitative insights and quantitative methods for optimal
dynamic control of an assemble-to-order system will help car companies to
eliminate that waste. &lt;br/&gt;(1) Survey: Computers of the World Unite. The
Economist, February 2002, S19-S20.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Agrawal, M., T.V. Kumaresh and
G.A. Mercer. The False Promise of Mass Customization. McKinsey Quarterly 3,
2001, 62-71.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was originally funded
as a CAREER award, and was converted to a Presidential Early Career Award for
Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in September 2004.&lt;br/&gt;