* 0239889
* Investigations of Interactions Between the Atmospheric Boundary Layer and Squall Lines
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Kevin Knupp, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 04/30/2006
* USD 417,954.00

This research project will be an integral component of a multi-institution field
experiment termed the Bow Echo and Mesoscale Convective Vortex Experiment
(BAMEX). During the field phase of BAMEX (16 May to 6 July 2003), the Principal
Investigator will use the University of Alabama at Huntsville Mobile Integrated
Profiling System (UAH-MIPS) to document the kinematic and thermodynamic
structure of the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL) and associated squall line
structure, including bow echoes and line-echo-wave patterns (LEWP). The BAMEX
program seeks to improve understanding of bow echoes and associated severe
weather, and mesoscale convective vortices. Specific BAMEX scientific goals
include: (a) documentation of the life cycle of bow echoes, emphasizing
mechanisms of damaging wind production and tornado genesis, and (b)
investigation of the structure and evolution of mesoscale convective vortices
that form within mesoscale convective systems. Both goals include an
observational and modeling component, and the eventual goal is to improve
predictability of these phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to advance general understanding of the interaction between the
spatially variable and temporally evolving ABL and squall lines, bow echoes and
LEWPs. Current knowledge of the dependence of squall line dynamics on ABL
properties is not well known, particularly for the nocturnal boundary layer.
During the course of this investigation, the Principal Investigator will examine
the structure and evolution of squall lines and their associated ABL, which will
vary from stable to unstable or neutral. Thus, detailed measurements of the
thermodynamic and kinematic structure of the ABL will be acquired. A particular
focus will be placed on squall line behavior and the nocturnal boundary layer.
Two important problems involving interactions between squall line and ABL
processes will be addressed: (a) The structure, dynamics and thermodynamics of
downdrafts that produce strong surface winds within squall lines and bow echoes
will be examined. (b) The development of low-level mesoscale circulations
associated with development of tornadoes within squall lines will be
investigated. The UAH-MIPS is ideally suited for this activity, and will be the
only stationary instrument suite that can simultaneously measure detailed
continuous wind profiles (up to 2-4 km AGL) and thermodynamic profiles within
and above the ABL (up to 10 km AGL).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two benefits can be
anticipated from this research: (a) an improved understanding of mechanisms that
produce strong winds and tornadoes within squall lines, which will contribute to
enhanced detection and predictability of these hazardous phenomena; and (b)
comprehensive analyses that will validate numerical simulations of these
phenomena, which will in turn provide future scientific advances in
predictability.