* 0239030
* SBIR Phase II:  Optimal Replenishment Algorithms for Service Parts Logistics Systems
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Vipul Agrawal, MCA SOLUTIONS INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 01/31/2005
* USD 498,419.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II Project will develop prototype
software to provide optimal real time purchase and repair replenishment, and
allocation of service spare parts used to provide after-sales support to
mission-critical products. It will design, develop and test advanced
optimization algorithms to ensure that the right part is ordered from the right
source in the right quantity at the right time and then allocated to the right
location. In Phase III these engines will be incorporated in MCA Solutions
planned commercial enterprise software product Replenishment and Allocation
Optimizer (RAO) and complement MCA Solutions current product Service Parts
Optimizer (SPO).

The use of this tool will result in higher availability of service parts,
increase products uptime and lower expense in service parts inventory. The
target industries for this solution will be Defense, Aerospace, and
manufacturers of Automotive, Computer, Telecommunications and Hi-Tech equipment.
RAO will be the first commercial software product to support near real time
optimization of inventory management in service supply chains. The requirement
allocation optimizer software market is underdeveloped. The size of this
opportunity is significant. Over 1,100 companies in the United States generate
sales higher than $250 M/year in the original equipment manufacturer segment.
Combined sales in this sector are $3.3 trillion with total inventory investment
in service parts of about $250 Billion. Service parts inventory accounts for
about 5 to 10% of product sales for an OEM. The technology has the potential to
reduce these investments by 20% to 40 which in turn may pass some of the
reductions to the customers.