* 0239042
* CAREER:  Virtual Prototyping of Artificial Knees
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2009
* Benjamin Fregly, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 04/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

0239042&lt;br/&gt;Fregly&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal seeks to develop an
integrated educational and research foundation in computational modeling of
artificial knees. The two main objectives are (1) develop a virtual prototyping
environment that can be used to improve wear and functionality in artificial
knees, and (2) create two exhibits on engineering analysis of knee function for
the largest science museum in the southern U.S. An estimated 375,000 total knee
replacements (TKRs) were performed in the USA in 2002, and if current trends
continue, over 10 million will be performed between now and the year 2020. The
ability to improve the longevity and functionality of these implants would make
a significant impact on the quality of life for the millions of knee
osteoarthritis sufferers worldwide who will receive knee replacements in the
coming years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current experimental and computational
methodologies for studying TKR functionality and wear have significant
limitations. Knee simulator machines used to measure wear are costly and time
consuming, while dynamic finite element methods that predict motion and contact
pressures simultaneously require hours or days of CPU time. Consequently,
neither is appropriate for design sensitivity and optimization studies of knee
implant design and surgical positioning issues. Furthermore, neither allows the
study artificial knee function within the in vivo loading environment of the
larger musculoskeletal system. This study proposes a fundamentally new approach
for studying TKR functionality and wear. The approach integrates elastic contact
theory with multibody dynamics theory to produce a hybrid simulation environment
that possesses the advantages of both - fast dynamic movement simulation from
multibody dynamics and accurate contact pressure prediction from elasticity. The
method is fast enough to be integrated into a larger dynamic systems model of
the musculoskeletal system, providing a unique in vivo computational environment
for virtual prototyping of artificial knees. The environment will be extensively
evaluated in four stages against existing and new experimental data to ensure
that the final product is predictive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paralleling these
activities is the development of two exhibits on knee mechanics for the Museum
of Science and Industry in Tampa, FL. The exhibits will take the engineering
concepts and methods investigated in the research plan and make them accessible
to the general public. One exhibit will be a bank of knee models that visitors
can manipulate to study natural, injured, arthritic, and artificial knee
mechanics, and the other will be a multimedia exhibit at which visitors can
create and analyze simple knee models using the same engineering software as in
the research plan. Minority and economically disadvantaged children
participating in museum programs will serve as exhibit evaluators to expose them
to the use of engineering in medicine. &lt;br/&gt;