* 0239099
* CAREER:    Biomolecular Engineering of Antigen Presentation:    Development of an Interdisciplinary Research and Education Toolkit
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Eric Boder, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 03/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

The mammalian immune system demonstrates incredible power and flexibility in
protection from disease and other organism processes, and the ability to
stimulate controlled immune responses could revolutionize many areas of
molecular medicine. Peptide antigen presentation to T cells by major
histocompatibility complex proteins (MHC) is central to these immune responses;
engineering MHC-peptide binding will require a detailed and quantitative
understanding of the phenomena. This will require assiduous development of
research tools and infrastructure for personnel training aimed at quantitative
molecular design and optimization. The proposed work aims to (1) quantitatively
study a related family of A related will be studied to quantitatively examine
the kinetics and thermodynamics of binding between class II major
histocompatibility complex protein (MHC-II) and a family of related peptide
antigens; (2) elucidate correlations between peptide physicochemical properties
and antigenic properties through computational structure analysis and functional
studies; and (3) develop a directed evolution approach to tailoring MHC-II
peptide-binding properties; (4) develop a graduate and undergraduate lecture and
laboratory courses teaching state-of-art approaches in molecular biotechnology
and biomolecular engineering.