* 0239109
* CAREER:  Static Properties and Dynamical Behavior of Jammed Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2009
* Eric Weeks, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2009
* USD 474,939.00

This CAREER project will investigate connections between the microscopic and
macroscopic properties of complex fluids. The systems studied are "jammed"
materials, including colloidal suspensions, emulsions, and granular suspensions.
All these materials possess similar microscopic properties, and recent theories
propose that they share an underlying transition to the "jammed" state,
analogous to a glass transition. The objective of this work is to utilize
microscopy to provide crucial details for testing and extending theories of
jamming. Experiments will connect the rheological behavior of these systems to
the formation and dynamics of microscopic structures. The overarching goal is to
clarify the mechanisms underlying jamming, which will be highly relevant to a
large number of researchers studying granular materials, colloids, glass
transitions, and nonlinear dynamics in complex fluids. Moreover, the insight
from these experiments will be useful to the processing of industrially
important materials. Undergraduate and graduate students involved will receive
broad training in experimental techniques and computer data analysis. Because of
the interdisciplinary nature of these systems as well as their relevance to
technological and industrial processes, students involved in the project will be
well trained for careers in academe, industry, or government. The project is co-
supported with the Particulate and Multiphase Processes Program in the Division
of Chemical and Transport Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will
investigate connections between the small-scale structure of complex fluids and
their large-scale flow behavior. The systems studied are "jammed" materials,
including colloidal suspensions (small solid particles in a liquid), emulsions
(liquid droplets in a second liquid), and granular particles (large solid
particles). All these materials possess similar small-scale properties, and
recent theories propose that they share an underlying transition to the "jammed"
state analogous to how glasses become solid upon cooling. The objective of this
proposal is to use microscopy to provide crucial details for testing and
extending theories of jamming. Experiments connect the behavior of these
materials as they flow through tubes or deform under applied forces, to the
formation and motion of microscopic structures. The insight from these
experiments will be useful to the processing of industrially important materials
(such as food products, paints, pharmaceuticals, and oil). Undergraduate and
graduate students involved receive broad training in experimental techniques and
computer data analysis. Because of the interdisciplinary nature of these systems
as well as their relevance to technological and industrial processes, students
involved in the project will be well trained for careers in academe, industry,
or government. The project is co-supported with the Particulate and Multiphase
Processes Program in the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems.&lt;br/&gt;