* 0239152
* CAREER:    Innate and Adaptive Immunity in Response to Tissue Engineered Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Julia Babensee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 06/30/2008
* USD 400,000.00

0239152 Babensee Tissue engineering has the potential to revolutionize
reconstructive surgery through the provision of engineered tissues and organs
where no suitable alternative exists or to reduce morbidity associated with
current procedures. Tissue engineered constructs must evade the host defense
system to avoid rejection by the immune system and/or the consequences of
inflammation. Otherwise, the cells of the construct will die, lose function,
and/or be replaced by nonfunctional fibrotic or granulation tissue. Dendritic
cells (DCs) function in innate immunity to recognize foreign pathogens and
"danger signals" alert the effector arm of the immune/inflammatory system to
initiate an adaptive immune response. DCs, provide a bridge between innate
immune response to external signals such as foreign pathogens and the mounting
of an adaptive immune response to presented foreign antigens. Similarly, it is
expected that DCs play a central role in the inflammatory/immune response to
tissue engineered devices. It is critical therefore, with the immunological
complications of potential with tissue engineered cell/polymer constructs, to
understand the molecular basis for controlling the phenotype of this cell. In
this way, biomaterials may be designed on a molecular scale for this purpose.

This CAREER proposal is focused on: 1) Understanding the role of biomaterial
contact as a maturation stimulus for DCs, 2) Defining the "biomaterial
associated molecular patterns" (through the protein layer that they direct) that
regulate DC maturation, 3) Identifying the DC receptors that recognize these
chemical motifs and hence the mechanism of their maturation, 4) Integrating
biological and engineering principles of cell and tissue engineering within
educational programs with a hands-on approach.

The overall hypothesis of the research is that biomaterials induce the
maturation of DCs, acting as a "danger signal", such that the DCs become
efficient antigen presenting cells and T cell stimulators. Further hypothesized
is that biomaterial-associated DCs mature under the control of receptors similar
to those used to respond to microbial pathogens. The overall goal of the project
is that through an understanding of the effects of biomaterial chemistry on DC
maturation and the mechanisms by which biomaterials are DC maturation stimuli,
biomaterials may be designed on a molecular level to control DC phenotype.
Specifically, biomaterials will be designed to not support DC maturation where
immune responses are undesirable as for tissue engineered devices while designed
to support DC maturation where immune responses are desired as for non-viral
delivery vehicles for DNA vaccines. The objective is to delineate the biomedical
engineering principles that underlie the inflammatory and immune responses
towards tissue engineering constructs to enable biomaterial and biomedical
device design with improved clinical outcome. The overall engineering aspect of
this project is the elucidation of design rules for robust tissue engineered
devices that withstand host defense systems.

In parallel with the research, the PI will develop and implement a novel cell
and tissue engineering laboratory course for undergraduate biomedical
engineering (BME) students in which the students will learn the key concepts of
this field through active learning laboratory experiences. Presenting this
course in a laboratory format will stress the research nature of this field as
students perform experiments using non-textbook methods form the current
literature. The experiments will introduce students to aspects that are under
active investigation in the research community. Furthermore, diffusion of this
knowledge to younger students will attract the biomedical engineers of the
future. Middle school and high school students will be engaged in hands-on
learning about tissue engineering and its impact on society in a new short
course. Through collaboration with the Atlanta Girls' School, as an initial test
bed for this course, the infrastructure is present in their Winterim program,
for the development and presentation of this short course to a key target
audience, young girls.