* 0239413
* CAREER:  Dynamics and Synchronization in Semiconductor Lasers with Feedback
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* David Sukow, Washington and Lee University
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0239413&lt;br/&gt;Sukow&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
goal of this NSF CAREER proposal is to strengthen the undergraduate
&lt;br/&gt;physics program at Washington &amp; Lee University through an
integrated program of research and education emphasizing optics and lasers. The
main objective is to develop and support a stronger research culture through
enhancing the experimental research program in semiconductor laser dynamics.
This research program will consider current and exciting topics involving
dynamical instabilities and synchronization in diode lasers due to delayed
optical feedback, a subject of fundamental interest and technological
importance. All research projects will be undertaken with undergraduate research
assistants and a high school student intern. This environment will produce
significant scientific advances while taking advantage of the special strengths
of a liberal arts institution as a venue for mentoring undergraduates. Enriching
the research environment is a substantial program of visitors and
collaborations. Supplementing the research program will be the development of a
new Advanced Research Methods course, designed to create a bridge between the
classroom and the research lab. Existing classes will be enhanced with new
laboratory exercises and real-time demonstrations, to help create interest in
lasers and optics while enriching those courses for all students. Finally, the
impact of the lab exercises, demos, and student expertise developed in the
undergraduate setting will be extended to the local educational community.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Intellectual merit: The proposed research addresses
current and important questions in laser physics and nonlinear dynamics. The
research is organized around realistic experimental issues in dynamics and
synchronization of semiconductor lasers, and emphasizes a novel approach based
on simultaneous time-domain measurements of two optical signals. The results of
the proposed research will advance knowledge in laser dynamics with application
to communications, and also in the broader area of time-delayed feedback
systems. The PI has significant experience and an established record of
accomplishment in this research area. Washington and Lee University has provided
and continues to provide excellent support, adding to the feasibility of the
proposal. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Broader impacts: This CAREER proposal
thoroughly integrates research and education. Undergraduate and high school
student participation in research every year provides scholarly activity in a
close, mentoring environment. Students will be exposed to the greater scientific
community through attendance and presentations at conferences, as well as an on-
site schedule of collaborators, visitors, and international experts from
academia, government, and industry. The research and education infrastructure at
Washington and Lee will be strengthened through curricular development, which
will increase crossover between the classroom and the laboratory, and will
reform existing courses by infusing them with hands-on laboratory work
emphasizing real applications. Traditionally underrepresented groups will be
actively engaged through on-campus programs and outreach to the local
educational community, activities that will be used as teacher training
opportunities as well. Societal benefit may be realized through the application
of research results applied to faster and more efficient optical communication
systems, a well-trained technical workforce, and a more scientifically literate
public. All outcomes will receive wide dissemination at appropriate meetings and
by electronic means. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;