* 0239590
* Dust and Molecules at Low Temperatures:     Astrophysical Research & Curriculum Development
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2007
* Jason Ferguson, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 12/31/2007
* USD 249,621.00

Proposal ID: AST-0239590 Institution: Wichita State University PI: Ferguson,
Jason

Dr. Jason Ferguson of Wichita State University (WSU) will pursue calculations of
the opacity of cold dust grains. Dust is evident in the interstellar medium,
circumstellar dust shells around dying stars, and in disks around newly forming
planets. Dust has a vital role in the formation of stars and planets. Dust
reddens and dims the light from distant galaxies. Astronomers modeling these
diverse conditions need accurate dust physics including the interaction of dust
with light: opacity. Opacities are essential for the computation of the passage
of radiation through matter. Astronomers modeling such diverse processes as star
and planet formation, accretion disk physics, and stellar evolution need opacity
tables that contain data over a wide range of temperature, density, and chemical
composition. Dr. Ferguson will develop methods to improve the computation of
these opacities and the physics involved. He will also integrate his research
into upper division level astronomy courses, allowing students to participate
directly in the modeling of astrophysical phenomena.

In addition to his research, Dr. Ferguson will implement inquiry based learning
in the undergraduate astronomy curriculum at WSU with assistance from the
Curriculum & Instruction (C&I) Department in the College of Education. He will
also work with the C&I department to design and implement a new physical science
course for non-science educators. The course activities will also be offered as
workshops to in-service teachers during the summer.