* 0239735
* CAREER: An Integrated Research and Education Program in Gravitational-Wave Phenomenology
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Sukanta Bose, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 04/30/2008
* USD 400,000.00

A multi-disciplinary program in gravitational wave (GW) science that integrates
cutting-edge research with education at various levels will be established at
the Washington State University (WSU). This is motivated largely by the onset of
observational runs undertaken by five GW detectors around the world, including
two of the three detectors of the NSF-funded Laser Interferometer Gravitational-
wave Observatory (LIGO) located at Hanford, near WSU. Data analysis strategies
for searching GW signals from a variety of astrophysical and cosmological
sources with a network of detectors operating simultaneously will be formulated
as part of this program. A multi-detector analysis is significant owing to the
most powerful veto it levies against instrumental artifacts and the additional
source properties it unravels.

Gravitational-wave science oriented courses and lab experiments will be included
to enhance WSU's astronomy program and to develop the infrastructure required
for a quick transfer of knowledge. Sophomores and seniors, numbering about 200
per year, will be trained to develop skills in a field that will soon be
inundated with data, with the hope that some of them will go on to graduate
programs strongly tied to GW research. Courses in GW science will be cross-
listed towards a major in physics, thus expanding their impact. LIGO will be
supported by this work in ushering in a new era in Physics and Astronomy where
novel insights will be gained into the behavior of pulsars, supernovae and black
holes, and in putting our best understanding of classical gravity, in the form
of Einstein's general relativity, to a fresh set of stringent tests.