* 0240765
* First Japan-U.S. Workshop on Testing, Modeling and Simulation in Geomechanics; Boston, MA; June 27-29, 2003
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Jerry Yamamuro, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Juan M. Pestana
* 09/30/2003
* USD 58,000.00

0240765, Jerry A. Yamamuro, U. of Delaware &lt;br/&gt;"First Japan-U.S. Workshop
on Testing, Modeling and Simulation in Geomechanics"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
action provides support for the First Japan-U.S. Workshop on Testing, Modeling
and Simulation in Geomechanics, to be held in Boston, Massachusetts, June 27-29,
2003. This meeting was initiated by the signing of an Agreement of Cooperation
between the American Society of Civil Engineers Geo-Institute (G-I) and the
Japanese Geotechnical Society (JGS). The purpose of this agreement is to
"promote and enlarge the exchange of technical, scientific and professional
knowledge to better serve the interests and welfare of their members, the
engineering profession in general, and the public in both
countries."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Workshop is to bring together
the top researchers from Japan and the United States in various fields of
geomechanics, specifically experimentation, constitutive modeling, and numerical
simulations. Researchers from Japan and the U.S. will be invited to present
current relevant research activities on a variety of topics for the expressed
purpose of sharing knowledge so as to foster and build cooperative efforts
between the two countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics that will be
presented are of broad current interest, and are considered to be the state-of-
the-art. They include: inherent and stress system-induced anisotropic
properties; highly non-linear stress-strain behavior; elastic stress-strain
behavior at small strains; post-peak stress-strain behavior; mechanics of shear
banding; effects of strain rate, aging, and viscous effects on stress-strain
behavior; effects of particle size and gradation on stress-strain behavior;
stress-strain behavior and residual strains obtained from cyclic loading;
mechanics of soil liquefaction; and soil dynamics and the determination of soil
behavior using geophysical methods. The types of geomaterials will be limited to
unbound and cemented soils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information about the Workshop
and its activities will be disseminated via the World Wide Web. Papers and
abstracts will be posted on this website for general access, but, especially by
non-participants. E-mail discussions before and after the Workshop will be
implemented to obtain feedback and to create new ideas for future workshops. The
proceedings of the workshop will be made available electronically.&lt;br/&gt;