* 0240802
* Gender and Cooperation in Social Dilemmas
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2003,11/30/2005
* Brent Simpson, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 11/30/2005
* USD 58,333.00

This research extends recent work on the conditions under which gender affects
cooperation in "social dilemmas," or collective action situations that pose
conflicts between the individual's own interests and the group's interests.
Despite theoretical expectations of gender differences in which women are seen
as more likely to cooperate than men, nearly four decades of research has failed
to find clear patterns consistent with these expectations. The first goal of
this research is to examine whether the failure to draw more definitive
conclusions from previous work stems from the fact that past studies have relied
exclusively on the "Prisoners' Dilemma" (PD) paradigm to look for gender
differences. Several theories suggest we should expect gender differences in
cooperation, but not necessarily in PD. More specifically, these theories
predict that females are more likely to respond non-cooperatively to the "fear
component" in social dilemmas (the prospect that one's cooperation may be
exploited), while males are more likely to respond non-cooperatively to the
"greed component" (the temptation to free-ride on others' cooperation). Since
the PD situation contains both fear and greed components, it is not surprising
that previous research has not shown clearer evidence of gendered responses. Two
experimental studies will be conducted here in an effort to disentangle the fear
and greed components of cooperation. The first study varies the relative size of
the fear and greed components. The second study investigates the effects of the
gender composition of groups on cooperation. Because social dilemmas are
inherent in a wide range of social, economic, and political situations, the
broader impacts of this research lie, in part, in its capacity to illuminate the
factors that lead to cooperation or failure to cooperate in situations where
there are conflicts between individual and collective interests. Further, this
research should produce a better understanding of the determinants of gender
differences in behavior in a variety of collective action contexts, from
everyday social exchanges in friendships and families, between neighbors, in
workplaces, as well as in contributions to and participation in large-scale
organizations and collective action.&lt;br/&gt;