* 0240917
* The Role of Calcium Channels in Facultative Fungi
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Angie Gelli, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/2006
* USD 330,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Gelli of the University of California at Davis,
to study how fungal cells use calcium channels to proliferate and survive within
the host environment. Like all eukaryotic cells, fungal cells translate changes
in their environment into physiological responses and adaptations through cell
signaling events. Dr. Gelli proposes that calcium channels in fungal cells
initiate a calcium-dependent signaling pathway by responding to particular host
environmental conditions. Once activated the calcium-dependent signaling cascade
promotes fungal proliferation, growth and cellular morphogenesis. The ultimate
goal is to understand how calcium channels function within signaling pathways to
promote fungal proliferation and growth within the host. It is anticipated that
this research will provide the knowledge to alter channel function or regulation
as a means to prevent fungal proliferation and ultimately prevent fungal
survival.

The facultative fungus, Cryptococcus neoformans will be used as the model
organism in this research since this fungus offers a particularly unique
opportunity to examine the role of calcium channels in stimulus-response
coupling in the fungal-host relationship. Since C. neoformans is
phylogenetically at the junction between some of the most destructive plant
pathogens (such as smuts or rusts), and economically important food sources
(mushrooms) within the Basidiomycota, the proposed research will impact the
field of agriculture. Also since calcium channels in fungi have never been
characterized at the level of detail proposed here, it is anticipated that this
project will likely produce the first mechanistic insight in calcium channel
activity in the entire fungal kingdom. This kind of insight will be useful to
all researchers who study calcium channels in other fungi and in animals. In
addition, the development of robust procedures for applying electrophysiology to
fungal cells will benefit these same researchers. Additionally, Dr. Gelli is
involved in an outreach program to attract high school students into the
laboratory. This will be a great opportunity to get many of these students
involved so that they can see first hand the various aspects of fungal
physiology.