* 0240770
* Growth and Dynamics of Extended Actin Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Anders Carlsson, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2009
* USD 1,238,316.00

0240770 Carlsson This work is aimed at clarifying the mechanisms by which cells
integrate a set of external inputs to determine a motility response. Algorithms
are developed for treating cross-linking and elasticity of growing actin-
filament networks in the presence of several types of cross-linking proteins.
These are used to determine the response of a cell to external signals that
influence cross-linking and branching rates. The algorithms use a stochastic-
growth methodology, which treats actin filament growth, depolymerization,
capping, branch formation and detachment, and attachment of filaments to each
other by cross-links. Elastic effects are included in the algorithms by the use
of a special-points method. The three-dimensional structure of the actin
cytoskeleton is followed at a resolution of individual subunits. The values of
the rate parameters in the model are obtained from in vitro experiments for
simplified cases. The code is also used to evaluate the potential for
spontaneous formation of localized protrusions. The model predictions are tested
by polymerization experiments with several types of cross-linking and branching
proteins. Practically all types of cells are capable of moving in a way very
different from muscle cells: white blood cells chasing bacteria, cells moving to
remodel tissue after an injury, and migrating cancerous cells. Such motion is
based on the protein actin, which is very abundant in cells, and accumulates in
long filaments. These filaments can connect to each other, forming networks or
other types of structures, which can push against a cell membrane and thus cause
the cell to move. The "decision" about whether and how a cell moves is based on
external signals, which activate or deactivate various types of filament
connections. But it is not known exactly what actin structures form in response
to a given set of external signals. The calculations predict these structures
using powerful simulation methodologies based on parallel computers. By thus
establishing the response of the actin structures in cells to external signals,
one can hope to better understand the nature of diseases related to these actin
structures. This will also help in understanding the migration of cancerous
cells, which could eventually aid the development of cancer treatments. This
grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support Research Grants in
the Area of Mathematical Biology. This is a joint competition sponsored by the
Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the National Science Foundation and
the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the National
Institutes of Health.