* 0240228
* SGER:  Exploratory Research on Material Properties of Fire Protective Coatings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Frederick Mowrer, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 08/31/2003
* USD 29,995.00

Modern steel-frame high-rise buildings are typically protected from fire by the
application of spray-applied fire resistive materials (SFRMs). These materials
have a number of desirable attributes, including light weight, low thermal
conductivity, low cost and ease of application. &lt;br/&gt;Despite their
widespread use in fire resistant assemblies, the high-temperature properties of
SFRMs are not well characterized. With increasing interest in analytical
approaches to evaluating the impacts of fires on structures in the wake of the
World Trade Center collapses on September 11, 2001, there is an increasing need
to understand and characterize the high-temperature properties of SFRMs. The
purpose of this exploratory research is to evaluate the high-temperature
properties of current and potential SFRMs to determine the fundamental bases for
their fire resistive properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Samples of current and
potential SFRMs will be subjected to fire heat fluxes using a bench-scale cone
calorimeter. The thermal and mechanical properties of the SFRMs will be
evaluated before, during and after exposure to these fire heat fluxes. Scanning
electron microscopy will be used to observe changes in the microstructure of the
SFRMs resulting from fire exposure and these changes in microstructure will be
evaluated in terms of their potential effects on thermal and mechanical
properties. It is hypothesized that different SFRMs have different mechanisms to
reduce heat transfer to the substrates they are protecting. Some SFRMs are
purely insulative, while others include endothermic dehydration or sublimation
processes in addition to insulation to reduce heat
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;