* 0240948
* Characteristics of Cyclone Development in the Arctic and Their Hydrologic Impacts
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Roger Barry, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 03/31/2007
* USD 252,919.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OPP-
0240984&lt;br/&gt;Serreze&lt;br/&gt;Barry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
improve our understanding of the development and decay of extra-tropical
cyclones in northern high latitudes and their hydrologic impacts. The study will
focus on two key regions: 1) the northern North Atlantic, in particular the area
around the Icelandic Low and the marginal ice zones of the Greenland and Barents
seas; and 2) a domain comprising northeast Eurasia extending to the central
Arctic Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first region, representing the terminus
of the North Atlantic cyclone track, has first order impacts on heat and
moisture transports into the Arctic basin and the circulation of the sea ice
cover, in particular, the flux of sea ice through Fram Strait. Variability in
this ice flux has potentially strong influences on the ocean's thermohaline
circulation. Past studies have shown that cyclone variability in this region is
closely tied to the phase of the Arctic Oscillation /North Atlantic Oscillation
(AO/NAO), but relatively little attention has been paid to the role of local
development processes. Synoptic activity in this region during the winter season
appears to be strongly influenced by vorticity production in the lee of
southeast Greenland and enhanced baroclinicity along the sea ice margins. The
hypothesis is that, 1) such local development processes are important in
modulating the Fram Strait ice flux; and 2) the intensity of these local
development processes is associated with differences in the general synoptic
environment associated with the positive/negative phases of the
AO/NAO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies for the second domain will focus on summer.
Summer is characterized by development of a pronounced baroclinic region along
the shores of northeast Eurasia. It is interpreted to arise from strong
differential heating between the cold Arctic Ocean and snow free land.
Development of the baroclinic region over northeast Eurasia is attended by
frequent cyclogenesis in the same region where a particularly large fraction of
annual precipitation falls during the summer months. Cyclones generated over
northeast Eurasia often migrate into the central Arctic Ocean. The hypothesis is
that the cyclogenesis maximum can be explained through interactions between
coastal baroclinicity and orographic development processes. A second hypothesis
is that cyclones forming in this region significantly impact on the wind driven
sea ice circulation in the central Arctic Ocean and are primary drivers of the
summer maximum in precipitation over the central Arctic Ocean and coastal
zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies will use the suite of atmospheric
fields from the National Center for Environmental Protection (NCEP) and ERA-40
reanalysis systems, along with generated data sets. These include six hourly
time series of cyclone activity, frontal location and intensity, and Q vector
fields. Use will also be made of daily satellite derived fields of sea ice
motion and concentration together with daily precipitation over both land and
the Arctic Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;