* 0240412
* Foundations of Content-Based Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Antonio Carzaniga, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2007
* USD 450,000.00

This research project focuses on foundations for a new kind of advanced
communication infrastructure referred to as a content-based network. A content-
based network is intended to complement traditional uni-cast and multicast
networks, providing improved support for the communication modes underlying
large-scale, loosely coupled, multi-party, distributed applications such as
auctioning, information sharing, fusion and dissemination, sensor grids,
personalized news distribution, service discovery, and multi-player games. The
main research challenge in this project is to formulate a viable technological
basis to support the service model of a content-based network. In particular,
the work involves six basic technical thrust areas: Network Configuration,
Subnetting, Routing, Forwarding, Quality of Service and Security. For Network
Configuration, research involves design of an expressive, yet tractable, data
model and associated predicate language for messages. Subnetting is expected to
simplify network configuration and reconfiguration, as well as to reduce the
computational cost of forwarding. Based on the chosen approach to addresses and
subnets, an appropriate routing algorithm must be selected and adapted.
Fundamental to the efficiency of content-based networking will be the
availability of the compact forwarding tables and fast forwarding algorithms.
The range of delivery guarantees for Quality of Service in a content-based
network is conceivably rich. Finally, content-based networking introduces some
challenging twists to traditional communication security, which have to be
identified, thoroughly characterized and evaluated. The results in all these
thrust areas are subject to rigorous evaluation. Two-pronged evaluation strategy
is planned: simulation-based experimentation and prototype-based measurement.
The simulations will provide a means to evaluate the robustness and scalability
of the service under a variety of synthetic usage scenarios, while the prototype
will allow the utility and comparative performance of the service to be
demonstrated in implementing a variety of higher-level applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;