* 0240251
* Aquisition of a Variable Pressure Scanning Electron Microscope for Multiple Use in Research and Education
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Louis Jacobs, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2007
* USD 209,260.00

EAR-0240251&lt;br/&gt;Jacobs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary project
will fund a new scanning electron microscope (SEM), sputter coater, and critical
point dryer. The SEM will enable scientists and engineers to see the surfaces of
objects at magnifications ranging from 400X to &gt;10,000X. The model slated for
purchase will be a vast improvement over SMU's out-dated 20-year-old equipment,
which either no longer operates at maximum efficiency or uses antiquated methods
for documenting images. Critical improvements over the old equipment include (1)
the ability to image specimens without first coating them with a metallic
substance, (2) a sample stage that tilts and rotates, (3) a large sample
chamber, (4) a sputter coater (better than the current evaporative coater) for
use when metallic coating is necessary, and (5) an energy dispersive
spectrometer (EDS), which allows elemental analysis of samples. The ability to
image without applying a metallic coating is essential for study of
paleontological and archaeological specimens that are rare or on loan from
nations that do not permit any alteration of fossils or artifacts. Products of
chemical research that require scanning without compromising the sample's
surface also require imaging without coating. We anticipate imaging fossil
flowers, fruit, seeds, leaves, teeth, bones, stone tools, and experimental
polymers and metals. Paleontological research at SMU addresses vegetation
change, floral evolutionary history, and small mammal evolution in tropical
Africa, evolutionary history of some Cretaceous conifers, the dietary
implications of tooth micro-wear on dinosaur teeth, and the evolutionary history
of crocodiles and their relatives. Research in archaeology will make use of the
new EDS to analyze the glaze on ceramic artifacts from the American Southwest,
which can help determine source area and delimit trade routes among various
Puebloan groups during the 13th and 14th centuries. Chemists will be able to
evaluate tests on polymer films that have the potential to affect development in
areas from microelectronics to fuel cell technology. Mechanical engineering
projects require testing of material deposition systems that will is
significantly impact manufacturing technology by changing the process of going
from computer design to reality. The digital images produced by this research
will be used in ongoing public outreach. The paleontological research group is
already consulting on a major NSF-supported exhibit currently under construction
at the Fort Worth Museum of Science and History. Engineering and chemical
technologies will transfer to the public via established ties with the business
community.&lt;br/&gt;***