* 0240972
* Seismological Investigation of Columbia Glacier Calving Mechanics
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2005
* Daniel McNamara, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 04/30/2005
* USD 91,934.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OPP-024072&lt;br/&gt;Pfeffer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iceberg
calving is a major component of mass loss from many marine glaciers and is
intimately connected with the dynamics of tidewater glacier retreat. Despite its
importance, the calving process is very poorly understood. The need to
understand calving and tidewater glacier dynamics becomes more pressing as the
importance of Alaskan glaciers in modern global mass balance is better
understood, and as the utility of modern tidewater glaciers as analogs for rapid
retreat of marine-based paleo ice sheets is recognized. The Columbia Glacier has
been studied since the early 1980's, and has yielded a large volume of very
useful data. The importance of studying Columbia Glacier increases, however, as
its retreat accelerates. It is the last of Alaska's major tidewater glaciers to
retreat from its extended position, and currently the world's fastest glacier
(at 12 km yr-1), which discharges approximately 22 km3 per year of ice into the
ocean via calving, and may complete its retreat within 25 years or
less.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator will pursue three
objectives: 1) a detailed analysis of kinematics determined from the 1997- 1999
photography which describes the flow regime, strain rate characteristics,
boundary tractions, and bed depth in the glacier channel within about four km of
the terminus will be done. Geostatistical analysis of spatial heterogeneity of
strain rates in the lowest five km of the glacier, based on terrestrial
photogrammetry from 1999 ground-based photography will be completed. This work
will be supplemented by additional aerial photography from 2000 and 2001.
Theoretical analysis of upstream propagation of kinematic waves associated with
irreversible tidewater retreat which shows how basal sliding may be the ultimate
cause of the episodic and generally irreversible character of tidewater retreat
will be addressed; 2) Observations of glacial icequake and calving activity
using modern seismic recording equipment is relatively immature. The Principal
Investigator will analyze these data sets to develop techniques that will
improve future deployment and data analysis. The goal is to determine first-
order time and frequency domain source characteristics, using known seismic
sources. He will also digitize the smoked-paper records to enable analysis in
standard software packages and apply the refined event detection software to the
digitized data set; and 3) The August 2002 photo flights are the 124th and 125th
flights in an unbroken series of aerial photography started in 1976, and from
which most of our knowledge on the pattern of retreat since around 1980 is
based. Future photogrammetric analysis now becomes his responsibility because
the photogrammetric procedures are fairly straightforward, but the actual
process of recognizing the correct features in the photography is not. Thus, the
most difficult part of the problem is suited to the skills of a glaciologist
than a photogrammetrist, so he will purchase new digital ('softcopy')
photogrammetric software.&lt;br/&gt;