* 0240186
* Redistribution in a Divided Society
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Michael Wallerstein, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2004
* USD 127,000.00

Although there is a rich literature exploring the logic of political competition
over redistributive policies, there are few theoretical studies that include the
existence of social cleavages other than the division by income level. Few
observers, however, think that the politics of redistribution in the U.S. can be
understood without consideration of the complications introduced by racial
divisions. Moreover, the U.S. is not unique in being divided according to
ascriptive characteristics. While salient cleavages differ from country to
country, the existence of politically significant racial ethnic, religious, or
linguistic divisions is widespread. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to study political conflict over redistributive policies in a
society that is divided by race, religion, language, or other ascriptive
characteristics. In the past, consideration of non-economic cleavages in
theoretical work has been inhibited by the difficulty of modeling policy choices
along two or more dimensions. Recent developments in formal theory now make it
possible to develop a rigorous model of redistributive conflicts in a society
divided by ascriptive traits as well as income. The research will build an
integrated political economy model in which individuals are distinguished by
earning ability and an ascriptive characteristic (here, race); the policy space
is a proportional redistributive tax rate and an affirmative action constraint
on firms in the labor market. The distribution of income and the policy are
endogenous, with the latter being the outcome of a legislative bargaining game
between three parties. This study will explore conditions under which the claim
that social divisions reduce the support for redistributive policies is correct
and study more generally the relationship between policy outcomes and the
distribution of income in heterogeneous societies. Preliminary results suggest
that the relative political weights given to different economic subgroups within
the minority play an important role; in particular, the more weight accorded to
low income members of the minority, the more emphasis there is on direct
redistribution through the tax system relative to indirect redistribution
through affirmative action in the labor market.&lt;br/&gt;