* 0240184
* SGER: Biodiversity of Native Mexican Trout (Genus Oncorhynchus spp.) and The Impending Treat of Their Demise by The Exotic Rainbow Trout O. mykiss gairdneri (Teleostei: Salmonidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Richard Mayden, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 09/30/2004
* USD 73,735.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Richard L. Mayden at Saint Louis University to
conduct field and laboratory research in collaboration with other USA scientists
and several scientists from Mexico on the environmental status, distribution,
conservation and genetics of native trout populations of Mexico. While
biologists have been aware of the existence of native trout in Mexico for over a
century, they have received little study. Beginning in the mid-1990's a group of
ichthyologists and conservation biologists from both Mexico and USA jointly
formed an international alliance, Truchas Mexicanas, to better understand the
native trout of the Sierra Madre Occidental. Through these efforts, scientists
have discovered previously unknown trout species restricted to Mexico and
introduced (non-native) populations of rainbow trout. The existence of these
non-native rainbow trout originating from streams in the US and Canada in the
ranges of the unique Mexican trout species is a significant threat to the future
existence of native species. Rainbow trout are known to displace native trout
species through competition or genetically "swamp out" their gene pools through
aggressive hybridization. Other native populations of trout are also predicted
to occur in the upper Rio Conchos; these populations are predicted to also be in
danger from habitat destruction and introductions of rainbow trout. In this
study we will inventory many river systems of the sierras for native and
introduced trout species, including the upper Conchos River system. Genetic
samples will be examined from all of these populations to evaluate genetic
variability of native species and determine if any native populations are
compromised genetically through hybridization with introduced rainbow trout.
This research supports the development of an international alliance
investigating native trout populations of Mexico and southwestern United States.
Trout species are important game and forage species for human populations,
constituting a major element of diets in some regions. Trout fisheries are also
very important economic elements to some regions as trout are highly prized
sport fish species. Understanding native trout species diversity in Mexico and
its conservation and maintenance in these streams has a major impact on both
fisheries and economic areas. Mexican trout species are the southern-most trout
and are adapted to theses unique ecosystems. Introductions of non-native rainbow
trouts will seriously jeopardize these adapted populations and lead to their
extirpation from the region. This will have serious sociological and economic
impacts for the native people of the region.

