* 0240785
* Phylogenetic diversity of bacterioplankton in relation to distribution of cell-specific physiological properties and environmental conditions in an upwelling ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Barry Sherr, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2007
* USD 390,173.00

Marine bacterioplankton are central and quantitatively significant components of
marine ecosystems; their role looms large in determining the capacity of oceanic
systems to sequester atmospheric CO2 into the deep ocean. Current models
constructed to examine these questions consider marine bacterioplankton as a
monolithically active compartment. This is in large part due to the lack of
understanding regarding whether specific phylogenetic or physiologically
identifiable groups of bacteria have distinct conditions for optimal growth, or
whether diverse groups of bacterioplankton do in fact respond uniformly to
changing environmental conditions, as the models assume. Flow cytometric
enumeration of marine bacterioplankton using nucleic-acid specific stains has
shown the routine presence of two distinct clusters of bacterial cells based on
cell-specific nucleic acid (NA, i.e. DNA and RNA) content. Opposing ideas have
been proposed concerning these distinct clusters of bacteria: 1) most bacterial
activity is due to cells with higher nucleic acid content (high-NA), while lower
nucleic acid content cells (low-NA) are either slow-growing or dead, or 2) both
high-NA and low-NA cells have similar biomass-specific rates of activity. This
research will focus on the high-NA and low-NA cells present in bacterial
communities in the Oregon upwelling ecosystem. Two alternative hypotheses will
be examined: Ho 1. High-NA and low-NA bacterial cells are composed of
phylogenetically distinct bacterial assemblages that show differences in
physiological activity. This would be the case if high NA and low-NA cells tend
to fall into separate assemblages of cells that are adapted to different growth
strategies. Ho 2- High-NA and low-NA cells tend to have similar phylogenetic
compositions and similar biomass-specific rates of activity. The approach will
involve flow cytometric enumeration and sorting of bacteria based on cell-
specific nucleic acid or protein content. Sorted bacteria will be assayed for
cell-specific activity via prior labeling with radioactive substrates, and
assayed for phylogenetic diversity via PCR amplification of DNA extracted from
sorted cells followed by DGGE analysis, sequencing of selected gel bands, and
phylogenetic identification. At the same time, radiolabeled subsamples will be
collected on filters and analyzed by combined microautoradiography and
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using domain-specific probes, as well
as more specific probes, in order to determine the relative contribution of
substrate-active phylogenetic groups to total bacterial abundance. A main goal
of the project is to put the results in ecological context, i.e. to relate
variability in activity and diversity among high-NA and low-NA bacterioplankton
to environmental parameters likely to affect the growth of marine bacteria (e.g.
potential bottom-up controls such as phytoplankton biomass and riverine DOC
influx).

Intellectual merit: This research project will address the linkages between
physiological and phylogenetic diversity in marine bacterioplankton, and how
such linkages might affect bacterial processing of organic matter in marine
systems. The results would be a significant step in understanding the role of
specific phylogenetic components of the bacterioplankton community in global
biogeochemical cycles and carbon flux. Broader impacts: This project will
support the Ph.D. thesis research of a female graduate student and provide the
student with post-doctoral training; it will also enhance the teaching efforts
of the P.I..s and support the common use Flow Cytometry Facility and molecular
genetics capabilities in the College of Oceanography and Atmospheric Sciences.