* 0240992
* Micro-evolutionary Effects of Sea-ice Conditions in the Ringed Seal, Phoca hispida
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2005
* Per Palsboll, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Marie H. Bundy
* 03/31/2005
* USD 104,363.00

ABSTRACT Palsboll OPP-0240992

Sea ice constitutes a dominant, but highly dynamic physical feature of marine
Polar environments and significantly affects the distribution of most species.
Much attention has been placed on correlating species distribution with annual
ice conditions, but no study has focused on the micro-evolution of marine fauna
as a function of annual ice conditions. This study will test the hypothesis that
annual sea ice conditions significantly affects the micro-evolution of Polar
marine fauna by use of high-resolution population genetic analysis of Greenland
ringed seals (Phoca hispida). In total 96 nuclear SNPs (Single Nucleotide
Polymorphisms) genotypes, in addition to the nucleotide sequence at the
maternally inherited mitochondrial control region, will bedetermined in 1,054
ringed seals samples collected in highly different annual sea ice regimes around
Greenland and Svalbard.

Intellectual merits: The study will focus on the connection between the effects
of a dynamic key physical feature of the Polar environment and the micro-
evolution of Polar fauna. The analyses will estimate the relative effects of
commonly occurring differences in annual sea ice dynamics, Knowledge of the
micro-evolutionary effects of sea ice conditions in Polar fauna will add to the
foundation of our assessment and predictive abilities of the long-term effects
of climate changes in Polar Regions. The ringed seal is centrally placed in the
Arctic food web, so any processes that affect them cannot be viewed in isolation
but will likely extend to other species to which the ringed seal is trophically
linked. The high-resolution genetic approach taken is novel aimed at natural
populations in a non-model species.

Broader impacts: The results will have direct relevance in terms of formulating
management policies for ringed seals and those species that are part of the same
food web. Ringed seals are harvested for local subsistence in the Arctic and
understanding the processes that limit or facilitates dispersal is central in
defining biological sound management policies. The study enhances includes an
international collaboration between a U.S. education and research institution
and a Danish non-educational research institution. The project involves
education and training of a doctoral student and postdoctoral researcher in
state-of-the-art genetic analyses of natural populations The results will be
published in scientific journals and the data will be made available upon
request. All mitochondrial DNA haplotype sequenceswill be deposited in the
public sequence databases (e.g., GenBank).