* 0240347
* Food Safety Standards, Scientific Knowledge, and the Moral Economy of Meatpacking
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Elizabeth Dunn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2006
* USD 124,856.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;SES 0240347&lt;br/&gt;"Food Safety Standards,
Scientific Knowledge, and the Moral Economy of Meatpacking"&lt;br/&gt;Elizabeth
Dunn, University of Colorado&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In July, 2002, the ConAgra
meatpacking plant in Greeley, Colorado, recalled 19 million pounds of beef
potentially contaminated with E.coli. Journalists wrote vivid prose about the
stench of the feedlots and the horrifying conditions in the packing plant, but
this was only one of many recent, widely publicized global meatpacking
disasters. In recent years, thousands of cattle with Mad Cow disease have been
destroyed; hundreds of thousands of sheep and pigs with Foot and Mouth disease
have been slaughtered; and widespread discussion has arisen about meat
irradiation, the labeling of organic meats, and the safety of meat imports. All
of these controversies hinge on the creation and enforcement of standards for
food production.&lt;br/&gt;But what exactly do standards regulate? The proposed
research investigates standards not simply as technical rules but as aspects of
a moral economy that governs industrial sectors, firms, and people (Thompson
1971, Busch 2000). How do national or global standards shape local places? The
PI has developed a standards chain methodology to trace standards from their
production in technical committees, through the global and national institutions
that introduce and enforce them, down to the people who make their livelihoods
from meat. This research will compare the deployment of scientific knowledge in
two standards-writing bodies: Codex Alimentarius and the US Department of
Agriculture. It will also examine how new regulations shape meat production in
Poland and the United States and explore their effects on the people of two
meatpacking towns: Greeley, Colorado, and Sanok,
Poland.&lt;br/&gt;Standardization is a crucial means of governance in the world
economy. Yet, we know very little about how the ostensibly objective and
scientific knowledge employed in the organizations that produce standards are
entwined with the locally specific interests of the people who, in producing
food, are coerced or entrusted to use standards. How are the farmers, firms, and
workers who produce and process food represented in the process of creating
standards?&lt;br/&gt;Given the institutional constraints firms face, how do they
respond to those standards? The stakes in standardization are not trivial: a
miniscule change in a single standard might force smaller processors and farmers
out of business (Gmyrek 2001), cost larger producers millions of dollars in lost
revenue (Wilson and Otsuki 2001), or restructure sectors of the food system
along industrial lines (Busch 1997, Flynn et. al. 1994).&lt;br/&gt;Investigating
standards as elements of a moral economy means asking not only how they shape
large-scale economies but also how they transform the micropractices of the
workplace. How do people such as Poland's small-hold farmers or Greeley's
immigrant meatpackers perceive and experience these global forms of regulation?
What cultural resources do they use to modify, resist or circumvent regulation
(Scott 1998)? By comparing Poland, which was shaped by state socialism, with the
United States, which has faced consolidation of capitalist agribusiness, the
research asks how standards interact with regimes of accumulation, or large-
scale patterns of economic institutions, and the mode of social regulation, or
the social norms, values, and habits that govern individuals, economic actions.
The broader impacts of this research include contributions to the public debate
over food safety (Turner 2001) and suggestions of ways to include
underrepresented groups such as Polish farmers or Mexican immigrant workers in
the standards-writing process. The research will be shared with standards
producers in the hope that it will also introduce into public policy an
awareness of the wider social impacts of standardization.&lt;br/&gt;