* 0240238
* Superconductivity and Pseudogap Near Quantum Critical Points
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Andrey Chubukov, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2006
* USD 234,000.00

This award is for theoretical work on the system behavior near a quantum
critical point (QCP), at which an itinerant fermionic system becomes unstable
with respect to a structural instability, or to either a spin or charge density
wave. In all of these cases, the quantum transition is accompanied by a
softening of a bosonic mode. The principal investigator (PI) will study the
cases when the bosonic mode is an independent degree of freedom (e.g., a phonon
mode for a structural transition), or when it is a collective mode of fermions,
and its dynamics is created by low-energy fermions. The PI plans to analyze in
detail three aspects of the system behavior near a QCP: (i) the effect of
bosonic softening on a fermionic propagator - in many cases this leads to a
fully incoherent, non-Fermi liquid behavior at criticality; (ii) the pairing
instability at the QCP - this pairing, if it occurs, creates a dome on top of
the QCP beneath which the critical behavior changes due to feedback effects;
(iii) the conditions under which long range order (the result of a bosonic
instability) and superconductivity coexist, and when they are separated by an
intermediate pseudogap phase in which only discrete lattice symmetry is broken.

From a theoretical perspective, the primary interest in these issues is due to
the fact that the pairing problem near a QCP is entirely novel and is
qualitatively different from BCS-Eliashberg theory, as it involves fully
incoherent, diffusive fermions that interact by exchanging gapless bosonic
excitations. From an experimental perspective, the proposed research is aimed at
explaining the origin of the pseudogap phase detected in multiple experimental
measurements in the underdoped cuprates, and also in some heavy fermion and
colossal magneto-resistance materials. For cuprates, this study will be a
continuation of previous efforts to develop the full theory of the low-energy
behavior near an antiferromagnetic instability. %%% Theoretical research will be
conducted on strongly interacting electron systems whose behavior is believed to
be affected by its proximity to so-called quantum phase transitions. At these
zero-temperature critical points, the materials under study may experience an
instability and transition into another characteristic state. While this study
is of great fundamental interest, the results may impact our understanding of
novel materials and lead to new materials with technological applications. ***