* 0240265
* Density vs. Trait-Mediated Interactions Between Predators and Prey: Their Influence on Rocky Shore Algal Diversity and Community Structure
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Geoffrey Trussell, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2007
* USD 304,921.00

The trophic cascade concept has profoundly improved our understanding of how
predator-prey interactions shape the structure and diversity of ecological
communities. Trophic cascade studies typically focus on how predator effects on
prey density propagate through food chains to shape species diversity and
community structure (i.e., Density-Mediated Indirect Interactions). Recently,
there has been growing interest in interaction modifications: the presence of a
third species (predator) in the system alters the interaction between two other
species (prey and their resource). Trait-Mediated Indirect Interactions (TMIIs)
are those that occur because of predator effects on prey traits rather than prey
density. For example, in aquatic systems water-borne predator risk cues can
induce changes in prey behavior, such as feeding rates, thus altering the prey.s
impact on lower trophic levels. Hence, TMIIs emphasize nonlethal predator
effects in contrast to the more prevalent emphasis on lethal indirect effects
(DMIIs). Although ecologists are beginning to appreciate the importance of
TMIIs, there is still a limited understanding of the factors governing the
relative importance of density and trait-mediated predator effects and how they
shape the diversity and structure of ecological communities. Classic work on the
importance of herbivorous snails to the diversity and structure of macro-algal
communities on rocky shores has left a lasting impression. Luchenco demonstrated
that diversity and succession in these communities is closely tied to snail
(Littorina littorea) density and that the functional nature of this relationship
differs between tidal pools and emergent substrata. Moreover, she hypothesized
that green crab (Carcinus maenas) predation may exert an indirect influence on
algal communities by regulating L. littorea density. This hypothesis is
conceptually appealing, but over 20 years have passed without it being tested
experimentally. Recent data suggest that the suppression of snail grazing by
green crab risk cues can have a significant effect on rocky shore algal
communities. This research examines the relative importance of density and
trait-mediated interactions between green crabs and L. littorea to patterns of
algal diversity and structure on rocky shores by asking the following questions:
--I. What factors shape the relative importance of density and trait-mediated
effects? -- II. How may the relative importance of DMIIs and TMIIs influence
long-term algal diversity and community structure on rocky intertidal shores? --
III. Can habitat-specific differences in the relative importance of DMIIs and
TMIIs explain differences in the functional relationship between algal diversity
and snail density in two prominent rocky shore habitats: emergent substrata and
tide pools? This research will have broad implications to empirical and
theoretical ecology by explicitly examining the role higher order interactions
play in shaping long term community dynamics. By working in a system (a) widely
held as a classic demonstration of the role of density-mediated effects and (b)
that has contributed significantly to the development of modern ecology, the
proposed research will provide a better understanding of the processes shaping
diversity and structure in rocky shore and other communities. Because these food
chains are relatively simple and easily manipulated, these habitats afford an
excellent opportunity to explore these issues.