* 0240316
* Mechanical Explanation in Ancient Greek Philosophy
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Sylvia Berryman, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 09/30/2005
* USD 117,692.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT SES 0240316 Sylvia Berryman, Ohio State University "Mechanical
Explanation in Ancient Greek Philosophy"



This project aims to develop a new characterization of mechanistic explanation
in ancient natural philosophy. It has been recognized that the current practice
of applying the terms mechanical or mechanistic to characterize ancient natural
philosophers is problematic. This project argues that the applicability of the
term mechanistic does not depend on necessary and sufficient conditions, but
rather on a method of understanding natural processes by analogy to mechanics as
that is understood. Understanding the term in this way draws attention to
developing ideas about the mechanical art in the ancient world, and the
application of these to the understanding of the natural world. An alternative
way of characterizing the significance of ancient atomism is offered, namely,
the presence of conservationist assumptions about causation. The project begins
from an argument to the effect that attempts to define mechanistic conceptions
by a single characteristic are wanting. Both the many different ways in which
the mechanistic is typically characterized, and the frequency of open-ended
lists, indicate that the term refers, at heart, to the use of analogy to the
discipline of mechanics as a guide in investigating the functioning of natural
processes. As such, the development of mechanistic thought requires a developed
mechanical art to serve as a point of reference: comparisons to real working
artifacts play a role quite different from that of imaginary conceptions. There
is evidence in late antiquity that at least some thinkers adopted the approach
that proved influential in the early modern world, namely, the attempt to
understand nature as working like constructed devices. This work examines
evidence that ideas from the mechanical art were applied to the understanding of
natural processes, and that mechanics was understood as a part of natural
philosophy. So understood, the term mechanistic has little relevance to
understanding ancient atomism. It offers a proposal towards understanding the
feature of atomism that has lent credence to this usage: the principle that
nothing comes from nothing justifies the assumption that causation ought to be
answerable to certain quantitative restrictions. This seems to have developed
independently of the idea that nature works like a machine. This proposal aims
to develop a new conception of the terms in which the study of ancient natural
philosophy is framed, and thereby to help foster philosophical interest in the
development of ancient mechanics and its impact on ideas about the understanding
of natural processes. It is hoped that this research will help foster the
renewed interest among scholars of ancient philosophy in the interactions
between the scientific work of the Hellenistic period and philosophical ideas
about nature and its explanation.