* 0240383
* FourierNet:  Routing in Dense Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Badri Nath, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2007
* USD 354,784.00

This research project addresses some fundamental issues related to routing in
dense networks that are expected to be the key enabler of new facets of
computing exemplified by embedded-, ubiquitous-, and pervasive computing.
Specifically, a radically new framework for routing in dense networks called
Trajectory Based Forwarding is proposed. This novel method is a generalization
of source based routing and Cartesian forwarding in that the trajectory is set
by the source as a continuous trajectory, but the forwarding decision is based
on the relationship to the trajectory rather than the final destination.
Trajectory Based Forwarding has a number of features that makes it an ideal
candidate as a low level primitive in dense ad-hoc networks. First, it decouples
the path name from the path itself. This is the most critical aspect in a dense
network, where nodes might move, go into doze mode, or fail, thereby rendering a
source based path useless or make route maintenance expensive. Second, the
specification of the trajectory is independent of the destination. This makes
the Trajectory Based Forwarding usable both as a routing support, when the
destination is indicated, as a discovery support primitive, when the destination
is not known, or as a flooding replacement. In addition to the simple unicast,
trajectory routing and forwarding have significant advantages for many other
important network functions such as flooding, discovery, multicast and
broadcast, path resilience and even positioning. The objective of this research
is to test routing methods using trajectories, to explore ways of specifying
trajectories, and to implement many of the networking functions such as
discovery, flooding, and network management. A specific domain where Trajectory
Based Forwarding can be effectively deployed, used, and evaluated is in
monitoring transportation systems or physical infrastructure. It is expected
that Trajectory Based Forwarding can radically change the way we think about
routing in networks and lead to a new area of research with a rich problem
space.