* 0240962
* Agrobiodiversity and Development of Meso-Scale Irrigation in Tropical Mountain Ecosystems of Bolivia and Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Karl Zimmerer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2007
* USD 229,999.00

Loss of the biological diversity of diverse food plants (agrobiodiversity) has
long been assumed a fait accompli due to the effects of irrigated agricultural
development. According to standard assumptions and analysis, agrobiodiversity
decline is a necessary environmental trade-off in the irrigation-based
development of modern agriculture. Recent studies have challenged assumptions
regarding negative interactions between agrobiodiversity and irrigation,
however. This research project will investigate the changes in biodiversity,
social conditions, and policy networks that are associated with the development
of medium-scale irrigation projects during the last 15 to 20 years. The
investigators will conduct multiple case studies at field sites in Bolivia and
Peru. These studies will be complemented by investigators at international
policy and aid organizations in those countries as well as in Canada, the United
States, and Colombia. The project is grounded in geographical theory of the
relation of the environment to development change. Special emphasis will be
given to links between biodiversity in agriculture (agrobiodiversity) and
irrigated farm environments. Attention also will be given to irrigation risk and
household-level resource status and to the environmental design of irrigation
under recent policies of national and global development agencies. The
investigator and his Peruvian collaborators will apply research methods and
analysis that consist of ethnography and interviews; farm surveys; plant
ecological and soils analysis; GIS databases; multiple regression analysis; and
examination of institutional, property, and archive documents.

The social significance of this research is expected to be evident in its
contributions to policy making and analysis for agricultural and environmental
sustainability. This significance is centered on the combined problems and
challenges of declining biological diversity in agriculture and the increasing
management of water supplies. It is especially significant for the agriculture
and inhabitants of semi-arid environments of tropical mountain countries,
exemplified in Bolivia and Peru, which support a large share of global
agrobiodiversity that is subject to expanding areas of meso-scale irrigation.
The research project also will contribute analysis and guidelines on the role of
agrobiodiversity to farming under this sort of irrigation management, and it
will provide recommendations for policies that are concerned with
agrobiodiversity and irrigation in relation to technological and social change.