* 0240829
* Radar Backscatter Characteristics Using Numerical Simulation of the Medium and Scattering Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2006
* David Fritts, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B. Kerr
* 01/31/2006
* USD 270,804.00

State-of-the-art numerical techniques will be used in this project to simulate
the radar backscatter from the middle atmosphere thereby providing a direct
coupling between the dynamics in the radar volume and parameters computed from
the radar signal (e.g. velocities, momentum fluxes, and energy dissipation
rates). For the first time a direct numerical simulation (DNS) of evolving
turbulence structures with sufficient resolution to resolve the Bragg scale
features and a DNS of the Maxwell equations are integrated to study this
problem. A fluid simulation will provide volumes containing turbulent structures
formed during the evolution of a Kelvin-Helmholtz instability or breaking
gravity waves. This numerical tool is a high resolution simulation capable of
resolving the full turbulence spectrum, allowing the radar Bragg scale to be
specified within the inertial range of turbulence thereby permitting the
computation of all turbulence and radar backscatter quantities. These structures
will be integrated into a Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD) implementation of
the Maxwell equations which provides an accurate calculation of the scattering
from the complex structures generated by the fluid code. The integration of
these two simulations creates a unique capability to aid in the investigation of
the scattering mechanism for different types of radar systems and how these
processes affect the results derived from the radar signals with few underlying
assumptions.