* 0240263
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Delocalized Knowledges: Conceptualizing Problem Gambling on an American Indian Reservation
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Theresa O'Nell, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

0240263 O'Nell / Penickova Current studies suggest a significantly higher
prevalence of psychiatrically defined "problem gambling" among Native Americans
than among non-indigenous populations. Native Americans living on reservations
typically obtain mental health care from federal government institutions
employing primarily non-Native clinicians trained in Western psychology and
psychiatry. Native Americans, however, have their own understandings of what
constitutes mental illness and often point out the cognitive gulf among the non-
Native clinicians and their clients. This dissertation research tests the
hypothesis that there is a cognitive gulf between the Western Apaches living on
a reservation in Eastern Arizona and the local clinicians in the
conceptualization of "problem gambling." The researcher, a cultural
anthropologist, will explore the explanations and definitions of mental
illnesses recognized by tribal members and local mental health care providers.
Using data from an extensive series of focused interviews, she will compare the
two groups' explanations and definitions of "problem gambling" and examine how
these, and explanations of mental illnesses generally, overlap or diverge. The
research will provide a detailed examination of how tribal definitions are
represented in local diagnostic practice. The new knowledge generated by this
research will add to our understanding of disordered behavior in a culturally
diverse social setting. The broader impact from the analysis of the local
definitions of "problem gambling" will inform the development of more culturally
sensitive, and locally relevant diagnostic instruments, leading to more
effective counseling and education programs. The project also contributes to the
education of a young social scientist.