* 0240349
* Shortening velocity and power output of muscles that produce ballistic movements
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Kiisa Nishikawa, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 05/31/2007
* USD 348,319.00

New insights in biology have often come from studies of animals that exhibit
some extreme of performance. In such animals, principles of function common to
all animals are exaggerated, and are therefore observed and studied more
readily. Ballistic tongue projection in toads represents one such extreme.
During ballistic tongue projection, toad tongues can leave the mouth at
accelerations of 2500 m/s2. Previous and ongoing research in the laboratories of
these investigators has focused on elucidating mechanisms by which mouth opening
muscles of toads produce the power required for this extremely rapid
movement.&lt;br/&gt; The work in this project will focus on understanding the
force-velocity relationships and power output of two muscles that are involved
in powering ballistic movements: 1) the m. depressor mandibulae, which is solely
responsible for mouth opening during tongue projection ; and 2) the m.
semimembranosus, which along with other muscles, extends the hind limb during
jumping. The proposed studies will use the classic load clamp or quick release
technique to quantify the biphasic shortening behavior of these muscles during
the transition from isometric tetanus to isotonic shortening. In the load clamp
technique, an activated muscle is stimulated to develop tension while
contracting against a load that prevents it from shortening. When the load is
reduced, the muscle first shortens rapidly and then decelerates to a slower
shortening velocity.&lt;br/&gt; In contrast to most recent studies which measure
only the velocity of shortening during the slow phase, these investigators
measured velocity of shortening during the initial fast phase as well. Four
important new aspects of the shortening behavior of muscle have been discovered.
During the fast phase: 1) shortening velocity can be high (up to nearly 100
times Vmax), and it differs between jaw and hind limb muscles; 2) external work
performed contributes to total power output, although the magnitude of the
contribution varies between the jaw and hind limb muscles; 3) shortening
velocity increases with the duration of isometric pre-stimulation; and during
the slow phase 4) shortening velocity also increases with the duration of
isometric pre-stimulation, at least in some muscles.&lt;br/&gt; These results
are consistent with a model in which a series elastic component within the
sarcomere is stretched by the contractile elements during isometric tetanus, and
the degree of stretch increases with the duration of isometric pre-stimulation.
Preliminary data suggest that muscles differ adaptively in how kinetic energy is
distributed between the fast and slow phases of shortening. A mechanism, such as
phosphorylation of the thick and/or thin filaments, that controls the
distribution of kinetic energy between the fast and slow phases would likely be
important in controlling muscle power output during ballistic
movements.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed studies will extend these preliminary
studies. Specifically, the investigators will: 1) compare biphasic shortening of
anuran jaw and hind limb muscles in species of anurans that differ in feeding
and jumping performance; 2) quantify the effects of duration of isometric pre-
stimulation and muscle length on biphasic shortening; and 3) examine the
relationship between movement velocity and duration of muscle pre-activation in
freely behaving animals.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed studies are likely to
demonstrate: 1) that a significant amount of elastic potential energy, stored
during isometric pre-stimulation, is converted to kinetic energy at the instant
of release to isotonic shortening; and 2) that muscles differ in their
strategies for distributing this kinetic energy between the fast and slow phases
of shortening, thereby optimizing their power output during shorter vs. longer
contractions. In these ways, the proposed studies have the potential to change
our concept of how muscles shorten, especially at the high velocities that occur
during ballistic movements.&lt;br/&gt;