* 0240852
* Agent-Based Models of In-Group Favoritism and Out-Group Hostility
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Robert Axelrod, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2007
* USD 267,500.00

This project uses agent-based models to develop a deeper understanding of
fundamental aspects of in-group favoritism and out-group hostility, in all their
manifestations including ethnocentrism, ethnic conflict, and discrimination
based on factors such as skin color, religion or national origin. The importance
of these problems is manifest. In the US, racial discrimination is a major cause
of economic inequality. At the global level, ethnic conflict is endemic, with
almost one hundred ethnic conflicts active at the same time. Previous models
have assumed that the existence and membership of groups are fixed, and that
shared membership entails partiality. The agent-based models in this project are
able to drop these restrictive assumptions, and thereby allow the investigation
of how individuals form their social identity, how in-groups become coherent,
and why perceived similarity often becomes the basis of favoritism. Agent-based
modeling starts with specific assumptions about individuals (called agents), how
they interact, and how the population changes over time. An agent-based model is
run as a computer simulation to generate artificial histories. The artificial
histories are then analyzed to see what happens over time and why. In this
project, the models emphasize simplicity for the sake of insight, rather than
try for a completely accurate depiction of any one case. The project is built on
the premise that every person has some observable and relatively stable
characteristics such as skin color, language, and religion. These
characteristics can then be used by someone else to determine whether that
person will be treated as one of "us" or one of "them". The first model is
designed to investigate (1) the conditions under which in-group favoritism is
likely to arise and persist, (2) why hostility between ethnic groups is so
common, (3) what are the likely effects of making discrimination more costly,
and (4) how settlement patterns can affect tolerance for immigrants. A more
advanced model, called the Multi-Trait Model, is used to investigate (1) why
some characteristics are emphasized more than others in discrimination, (2) what
social categories agents tend to emphasize in drawing boundaries between groups,
and (3) what temporary interventions can have lasting beneficial effects on
tolerance, cooperation, and equality, even in a world with scarce resources. The
project uses facts, concepts and theories from a broad range of social science
disciplines, especially political science and sociology. The project also draws
on concepts and theories from evolutionary biology and computer science. The
findings provide new opportunities for interdisciplinary research, new
perspectives for analyzing in-group/out-group dynamics, and new theoretically
grounded hypotheses for later empirical testing. The broader impacts for society
will be twofold. 1. The insights from the theoretical models will provide a
sounder basis on which to make public policies to prevent, inhibit or correct
the problems caused by in-group favoritism and out-group hostility. While a
theoretical model can never by itself provide useful guidance, the insights of a
simple formal model can be helpful to both analysts and policy makers in
providing a framework in which to ask potentially fruitful questions. In
particular, the results will suggest new ways of thinking about how limited
resources might be most effectively focused to reduce discrimination, lessen
social tensions from immigration, increase tolerance through targeted education,
and intervene in ethnic conflicts. 2. The project will integrate teaching and
research by providing a web site for students in high school through graduate
school. The web site will have all the resources needed for a student with
little mathematical training to run agent-based models to explore the dynamics
of in-group favoritism and out-group hostility. Students and researchers will
also be able to modify the Java source code to conduct new experiments of their
own design, and to see QuickTime movies showing how their population evolves
over time and space. The web site will also include archived data, suggested
exercises for students, and a list of unsolved problems.