* 0240325
* Dissertation Research:  Support for Tanfer Emin: Technological Change in Pregnancy Termination, 1850 - 1980
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Ruth Cowan, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 06/30/2005
* USD 8,000.00

In the last three decades, studies in the history and sociology of technology
have taught us a great deal about the processes of invention, development, and
diffusion. However, very few of these studies bring the insights of the history
of technology to bear on medical and reproductive technologies, despite the fact
that these technologies are having an enormous social, ethical and economic
impact on today's world. By placing these reproductive technologies in their
proper historical context, this dissertation research project will not only
elucidate the issues with which our predecessors struggled, but also shed a ray
of light on the current debates over pregnancy termination and the likely social
impact of new technologies such as RU-486. Almost nothing is known,
historically, about the science and technology of pregnancy termination. No
scholar has ever thoroughly explored the changing technologies of pregnancy
termination during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and no effort has
been made to understand how these changing technologies were connected to the
politics of medical professionalization, specialization, and commercialization.
This dissertation project seeks to fill this historical vacuum. This study will
trace the changes in pregnancy termination technology from 1850 (when herbal
methods began to be replaced by surgical methods, and knowledge about
fertilization was growing) to 1980 (by which time numerous new surgical methods
had been developed and diffused, both fertilization and ovulation were well
understood, and the different stages of fetal development had been demarcated).
Since pregnancy termination has always been a politically charged subject, these
scientific and technological changes must, of necessity, be viewed within the
context of a variety of disputes: disputes between laypeople and professionals
about who should be licensed to control pregnancy termination; disputes between
men and women about who should be responsible for fertility control; disputes
between those who want the procedure to be legal and those who want it banned;
disputes between advocates of one technological system over another. This
dissertation project will thus be a study both in the social construction of
technology and in the technological construction of one very significant social
process -- pregnancy termination. In preliminary research, the Co-PI has
uncovered material in published sources (medical journals, medical textbooks,
patent records, trade catalogues) and in archival collections. NSF funds support
travel to other relevant archival collections. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;