* 0240107
* US Government Support for IAI Core Budget
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Marcella Ohira, Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2003
* USD 550,000.00

The Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI) was created by an
international agreement concluded among representatives of American States,
namely the Agreement Establishing the Inter-American Institute for Global Change
Research, done at Montevideo on May 13, 1992 ("the IAI Agreement"). The IAI
Agreement created an intergovernmental organization for the purposes of
coordinating and promoting scientific research related to global change. The
Institute has an evolving "Scientific Agenda" identifying particular areas for
research. Full membership in the IAI is limited to States, although the IAI
Agreement also provides for non-State entities to become "Associates of the
Institute."&lt;br/&gt;The Institute is governed by an annual Conference of the
Parties, and by a subsidiary Executive Council (EC). The US Government currently
serves on the EC. The Institute has a permanent secretariat, the "Directorate."
The procedures and practices of the IAI's governing institutions are elaborated
in detailed rules of procedure. The IAI thus possesses the fundamental
institutional characteristics of an international organization: it was created
by international agreement, is composed of States and is governed by governing
bodies composed of representatives of States.&lt;br/&gt;The US Government
participates actively in the IAI. The United States played a leading role in the
creation of the IAI and has been an active participant in the IAI since its
creation. Senior US Government officials serve on the Executive Council and hold
other responsible positions related to IAI activities. Furthermore, the IAI has
been listed by the State Department and by the Office of Personnel Management as
an international organization within the meaning of the Federal Employees
International Organization Service Act, covered by 5 U.S.C. 3343 and 5 U.S.C.
3581.&lt;br/&gt;Core Budget support, for which this proposal is submitted,
allows the operation of the Directorate of the IAI, and provides support for its
scientific advisory body. Currently, the IAI Directorate is hosted by Brazil in
Sao Jose dos Campos, Sao Paulo state, on the campus of the Brazilian National
Space Research Institute (INPE), where the IAI Directorate functions as an
internationally recognized juridical personality, with the corresponding
privileges and immunities granted by the Government of Brazil.&lt;br/&gt;The IAI
receives Core Budget contributions from the other Parties to the Agreement
Establishing the IAI: Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Jamaica, Mexico, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela. Amounts are arrived at by consensus at
an annual meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the IAI
Agreement.&lt;br/&gt;The IAI is a U.S. initiative to stimulate cooperative
research on global change issues among the scientific institutions of the
Americas. The National Science Foundation is the lead U.S. Government agency
designated by the White House to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the
IAI.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The Inter-American Institute for Global Change
Research (IAI) was created by an international agreement concluded among
representatives of American States, namely the Agreement Establishing the Inter-
American Institute for Global Change Research, done at Montevideo on May 13,
1992 ("the IAI Agreement"). The IAI Agreement created an intergovernmental
organization for the purposes of coordinating and promoting scientific research
related to global change. The Institute has an evolving "Scientific Agenda"
identifying particular areas for research. Full membership in the IAI is limited
to States, although the IAI Agreement also provides for non-State entities to
become "Associates of the Institute."&lt;br/&gt;The Institute is governed by an
annual Conference of the Parties, and by a subsidiary Executive Council (EC).
The US Government currently serves on the EC. The Institute has a permanent
secretariat, the "Directorate." The procedures and practices of the IAI's
governing institutions are elaborated in detailed rules of procedure. The IAI
thus possesses the fundamental institutional characteristics of an international
organization: it was created by international agreement, is composed of States
and is governed by governing bodies composed of representatives of
States.&lt;br/&gt;The US Government participates actively in the IAI. The United
States played a leading role in the creation of the IAI and has been an active
participant in the IAI since its creation. Senior US Government officials serve
on the Executive Council and hold other responsible positions related to IAI
activities. Furthermore, the IAI has been listed by the State Department and by
the Office of Personnel Management as an international organization within the
meaning of the Federal Employees International Organization Service Act, covered
by 5 U.S.C. 3343 and 5 U.S.C. 3581.&lt;br/&gt;Core Budget support, for which
this proposal is submitted, allows the operation of the Directorate of the IAI,
and provides support for its scientific advisory body. Currently, the IAI
Directorate is hosted by Brazil in Sao Jose dos Campos, Sao Paulo state, on the
campus of the Brazilian National Space Research Institute (INPE), where the IAI
Directorate functions as an internationally recognized juridical personality,
with the corresponding privileges and immunities granted by the Government of
Brazil.&lt;br/&gt;The IAI receives Core Budget contributions from the other
Parties to the Agreement Establishing the IAI: Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Jamaica,
Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela. Amounts are arrived at
by consensus at an annual meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the IAI
Agreement.&lt;br/&gt;The IAI is a U.S. initiative to stimulate cooperative
research on global change issues among the scientific institutions of the
Americas. The National Science Foundation is the lead U.S. Government agency
designated by the White House to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the
IAI.&lt;br/&gt;***