* 0240402
* Collaborative Research: Barrier Jets in the Gulf of Alaska - Causes, Impacts, and Interactions with Other Phenomena
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Brian Colle, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 204,858.00

The mesoscale atmospheric flow near coastlines with prominent terrain has a
tremendous impact on those who live and work in the coastal environment. Yet
this class of localized wind systems remains a challenging and important problem
in weather prediction. One of the most common terrain-induced coastal flows, the
barrier jet, creates especially dangerous weather conditions, particularly in
southeast Alaska and the Pacific Northwest. The resulting severe winds pose a
threat to life, property, and economic activities. Addressing these societal
issues requires research to improve understanding of the dynamics of coastal
barrier jets and the larger-scale weather conditions required for their
formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in satellite remote sensing
technology provide an opportunity to further understanding of barrier jets. For
example, synthetic aperture radar (SAR) provides detailed measurements of the
surface wind speed with resolutions of hundreds of meters over regions several
hundred kilometers on a side. Moreover, with SAR the wind speed field can be
observed to within 1 km of the coastline. These SAR speed observations can be
combined with other observations and model output to provide high-resolution
wind vector maps throughout the coastal zone. These SAR-derived wind maps from
several thousand cases over the past 5 years, archived at the Johns Hopkins
University Applied Physics Laboratory, represent a unique resource for the
development of improved understanding of barrier jets along the Alaskan coast.
This archive contains on the order of 100 cases of barrier jet flows over the
Gulf of Alaska. In this project, the Principal Investigators will exploit this
archive, along with additional imagery, in situ observations and numerical
simulations to gain a greater understanding of the dynamics of barrier jets
along the western coast of North America and of the larger-scale weather
conditions required for their formation, thereby providing the basis for
operational forecasting of this hazardous
phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the interactions between the flow
associated with barrier jets and local ocean circulations will be investigated.
The barrier jet climatology will be used to map the seasonal mean wind stress
anomalies associated with barrier jets in the Gulf of Alaska. These wind stress
anomaly maps will be used to determine the mean Ekman pumping associated with
barrier jets and the resulting upper ocean response. These results well be
checked against in situ observations from moored buoys and used to examine the
impact of barrier jets on the marine ecosystem. These findings will provide
important information to the fisheries industry as well as the marine biology
and physical oceanography research communities.