* 0240644
* Noise Studies of Disordered Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Michael Weissman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2007
* USD 425,000.00

This condensed matter physics research applies low frequency noise and aging
techniques to several unsolved problems of disordered condensed matter. The
primary foci will be mixed-phase colossal magnetoresistive (CMR) materials and
relaxor ferroelectrics. Noise provides a sensitive probe of the mixed-phase
states involved in much CMR, allowing direct thermodynamic measurements of small
regions and revealing the extent to which the current flow can be inhomogeneous.
The roles of random substitutional disorder, of net strain, and of anisotropic
strain constraints in stabilizing mixed phases will be investigated in several
materials, particularly manganites. Multilayer materials with net doping equal
to that of conventional solid-solution materials will provide a particularly
direct test of the role of quenched randomness. Relaxor ferroelectrics freeze
into an overall disordered collection of locally ferroelectric nanodomains,
allowing them to retain useful high dielectric and piezoelectric coefficients
over a broader temperature range than do conventional ferroelectrics. However,
there is little consensus on the mechanism or mechanisms behind this glassy
freezing in various relaxors. Noise and aging allow determination of the forms
of unconventional, glassy freezing on scales both larger and smaller than those
of the nanodomains. A new model, analogous to a reentrant spinglass freezing, is
suggested by initial results on some standard relaxors. Comparative studies of
several dissimilar relaxor materials will sort out which models are applicable
to which categories. The graduate students working on these projects have been
able to use both table-top small-science techniques and sophisticated
lithography and characterization techniques. They have typically gone on to work
in the materials side of the computer industry or in further basic research.

Although there are many well-developed techniques for studying regularly ordered
crystalline materials, which have formed the basis of the semiconductor
industry, many of the materials now under development for use in sensors and
other applications are disordered. The techniques for studying disordered
materials, in which every site is a bit different from every other site, are not
so well developed. In disordered materials, there are typically many slightly
different physical states among which the material spontaneously fluctuates,
giving rise to low-frequency noise. This research focuses on using that noise as
a probe to study the basic physics of several materials. One of the main types
to be studied will be colossal magnetoresistive materials, which can be driven
from a poorly conducting non-magnetic state to a conducting metallic state by
application of a magnetic field, providing a potentially useful sensor device.
Initial studies show that this change typically happens by a patchwork of
conducting and non-conducting regions, rather than by a smooth homogeneous
change. Noise provides a way of seeing the behavior of the individual patches,
and thus allows a detailed look at how changes in materials affect this
transition. The other main topic will be relaxor ferroelectrics, which freeze
into a patchwork of regions in which the electrical dipoles of many thousands of
crystalline cells line up together, but these units then collectively freeze in
a random-looking pattern. That random pattern turns out to have useful
properties unlike those of regular patterns. Noise studies (and related studies
of slow aging vs. time) allow determination of the scale and type of the
interactions driving this peculiar freezing. The students working on these
projects have been able to use both table-top small-science techniques and
sophisticated large-scale facilities for making and characterizing samples. They
have typically gone on to work in the materials side of the computer industry or
in further basic research.