* 0240953
* Geometrical  Approaches to Frustrated and Many-Body Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Christopher Henley, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2007
* USD 306,000.00

0240953 Henley This award supports theoretical and computational research and
education seeking to elucidate the origins and effects of strong correlations in
fermion and boson systems and the role of frustration in spin systems. The
research has three focus areas. I. A model of spinless fermions with neighbor
exclusion will be further studied, via variational wavefunctions for holes
moving on the stripes, the charged, quantum fluctuating antiphase boundaries,
found in this model and for analytic justification of the low-density fermi
liquid. A Wigner-crystal-like phase is a candidate for spontaneous currents, as
is a 2 1 ladder. II. A truncation scheme for interacting-fermion Hamiltonians on
lattices is aimed at constructing renormalized creation operators on blocks of
sites by a sort of canonical transformation, and thereby extracting
quasiparticle dispersion relations. It will be tested for the square-lattice,
neighbor-excluded spinless fermion model. An alternative truncation criterion
for such blocks will be tested, that uses the (many-particle) density matrix on
clusters overlapping the blocks, to optimize the translational invariance of the
truncated wavefunction. Finally, adaptations of the Cluster Dynamic Mean Field
Theory will be explored, that replace single-electron Green's functions on a
block by a dynamic version of the block's density matrix, III. Spin correlations
will be predicted for the highly frustrated and degenerate pyrochlore lattice
antiferromagnets, in two regimes. For the disordered regime, unusual
singularities in the diffuse neutron diffraction pattern will be explained in
terms of the constraint of zero total spin in each tetrahedron, and a complete
?ting form will be developed. In the large-S Heisenberg spin regime, an
effective Hamiltonian of Ising-gauge form will be investigated as encoding the
ground-state selection effects of harmonic spin-waves, and the exact ordering
pattern will be derived from spin-wave expansion to anharmonic order. In two-
dimensional models, a high-?eld square lattice spin model and a similar "quantum
6-vertex model" will be investigated using the map to an interface and coarse-
graining, to extract dynamic structure factors. Projects I and II are aimed at
the fundamental question: how can we truly understand the groundstate
correlations of a strongly interacting model, possibly in an exotic quantum
state, when brute-force computational power is inevitably too limited? Rather
than augment computational power, the PI seeks to make better use of potential
information in any simulation, by understanding better what degrees of freedom
are the most important, and what additional quantities are desirable to measure.
The style of this research is pertinent to pedagogical goals: the priority is to
develop pictures that fairly represent the fundamental reasons for a phenomenon,
or counter-examples that force a re-thinking of common assumptions, rather than
produce close fits of experimental results. This motivates a search for the
simplest concrete model that exhibits a particular effect. Rather than adapting
well-known techniques to additional systems for which answers are desired, these
projects aim to develop new techniques, that complement existing techniques by
providing a different viewpoint and hopefully by being more concrete or
transparent (e.g. preferring real over Fourier space or direct mappings over
dualities, when either way will work). Project III is motivated by ongoing
experiments in highly frustrated magnets. This area has the potential to be a
rich source of interesting strongly interacting systems. The complicated
lattices and ordering patterns provide much scope for the geometrical approach
that has been a theme of the PI's work. Broader impacts of this work include
graduate and higher level education in modern condensed matter theory and the
possibility that this research creates tools and insights that not only lead to
progress on rich and difficult problems of strongly correlated electron systems,
but are also applicable to broader areas of condensed matter physics. %%% This
award supports theoretical and computational research and education seeking to
elucidate the origins and physics of strongly correlated electron materials and
the role of frustration in spin systems. The research involves the creative
blending of advanced theoretical techniques, computation, and nonstandard models
to develop new techniques and physical insights into the rich and exotic quantum
mechanical states displayed in strongly correlated electron materials. A thrust
of the research aims to maximize information obtained from computational
simulations on small systems. Another focus of the research involves systems of
spins with geometric arrangements that are not compatible with the interactions
between them. Understanding the effects of this frustration observed in some
materials may open avenues to the discovery of new materials that may exhibit
qualitatively new strongly correlated quantum states. The broader impacts of
this work lie in graduate and higher level education in the modern condensed
matter theory and in the possibility that this research creates tools and
insights that not only lead to progress on a notoriously hard problem but find
application outside the original area of research. ***