* 0240266
* Collaborative Research: Informational Constraints on Interpersonal Coordination
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Richard Schmidt, College of the Holy Cross
* Standard Grant
* ping li
* 06/30/2007
* USD 111,710.00

When two people converse both are almost always in motion. As a speaker's
posture shifts, the listener's does too, and the two together become coordinated
with the speaker's speech rhythms. We don't always notice but this kind of
social coordination happens all the time. People coordinate the movements of
their bodies, even in the awkward social situation of a laboratory experiment.
Movements are subtly and unintentionally synchronized as in an unconscious
dance. This dance is important and is associated with mental health. It breaks
down with psychological dysfunctions such as schizophrenia, autism and even
marital dissatisfaction. Thus a fundamental science of social synchronization
would broadly impact our understanding of social concerns and further advance
the possibilities for therapy. With support from the National Science
Foundation, Dr. Richard Schmidt and Dr. Carol Fowler will advance our
understanding of the perceptual and cognitive processes that support social
interactions, the processes that allow synchronization of movements in natural
interactions. Past research by these scientists and others suggests general
dynamical principles that underlie interpersonal coordination. These previous
studies established that talking with another person or seeing the other
person's movements provide the coupling mediums, the bases for coordination. The
funded research will investigate how the mind and body interact to organize this
coordination. The new experiments put people together to solve problems and then
track how the shared problem solving-the degree of psychological coordination-
contributes to movement coordination. Subtle movements to maintain posture as
well as overt rhythmic movements are recorded for analysis using modern
mathematical tools of nonlinear dynamics. Different experiments contrast
movements of limbs, torso, and other parts of the body, competitive vs.
cooperative tasks, natural vs. rhythmic speaking, and how much can be seen of
another's person's movements.