* 0240976
* Surface-Atmosphere Ozone Fluxes at Summit, Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2006
* J. Lamarque, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 04/30/2006
* USD 284,710.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OPP-0240976&lt;br/&gt;Helmig&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Research
in polar regions has demonstrated that chemical and physical interactions
between the snowpack and the atmosphere have a substantial impact on the
atmosphere's composition. Deposition and scavenging of gases and aerosols result
in the accumulation of a chemical reservoir that, under conditions of increasing
temperature and solar irradiance, can turn into a photochemically active
reactor. These reactions form radicals and the release of chemicals into the
atmospheric surface layer, and consequently influence concentrations and budgets
of important tropospheric trace gases. Observations of photochemical depletion
of ozone in firn air, diurnal ozone trends in the surface layer, tethered
balloon vertical profile data and estimates of photochemical ozone production
imply that ozone deposition to the snowpack depends on parameters, including the
quantity and composition of deposited trace gases, solar irradiance and snow
temperature. Consequently, ozone surface fluxes in polar regions are expected to
have snow photochemical, diurnal, and seasonal dependencies and to overall be
more complex and possibly larger than considerations in global atmospheric
models. The objective of this research is to study the diurnal and seasonal
ozone deposition to the year-round snowpack and investigate dependencies of
ozone deposition on environmental and snow photochemical conditions. This study
will employ sensitive flux measurement approaches by eddy correlation, by the
tower gradient method and by measurements of ozone in the interstitial air.
Field measurements will be performed during three experiments at Summit,
Greenland and a coastal area during a wide variety of environmental and seasonal
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project will measure
diurnal and seasonal ozone fluxes and deposition rates over polar snowpack.
Ozone surface fluxes will be analyzed for their relation to environmental and
snow photochemical processes. Data will be incorporated into atmospheric three
dimensional chemistry and transport models. Estimates of the overall ozone sink
of polar regions and the impact of predicted environmental changes on the
tropospheric ozone budget will be developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This research will establish a new collaboration between two early
career scientists in the fields of atmospheric analytical instrumentation
development and field research and data assimilation and integration into
atmospheric models. Ozone flux measurement techniques will be thoroughly tested
and characterized for use in the Arctic environment and in future research. A
female graduate student will be supported for her Ph.D. Undergraduate students,
in particular minority and underrepresented groups, will participate through
internships and summer study projects. Data will be made available at the ARCSS
Data Coordination Center archive at the National Snow and Ice Data Center. This
research will contribute to improving our understanding and predictive
capabilities of future changes of tropospheric ozone and role in anthropogenic
radiative greenhouse gas forcing. Consequently, this research will contribute
towards improving global change predictions and in directing society responses.
&lt;br/&gt;