* 0240835
* Partial Support for Student Travel for the 47th Annual Conference on Magnetism & Magnetic Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Chia-Ling Chien, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2002
* USD 5,000.00

Graduate students play a key role in the advancement of new and enabling ideas.
Graduate students, particularly those in their final years of doctoral study,
have expertise that is closely tied to the development, demonstration, and
understanding of new concepts and technologies. The dissemination of these
concepts, along with the intellectual development of the students that is a
consequence of scientific and technical interaction, supports long-term
leadership needed by the technical community. The funding provided by NSF would
enable the MMM Conference to invite graduate students who are citizens or
permanent residents of the United States to present papers in key areas of
magnetism and to benefit from discussions with experts in the field. With
breadth and quality, these presentations and interactions are an integral part
of each Conference. Such interactions are essential if the Conference is to
serve its purpose of providing an effective forum for the discussion of new,
state-of-the-art results and developments in magnetics to the domestic and
international scientific community.

The purpose of this proposal is to obtain NSF support to provide partial funding
to allow graduate students to attend and to participate in the 2002 MMM
Conference. The Conference is sponsored jointly by the American Institute of
Physics and the Magnetics Society of the Institute of Electricaland Electronic
Engineers, in cooperation with the Minerals, Metals and Materials Society, the
Office of Naval Research, the American Society for Testing and Materials, the
American Physical Society, and the American Ceramic Society.