* 0240910
* Data Fusion for Inverse Electrocardiography:  Synthesis of Signals from Multiple Sensor Types and Locations
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Robert Throne, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 08/31/2004
* USD 76,450.00

0001315 Throne Knowledge of how electrical potential patterns on the heart
surfaces evolve over time can be an extremely valuable tool in the diagnosis and
treatment of a wide variety of cardiovascular diseases. Hence, researchers have
proposed numerous minimally invasive approaches for inferring cardiac electrical
activity from measurements of electrical activity made at more accessible
locations. In these types of inverse problems the goal is to estimate an input
(the surface electrical potentials) based on a measurement of the output (the
electrical activity measured at a less invasive location). These particular
inverse problems are extremely ill-conditioned, and consequently small errors in
the measurements cause enormous (hundreds of times larger) errors in the
estimated cardiac potentials. The overall goal in this project is to employ data
fusion-- systematic combination of signals from multiple sensors, types of
sensors, and sensor locations-- to improve the potential estimates on the
interior and exterior surfaces of the heart.

The development of minimally invasive, stable inverse techniques will
substantially affect the treatment of cardiac disease. In addition, the data
fusion techniques developed for these inverse problems will impact research in
such diverse fields as identifying sources of electrical activity within the
brain, structural damage identification, electronics cooling, materials
characterization, and online machine tool wear monitoring.

