* 0240188
* U.S.- Japan Seminar: Genomic and Genetic Analysis of Plant Parasitism and Defense
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Jan Leach, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 05/31/2004
* USD 36,520.00

0240188&lt;br/&gt;Leach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan joint seminar on genomic
and genetic analysis of plant parasitism and defense to be held in Shizuoka,
Japan from November 3-7, 2003. The co-organizers are Professor Jan Leach at
Kansas State University and Professor Shinji Tsuyumu at Shizuoka University in
Japan. The meeting will bring together research scientists from the U.S. and
Japan, two countries where important and exciting progress in this area of
science is being undertaken. With the advent of new genomic tools and the use of
these tools in combination with classic genetic tools and resources, the
progress toward deciphering the molecular basis of plant-microbe interactions is
rapidly accelerating. Discussions will focus on advances made in two intimately
linked areas of plant-pathogen interactions, i.e., pathogen virulence and
avirulence and host recognition and response. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-
organizers have complementary scientific expertise in the field. This enables
them to evaluate and attract the best biological scientists to participate. The
seminar organizers have made a special effort to involve postdocs and graduate
students as both participants and observers. The exchange of ideas and data with
Japanese experts in the field will enable U.S. participants to advance their own
work, and will set the stage for future collaborative projects. Following the
seminar the organizers plan to establish a workshop web page. Conference
proceedings will be published on this web site and also as a book.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;