* 0240854
* Symposium on Cardiovascular Technologies:  Devices and Tissue Engineering in Hartford, Connecticut
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2003
* Joseph Bronzino, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 10/31/2003
* USD 4,000.00

0240854&lt;br/&gt;Bronzino&lt;br/&gt;Important advances in "Cardiovascular
Technologies" occurred during the past decade; implantable defibrillators, new
stent designs for angioplasty, and heart assist devices including new artificial
heart designs. Additionally, there have been breakthroughs in "tissue
engineering" that are expected to revolutionize the treatment of cardiovascular
disease. This area of technology is important with the Symposium and the
associated Technology Fair being designed to provide practicing professionals
and students interested in bioscience and engineering an opportunity to become
familiar with some of the latest developments in the field. The topics to be
covered include: "Advances in the Design of the Artificial Heart, the ABIOCOR
Artificial Heart Program", "Frontiers of Organ and Tissue Replacement",
"Cardiovascular Tissue Engineering", "Fetal Cardiology", "Advances in
Interventional Cardiology", and "Electrical Mapping of the Heart". &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of this Symposium and the Associated
Technology Fair are:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Present insights into the new
research and development efforts underway on developing new cardiovascular
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Present examples of successful
academic/industrial collaborations in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Provide
the opportunity for researchers and entrepreneurs to present innovative
approaches and products related to the entire field of biomedical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As illustrated by the topics to be covered,
the intellectual merit of the Symposium is high and will have significant impact
on the bioscience and biomedical engineering community in the region. Through
the publication of the Proceedings a beneficial impact on students and
professionals will extend to the national level. The associated Technology Fair
provides an opportunity for both students and professionals to discuss the
process of innovation with those currently engaged in the technology development
process.&lt;br/&gt;