* 0240313
* CAREER: Active Orthotics for Helping the Neuromuscularly Impaired to Walk
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2004
* Gill Pratt, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Yu Oh
* 03/31/2004
* USD 120,300.00

Many neuromuscularly impaired and/or elderly individuals find it too difficult
or too frightening to walk. Often these individuals can walk in controlled
environments, but lack the strength to recover from large force disturbances
encountered in the real world. Such individuals might be helped if a
lightweight, active, leg orthosis occasionally acted to compensate large forces
and stabilize gait when a fall is immanent. There are three technical and two
scientific challenges that must be addressed to make such a device possible.
Technically, the system must be very lightweight, have no need for external
(e.g. e.m.g.) sensors, and have a battery that lasts at least an entire day.
Scientifically, the system must act with appropriate mechanical behavior and be
able to estimate the user's ground-relative limb configuration and motive intent
based on a minimum of sensory information. All five of these issues will be
addressed in this study. On the Educational frontier, the subject of computer
architecture is one of the most rapidly evolving in the field of electrical
engineering and computer science. In order to teach computer architecture to
undergraduates, we must give them a laboratory substrate that is both motivating
(in that students can build circuits that solve interesting problems in real
time) and not prohibitively difficult to use. The educational portion of this
grant will be used to complete work on a scalable FPGA lab substrate for
computer architecture education. It will also be used to aid an ongoing effort
to restructure MIT's common core curriculum in Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science into a more coherent whole.