* 0240823
* Channel Switching in Fluvio-Deltaic Systems Draining Land Ice;  Clyde River,  Baffin-Island as a Type-Location
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2003,09/30/2004
* Irina Overeem, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 09/30/2004
* USD 61,823.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;OPP-0240823&lt;br/&gt;Overeem&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models of
sediment supply to the Arctic coastal zones predict pronounced increase of
sediment influx as a result of a warming climate. Yet estimates are still
uncertain, because: 1) the numerical climate-sedimentary models do not model
rare high-energy events; 2) lateral changes in the fluvial transporting system,
i.e., higher discharges due to climatic warming inducing channel switches and
increased floodplain sedimentation, have previously not been modeled. It is
expected that these model limitations have the most important implications for
drainage basins with relatively gentle topography, for example, rivers draining
a hinterland land-ice cap. This project proposes to advance the climate-driven
hydrological model, HydroTrend, to incorporate low-frequency high-magnitude
events, such as glacial lake outbursts. Simulated high-resolution discharge and
sediment load series, which is output from HydroTrend, can directly be fed into
our three-dimensional sedimentary model, SedFlux3D. Previous theoretical
experiments show that increased sediment supply is a dominant factor in causing
channel switches and of significant importance for progradation rates of fluvio-
deltaic systems into the offshore. These two concepts will be tested against
field data of Clyde River, East Baffin Island, which drains the Barnes Ice Cap.
Regional hydrological and meteorological data from weather stations in
combination with aerial photograph and satellite image interpretation yields the
required input for HydroTrend. Field measurements of grain size trends,
floodplain sedimentation, and channel dimensions of the Clyde River will be
compared with output of SedFlux3D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit and
broader impact. The response of Arctic river systems to climate change is a
largely unknown component of climate change scenarios. The improved models will
allow systematic testing of the impact of high-energy events, which is otherwise
hard to quantify, because of the relatively short measurement records in the
High Arctic. Furthermore, the model will enhance predictions of sediment flux
into the ocean. In a wider perspective, the project opens up new horizons to the
integration of glaciological models and three dimensional sedimentary models. At
the NSF sponsored meeting on 'A Strategy for a Community Sediment Model', the
link between glaciological and sedimentary models was recognized as one of the
areas where important scientific progress can and shall be made. The Clyde River
forms a unique present-day setting, but is a representative 'type-location' for
the entire U.S. east margin under glacial conditions. The present offshore
stratigraphic architecture depends heavily on the sedimentary processes during
the last glacial period. Improved models of the stratigraphic architecture of
the shallow coastal zone will facilitate coastal
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;