* 0240295
* Redox Active Dendrimers and Molecular Capsules
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Angel Kaifer, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 01/31/2007
* USD 524,000.00

With this renewal proposal the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
supports the ongoing work of Professor Angel E. Kaifer in the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Miami. Professor Kaifer's work examines the
electrochemistry of several macromolecular and supramolecular systems. The PI
will synthesize and characterize redox active dendrimers, investigate new host-
guest binding interactions between guest residues in these dendrimers and freely
diffusing host molecules, and design and develop novel systems capable of
forming molecular capsules under redox control. The PI has presented a clearly
articulated plan intended to better understand the factors that control the
thermodynamics and kinetics of electron transfer to redox groups appended to the
focal point of dendrimers. These are important studies, because unlike the
bioinorganic community, Kaifer's work is intended to use the secondary structure
around the redox group to control redox properties. This is precisely what
happens in proteins. The success of this work is leading Professor Kaifer in a
new direction that involves the assembly of dendrons using smaller host
molecules. In the future, this should provide a means to assemble more complex
supermolecules that are even better protein analogs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program of the Division of
Chemistry supports the research activities of Professor Angel E. Kaifer in the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Miami. Professor Kaifer's work is
significant since his studies may lead to the development of novel
electrochemical sensors and intelligent materials. Also, it may provide insight
into biological electron transfer reactions. The work will be carried out by a
diverse group of graduate students and postdoctoral associates who will be
trained in synthetic, chromatographic, spectroscopic and electrochemical
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;