* 0240918
* Quantum Magnetism in Low-Dimensional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Rajiv Singh, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

This theoretical research will study magnetic properties of materials and
provide model-based computational support for experimental characterization
tools such as Raman scattering, neutron scattering and nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR). The bulk of the study relies on two types of computational
methods applied to many-body model Hamiltonians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
is the series expansion method, which is based on developing high order
perturbation theory or power-series expansions for thermodynamic properties in a
suitable variable such as inverse temperature or ratio of coupling constants.
When these expansion parameters are small and the series are convergent, a
direct summation provides the desired answer. Pade approximants and related
extrapolation methods are used to obtain thermodynamic quantities when the
expansion parameters become large. These methods are known to work well provided
one develops a long enough series and does not cross any phase boundaries. The
singular properties associated with the phase transitions can be obtained as a
limiting behavior from specially developed extrapolation
schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second method is quantum Monte Carlo
simulations based on the stochastic series expansion technique. This is a
stochastic method to sum up all the terms in a high temperature expansion of the
partition function. Using recently developed "operator loop" updates, this
method allows one to study fairly large finite-size systems down to low
temperatures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These theoretical calculations will be used
to study properties of novel and existing magnetic materials. These include the
cuprate family of high temperature superconducting materials and several other
organic and inorganic materials. We identify a number of recently synthesized
square-planar antiferromagnetic materials and spatially anisotropic materials
exhibiting unusual behavior, whose properties will be addressed. In order to
have a greater impact on the understanding of real materials, we plan to
continue our collaborations with electronic structure theorists and experimental
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second objective of this research is to develop,
establish or confirm new ideas and concepts in strongly interacting many-
particle systems. For example, the question of whether fluctuation dominated
one-dimensional physics can carry over to higher dimensional systems will be
addressed. Another question of interest is whether there exist two-dimensional
spin models, with exotic phases and possibly fractional spin excitations.
Specific models, whose properties will be calculated, are
discussed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A third objective is to further develop and
extend the computational methods themselves so that they can be used for a wider
class of models and for a larger class of experimental properties. We will focus
on dynamical properties of magnetic systems at finite temperatures, which would
be most important in quantitatively understanding neutron scattering and NMR
results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These computational studies provide excellent
training for students and postdoctoral associates.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This
theoretical research will study magnetic properties of materials and provide
model-based computational support for experimental characterization tools such
as Raman scattering, neutron scattering and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR).
The bulk of the study relies on two types of computational methods applied to
many-body model Hamiltonians. These are series-expansion techniques and quantum
Monte Carlo methods. These studies provide excellent training for
students.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;