* 0240058
* Vertical Integration of Research and Education in the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Michael Wolf, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2009
* USD 3,821,780.00

Rice University VIGRE Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The world is becoming more
mathematical. For example, in recent decades we have seen the diffusion of
sophisticated tools of mathematics into the subjects of finance and biology, to
say nothing of the relatively new subject of computer science, with its own
distinctive mathematical issues. These subjects, and others of an
interdisciplinary nature, are best studied by a combination of analytical,
computational and statistical methods, with the mathematical scientists working
alongside those from the particular science under study. We will create
opportunities for students and researchers to learn these subjects by working in
interdisciplinary and vertically integrated working groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rice University Departments of Mathematics,
Statistics, and Computational and Applied Mathematics will jointly organize new
courses, seminars and laboratories focussed around four or five
interdisciplinary research topics. These activities are designed to weave
together the intellectual heritages of pure mathematics, numerical methods,
statistical science, and the particular science under study, and the educational
strata of faculty, post-docs, graduate students and undergraduates. These topics
will also have in them questions which serve as introductions to the fundamental
scientific issues of the field. Working in small groups (called PFUG's - Post-
doc, Faculty, Undergraduate, Graduate student), students and faculty will
explore these questions in heavily mentored, interdisciplinary teams. For our
students we will create the opportunity for an exciting research experience in
the mathematical sciences, in interaction with another scientific or engineering
discipline, and other students, post-docs and faculty who share their
fascination who will serve as mentors. Our researchers will be introduced and
become involved in topics outside of their research areas in which they also
might make substantial contributions. With this VIGRE project, we will reshape
the mathematical sciences curriculum at Rice, building on our current strengths
and interests, in order to create new opportunities for students and faculty to
broaden and deepen their understanding of the ways in which mathematics plays a
central role in our growing understanding of the world. &lt;br/&gt;