* 0240889
* REU -- Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Houston
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Stuart Long, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 03/31/2007
* USD 320,236.00

0240889 Claydon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a three-year Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of Houston for 15
students each year for research in electrical and computer engineering. The REU
site is designed as a ten-week summer experience and will provide research
opportunities for undergraduates in the areas of applied electromagnetics,
computer architecture and automated design, optoelectronic materials and
devices, perceptual and cognitive dynamics, and telecommunications. Each student
will work on an assigned project under the direct supervision of a faculty
member with expertise in his or her respective research area. Participants will
be provided library, office, and laboratory space. The participants' development
will be closely patterned after that of graduate students conducting research.
During the necessary literature search and formulation of the problem, the
student will be closely guided by his/her supervisor. As the participant gains
command of the problem, he/she will be given increasing independence, with the
supervisor providing only occasional ideas and suggestions. It is anticipated
that students, as a result of participating in the program, will acquire the
skills necessary to conduct independent research work. The program will focus on
providing an experience that encourages participants to pursue graduate studies
in preparation for career opportunities in research.&lt;br/&gt;