* 0240963
* Starter Grant: Linking Life History, Behavior, and Plant Population Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Elizabeth Crone, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/2004
* USD 40,000.00

At the present time, population biology exists as two, largely independent,
lines of investigation: understanding why species have particular traits (life
histories and behaviors), given current conditions; and predicting changes in
population size over time (population dynamics), based on a few simple features
shared by many populations, rather than the diversity of known behaviors and
life histories. This research tests the role of different aspects of life
history and behavior for patterns of plant population dynamics, with particular
emphasis on problems relating to applied questions in conservation biology and
ecological restoration. This grant will provide support for ongoing projects
testing ecological mechanisms of synchronous reproduction in an herbaceous
perennial plant (Astragalus scaphoides), and the importance of active foraging
for a hemiparasitic annual plant (Rhinanthus minor). In addition, funds will be
used to collect preliminary data investigating which traits best predict the
ability of different plant populations and species to respond to environmental
contamination. &lt;br/&gt;Ecologists are increasingly called upon to predict
responses to perturbations at large spatial and temporal scales, that are not
amenable to direct experimentation. Separation of life history and population
dynamic research means, for example, that when predictive models are used to
make decisions about the consequences of management options, they do not
typically take into account most of what is known about a particular species. In
many cases, this simplification may be appropriate; the goal of a model is to
capture key features of populations that are needed to predict dynamics in space
and time, not to accurately reproduce every detail about behavior and life
history, even it could be done. The question is which "details" must be
considered, because they lead to population responses that systematically
deviate from those predicted by simpler models. Thus, the primary application of
my research is in developing methods to choose appropriate levels of detail. In
addition, I am studying population biology of an endemic plant, listed as a
species of concern in Montana and Idaho. Finally, my research will contribute to
knowledge of responses of plants to zinc pollution in particular, and mechanisms
by which plants respond to environmental contamination in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;