* 0240653
* Microbial Observatories:  Collaborative Research: Characterization of Novel Anaerobic Microorganisms from a Sulfide Spring
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Stefan Sievert, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2007
* USD 288,795.00

Grants have been awarded to Drs. Lee Krumholz, Cecelia Brown, Thomas Dewers,
Mostafa Elshahed and Bruce Roe at the University of Oklahoma and Drs. Stefan
Sievert and Kai-Uwe Hinrichs at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
(Massachusetts) to establish a Microbial Observatory for the characterization of
novel anaerobic microorganisms from Zodletone spring, an oxygen-depleted sulfide
spring in Southwestern Oklahoma. This spring is a unique environment that
provides a habitat for a range of unusual and interesting microorganisms, most
of which have not yet been cultured. The overall goal of the proposed study is
to determine the different kinds of microorganisms that inhabit the spring,
study how these different microorganisms interact together and obtain cultured
cells for more detailed studies. These scientists will focus on understanding
the physiological function and ecological roles that these microorganisms
fulfill in their natural environment. To achieve these goals, they will first
identify members of the spring microbial community via sequencing of specific
genes that are typically used to determine evolutionary relationships among
microorganisms, or to indicate a specific metabolic function. Secondly, they
will focus on novel groups of microorganisms encountered at the site. Large
fragments of the genome of these microorganisms will be sequenced and genes
identified to determine the nutritional and ecological characteristics of
microorganisms from the spring. The architecture of the microbial community will
be studied using a combination of molecular methods and microscopy to provide a
three dimensional picture of microbial populations. Based on the data obtained
from gene sequences, they will attempt to cultivate many of these so far
uncultured microorganisms and perform an in-depth analysis of the metabolic
capabilities of individuals under controlled growth conditions. &lt;br/&gt;
Throughout the project, scientists at the University of Oklahoma will engage in
educational activities with the public schools in the rural area surrounding the
sulfur spring (Kiowa and Caddo Counties) and in Norman, OK. They will provide
hands-on activities to develop and promote scientific reasoning and critical
thinking skills in high school and middle school students.&lt;br/&gt; The
project will provide a clear picture of the diversity of life in a very
interesting environment. Zodletone spring lies on the land surface, yet because
of the chemistry of the water, it is devoid of atmospheric oxygen. This
situation is extremely rare in current times yet was common in ancient (Archean)
geological ages. Therefore, much of the data produced could be extrapolated to
understand microbial life in these ancient times and the impact of
microorganisms in shaping the earth's geological history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;