* 0240985
* Collaborative Research: Site Evaluations and Background Studies of Interactions Among Fluid Chemistry, Physiology, and Community Ecology for Ridge 2000 Lau Basin Integrated Studies
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Charles Fisher, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/2007
* USD 268,441.00

Two exploratory cruises to the East Lau Spreading Center (ELSC) will be
undertaken to evaluate sites for selection as the Integrated Study Site (ISS)
bull's eye for the Ridge 2000 program and to carry out studies necessary for
further interdisciplinary research in this area. In addition to exploration and
biological mapping, the sites will be carefully evaluated in terms of the
relation between the chemistry of the diffuse flow vents and the macro-biology.
This is especially important to do at this time because the only available water
chemistry data for this region is from high temperature vents and indicates that
Zn is very high and sulfide and methane are very low; this is not consistent
with the abundant communities of sulfide and perhaps methane-oxidizing symbioses
reported in diffuse flow. The reserach is complementary to, and will follow
upon, the first two major ISS evaluation cruises outlined in the Implementation
Plan for the site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first of the two cruises will
examine up to 6 sites identified by previous cruises and carry out detailed
studies of 3 sites, with a goal of collecting data for finalizing selection of
the bull's eye site for the Lau Basin ISS. The 2nd cruise will take place a year
later, after selection of the ISS bull's eye, and will characterize the faunal
biology and low temperature hydrothermal chemistry in the detail needed for
planning the actual ISS experiments. The work for the first cruise includes
mapping of the distribution of major community types, measurement of water
chemistry in the major community types using an in situ analyzer supplemented
with discrete samples, quantitative sampling of major community types,
identification and phylogenetic analyses of component species, analyses to
determine the reductant used by the symbionts in the major symbioses,
measurements of physiological condition of major species in different vent
areas, preliminary studies on maintenance of these species alive for further
studies, and a variety of ancillary studies. The second cruise will be focused
on a single site and studies will examine interactions between chemistry,
physiology and ecology within each of the discrete assemblages of animals at the
site as well as constructing very high resolution maps of the site, and carrying
out experiments on living animals facilitated and guided by results from the
first cruise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;