* 0240877
* A Two-Value Model of Intergroup Attitudes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Charles Stangor, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 02/28/2009
* USD 302,863.00

The goal of this project is to better understand the nature and etiology of
stereotypes, prejudice and discrimination. The model assumes that intergroup
attitudes form an integral part of the individual's important psychological
meaning system, and relates them to the fundamental human values of
egalitarianism and conservatism. These two values are expected to relate to
attitudes toward ingroups and outgroups, respectively. The proposed research is
designed to help understand when and how individuals develop prejudices, and
what may lead them to engage in discriminatory behaviors. The model also helps
account for why intergroup attitudes change across age (because the importance
of expressing one's fundamental values changes with age) and why intergroup
attitudes are so difficult to change overall (because values are integral
aspects of the self concept). Five study sets will test the model. The research
involves summarizing and consolidating existing personality measures into the
2-value model, and testing the ability of the values to predict a variety of
intergroup behaviors. These relationships are assessed at both the implicit as
well as explicit levels. Many of the experiments are designed to assess how
individuals resolve conflict between the two competing values. Another major
goal of the work is to investigate how individuals develop their prejudices
through the cultural transmission of values - parents and peers are expected to
be important in this regard. The knowledge gained from the research may be
useful in helping to design programs to alleviate or redirect negative
intergroup beliefs, and preventing hostile behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;