* 0240485
* NR:  Design and Evaluation of Retrieval Functions in Peer-to-Peer File Sharing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Mostafa Ammar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 09/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

Peer-to-peer (P2P) file sharing systems allow content to be shared between
distributed end-systems or peers. Files are stored at the peers and transferred
directly between them. The last few years have seen the popularity of such
systems grow tremendously. Beyond their recent popularity, peer-to-peer systems
represent a significant new content delivery paradigm that has the potential to
re-shape the architecture and performance of the Internet in the long term. A
typical P2P user session consists of a search phase where multiple searches may
be conducted followed by a retrieval phase in which multiple files may be
requested. Much research and development has gone into the design of differing
systems for file search, with the aim of improving performance and robustness.
In the proposed work, the researchers focus on the file retrieval phase, which
has so far received less attention from the research community. We are motivated
by three main observations: (i) A P2P system user's experience is the sum total
of the performance of both the search as well as the retrieval functions; (ii)
The network resources used during the retrieval phase can outweigh by far the
resources consumed during the search phase. As such, new paradigms and
improvements in the design of the retrieval phase can have far reaching
implications on the performance of the Internet in general; (iii) A P2P system
provides a significantly different context for content retrieval than the more
traditional client-server model; they have larger scale content replication, the
peers may possess severe resource constraints, and the peers are quite dynamic.
Our proposed research encompasses three areas:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Peer
selection strategies for improved performance of the retrieval phase. The
resesearchers examine two aspects of this problem that are unique to the P2P
environment and that have received little attention: (i) the fact that, due to
the large-scale replication inherent in P2P systems, the search phase can only
discover a subset of available replicas, and (ii) the constrained nature of
serving peers which may require requests to block until serving capacity is
available.&lt;br/&gt;2. Content retrieval strategies involving multiple serving
peers simultaneously. The large scale replication that may be present in P2P
systems leads to the interesting possibility of performing file retrieval from
multiple peers in parallel, both to improve performance and overcome peer
dynamics and instability. This work considers the effect of wide-scale
deployment of parallel downloading on performance as well as fairness among
network users. In addition, our work revisits the selection problem in this
context.&lt;br/&gt;3. A holistic approach to the operation of P2P systems. The
objective is to improve overall P2P user search and retrieval experience. We
introduce a new dimension, the quality of a search, by which one should judge
the performance of the outcome of a search phase and its effect on the
performance during the retrieval phase. The researchers study existing search
techniques with this new perspective and also consider two search paradigms
inspired by prior work on distributed match-making algorithms and broadcast-
stream scheduling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research output will consist of
theoretical as well as practical studies of the areas described above. THe
researchers will use a variety of techniques to evaluate our ideas (including
mathematical and theoretical analysis, simulation, emulation, and
experimentation). This work will be among the first to study the retrieval phase
in P2P systems in depth. Because network resource usage is primarily influenced
by the retrieval phase requirements, this work will also provide the basis of an
understanding of the effect of P2P systems on Internet resources and further
guide provisioning efforts to meet the demands of P2P systems. We are also
committed to activities that will promote the broader impact of the proposed
work including: (i) development of modules based on our research for graduate
and undergraduate classes, (ii) continued emphasis on inclusion of under-
represented groups within our research efforts and (iii) outreach activities to
Atlanta-based historically black colleges and
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;