* 0240919
* Collaborative Research:     The Role of Loess Weathering in Global Geochemical Cycles
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Daniel Mann, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 06/30/2006
* USD 87,298.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Anderson&lt;br/&gt;
OPP-0240676&lt;br/&gt;Mann&lt;br/&gt;OPP-0240919&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators at the Universities of
California-Santa Cruz and Alaska -Fairbanks. This award will be jointly
supported by the Arctic Natural Sciences Program and Geology and Paleontology
Program in the Division of Earth Sciences. Glaciers produce large amounts of
fine-grained sediment, exposing vast amounts of mineral surface area to chemical
weathering processes. Despite the tremendous potential for glaciers to influence
global weathering rates and hence atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) levels, this
effect has not yet been demonstrated. Silicate weathering rates underneath
glaciers are subdued, and rates in recently deglaciated terrain are below
average. The hypothesis is that loess weathering provides the key link between
the physical erosion done by glaciers and global geochemical cycles. This
project is to study silicate weathering fluxes from glacial loess, and assess
their global significance. Loess is a silt-clay sized sediment, transported by
wind off unvegetated braid plains of glacier-fed rivers, and deposited over
broad vegetated areas. Both the fine grain size and vegetation should render
loess deposits highly susceptible to silicate weathering. These deposits
effectively extend the impact of glaciation to a much broader area than the
extent of glacier ice. Weathering of loess has never been examined from the
perspective of contribution to global geochemical cycles. The project is
designed to answer two questions: 1) does loess deposition increase the silicate
weathering flux from a soil profile, and 2) does the weathering of loess occur
at rates that can affect global weathering rates, and hence, global CO2 levels?
Laboratory experiments, field measurements, and modeling will be used to address
these questions. The field site is the Delta River valley in central Alaska, a
glacial outwash system with on-going loess deposition at variable rates. Results
from lab and fieldwork will be synthesized in a one-dimensional model of soil
weathering fluxes as a function of loess deposition rate, precipitation rate,
organic matter content, and grain size distributions. The model will be extended
to the landscape scale to assess the global significance of loess deposition on
CO2 consumption. Weathering of loess may be a significant, but it is still an
unrecognized, component of carbon cycling. If this proves to be the case, then
loess formation and weathering over timescales much longer than the duration of
glaciation must be considered in models of atmospheric CO2 variation.&lt;br/&gt;