* 0240747
* Active Layer Thickness and Moisture Content of Arctic Tundra From SVAT Models and Assimilated 1.4 or 6.9 GHz Brightness
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2006
* Roger DeRoo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 02/28/2006
* USD 462,467.00

The long-term objective of this project is to enable near-daily satellite
monitoring of thickness and water content of the active layer throughout the
circumpolar Arctic. The PIs propose to test two hypotheses within the framework
of Arctic-CHAMP: 1) Assimilation of plot-scale 1.4 or 6.9 GHz brightness in
SVAT/Radiobrightness models will yield reliable histories of thickness and
moisture content of the permafrost active layer; and 2) Assimilation of
satellite-scale 1.4 or 6.9 GHz brightness in a distributed hydrology model
having embedded SVAT/Radiobrightness linkages will yield meaningful spatially
aggregated active layer histories. This assertion is supported by REBEX-3 data,
which show plotscale 19 GHz brightness data (~3 m) to be nearly identical to
SSM/I satellite-scale 19 GHz brightness data (~50 km) - a 4 order of magnitude
span in spatial resolution. Soil-Vegetation-Atmosphere Transfer (SVAT) models
depict energy and moisture transport and storage processes in soil, vegetation,
and snow. SVAT moisture profiles have been made accurate to meter depths through
assimilation of the moisture content of the top 5 cm of soil inferred from 1.4
GHz brightness. Although similar tests have not been made with 6.9 GHz data,
these data have significant sensitivity to soil moisture and are now available
from the new AMSR satellite instrument. For the assimilation approach with
either frequency to work in the Arctic requires that tundra SVAT models linking
active layer moisture content to microwave brightness be developed and
calibrated. A NASA Global Water and Energy Cycle (GWEC) Program grant is
permitting the PIs to build upon the success of their prairie Land Surface
Process/Radiobrightness (LSP/R) model to develop and calibrate a diagnostic
LSP/R model for arctic tundra. The GWEC project includes a six-week, plot-scale
calibration experiment near Toolik Lake in 2004. The PIs propose to (1) extend
that calibration experiment to the entire summer season, (2) create a
parameterized inversion model to assimilate 1.4 or 6.9 GHz brightness data from
the calibration experiment to test hypothesis 1, (3) embed the tundra LSP/R
model and the parameterized inversion model in an existing hydrology model of
the upper Kuparuk River watershed, (4) acquire AMSR satellite 6.9 GHz brightness
data and create a season-long "nature run" of 1.4 GHz brightness data for an
area of the Watershed equal to a satellite footprint (~2,500 km2), and (5)
assimilate the satellite and synthesized nature run data to test hypothesis 2.
&lt;br/&gt;The research is interdisciplinary between the Department of
Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Space Sciences and the Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science at the University of Michigan. It offers
scientists and engineers across these disciplines unique collaborative
opportunities to introduce new technologies to arctic environmental science.
&lt;br/&gt;