* 0240903
* Studies of Methyl Farnesoate in Crustaceans:  Physiological Significance and Peptide Regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Donald Lovett, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 03/31/2006
* USD 506,188.00

Crustaceans have a rich diversity of hormones that regulate their physiology,
development, reproduction, and behavior. One of these compounds appears to be
methyl farnesoate (MF), a sesquiterpene produced by the mandibular organ (MO).
Recent research suggests that MF may affect crustacean growth and reproduction,
but these studies do not definitively prove these roles. Other research has
shown that the eyestalk produces a peptide (MO-inhibiting hormone, MO-IH) that
can inhibit the production of MF by MO in vitro, but it has not been shown that
MO-IH regulates MF in vivo. The research described in this proposal will explore
these issues in the green crab, Carcinus maenas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
physiological role(s) of MF will be investigated by infusing crabs with MF (to
increase MF levels) and/or with purified MO-IH (to decrease MF levels). Some
animals will be transferred to dilute seawater, which causes a chronic rise in
MF levels, before infusion with MF and/or MO-IH. These procedures will be used
to test hypotheses that MF regulates osmoregulation and stimulates ovarian and
testicular development. Purified MO-IH will also be used to develop antisera to
MO-IH, and these antisera will be used to develop immunological test for this
peptide. MO-IH and MF will be measured in hemolymph from crabs in different
physiological states to test the hypothesis that MO-IH regulates hemolymph
levels of MF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies will answer fundamental
questions about the roles of MF in the physiology and development of this
important group of animals. The results may be useful in designing strategies to
increase the growth rate and reproductive fecundity of valuable crustaceans
(e.g. shrimp), which could benefit consumer and the aquaculture industry.
Finally, many of these studies will be performed by undergraduate students,
providing them with a hands-on opportunity to learn science during the academic
year and for extended periods during the summer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;