* 0241858
* Collaborative Research on the Formulation, Estimation, and Identification of Hedonic Pricing, Demand and Supply Models
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* L. Ridgway Scott, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2007
* USD 999,577.00

This award is jointly supported by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the
Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences as part of the
Mathematical Sciences Priority Area.

Economics models for hedonic markets characterize the pricing of differentiated
goods viewed as bundles of attributes, and the demand and supply of those
attributes under different market structures, preferences, and technologies.
Hedonic models provide insight into the economics of variety and heterogeneity,
which are features of modern labor and product markets. Using hedonic models, it
is possible to interpret wage data for heterogeneous labor, evaluate workplace
safety laws and analyze subsidies for wages and job training in terms of their
impacts on equilibrium wages and prices and on market participant welfare.
Hedonic models lie at the heart of modern methods to adjust cost of living
indices for changes in quality.

This research will develop the economic foundations of hedonic models in more
general settings than have been developed to date. Specifically, the research
will characterize the properties of alternative hedonic economies, including the
existence and uniqueness of hedonic pricing models in multi-attribute models
under different assumptions about dimensions of heterogeneity that characterize
agents, competitive structure of markets, the grouping of agents into
coalitions, characteristics priced in the market, and the nature of the
heterogeneity of agents. Computation of hedonic equilibria is of interest in its
own right, and for determining the consequences of alternative assumptions on
pricing, as well as for exploring the impacts of different policies on producer
and consumer welfare. It is also an essential ingredient in the econometric
analyses we propose to conduct. Our analysis of existence and uniqueness is a
vital step in developing computationally robust methods for simulating hedonic
economies and for recovering preferences and technologies from hedonic
economies.

This research will also conduct and econometric analyses of hedonic economies
under alternative assumptions about market structure, technology and
preferences, and the information available to agents and to econometricians. We
will conduct identification analysis and develop nonparametric and
semiparametric methods to recover the primitives of preferences, technology, the
distributions of productivities and preferences. We will apply these econometric
methods to analyze the determinants of earnings, housing prices and public goods
using data on individuals, firms, and communities. We also propose to examine
identification problems in models of social interactions using information on
prices to solve identification problems.