* 0241214
* Optimization of Interactions and Dispersions in Multi-Component Polymer Systems: Blends and Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Mark Dadmun, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2006
* USD 288,000.00

A series of experiments that provide an understanding of how to control and
optimize the extent of intermolecular hydrogen bonding that occurs in a multi-
component polymer system are proposed. DMR supported research has demonstrated
that miscible blends containing a liquid crystalline polymer (LCP) and an
amorphous polymer can be created by optimizing the extent of intermolecular
hydrogen bonding between the two species. The physical, engineering, and
thermodynamic parameters of miscible LCP/amorphous matrix will be determined
using small angle neutron scattering, its phase decomposition process monitored
by time-resolved light scattering, and its engineering properties (tensile,
strength and flow properties) measured by standard techniques. The effect of LCP
rigidity on the ability to form miscible blends will be examined to probe the
universality of the ability to induce miscibility in LCP/amorphous polymer
blends by optimizing intermolecular interactions. The impact of controlling and
optimizing the extent of intermolecular interactions on the properties of
polymer nanocomposites will also be studied. This will be accomplished by
correlating the dispersion of single carbon nanotubes and layered silicates in a
multi-component polymer mixture to the level of hydrogen bonding between the two
components. The completion of this set of experiments will furnish critical
information that will define the limits of the optimization of hydrogen bonding
between two components in a multicomponent polymer mixture to improve its
dispersion and properties and define crucial parameters that will enable the
design and production of robust multicomponent polymer systems, including true
molecular composites and nanocomposites.

The broader impacts of this work will come from the experience of Science
teachers from a public High School when they spend four weeks in a university
lab contributing to this project, obtaining hands-on laboratory experience and
training in polymer demonstrations. The teachers will utilize this experience in
their classroom to introduce high school students to polymers and research. This
research will also be disseminated to a broad range of audiences by the
development a public outreach webpage called "The Fact of the Matter" to educate
the public regarding the contribution of materials to technological advances.
Further impact will result from the completion of neutron scattering experiments
at the National Institute of Standards and Technology as well as Oak Ridge
National Laboratory where the students participating in this project will
acquire hands-on experience in a multi-user facility and develop the next-
generation of neutron users to insure the continued health of these National
facilities. Finally, Current collaborations and interactions with industrial
and/or government laboratories will expedite the transfer of the guidelines and
fundamental understanding garnered from this project to commercial viable
technologies that will benefit society. The results of this project will provide
critical guidelines that will ultimately enable the rational design of
multicomponent polymer mixtures (blends and nanocomposites) that can be used to
create materials with a broad range of targeted properties for an enormous range
of technological applications including the next generation of extraordinary
structural, flame resistant, and/or thermally stable materials.