* 0241020
* Improving Computerized Adaptive Testing In the United States
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2003,03/31/2006
* Hua-Hua Chang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2006
* USD 180,000.00

While the implementation of computerized adaptive testing (CAT) has many
advantages, many issues related to CATs are not well understood. This project
will study three specific issues in development and implementation of CAT: (1)
compatibility between CAT and "paper and pencil" (P&amp;P) tests, (2) test
security and item pool usage, and (3) how to calibrate test items in large
quantities efficiently and economically. With respect to compatibility between
CAT and "paper and pencil" (P&amp;P) tests, it has been widely reported that
some students get much lower scores than they would if an alternative P&amp;P
version were given. However, examinees currently required to take Graduate
Record Examination (GRE) in the United States, for instance, are not given a
choice between the standard P&amp;P version of the tests and the CAT versions.
Without effective remedial measures, the credibility of CAT could be
significantly undermined. This project proposes to modify the statistical
procedure used for CAT item selection by incorporating some advanced analytic
techniques. It is expected that the analytic and simulation results will show
that weighting likelihood score may alleviate the problem of underestimation.
With respect to test security and item pool usage, in current operational CATs,
computers tend to select certain types of items too frequently, making item
exposure rates quite uneven. This project will show that test security and the
underestimation problem discussed in the research on CAT and P&amp;P tests are
closely related. It is also expected that the project will show that the alpha-
stratified approach proposed by Chang and Ying in 1999 tends to improve both the
underestimation and test security. With respect to calibrating test items in
large quantities efficiently and economically, administration of CATs requires
very large item pools. Fortunately, CAT provides great potential to large-scale
calibration during on-line testing. This project will explore the development of
on-line calibration in CAT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAT has become a popular mode
of educational assessment in the United States. Examples of large scale CATs
include the Graduate Record Examination (GRE), the Graduate Management Admission
Test (GMAT), the National Council of State Boards of Nursing, and the Armed
Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB). Findings from this research
project may speed up the process of improvement over current item selection
algorithms. Because many CATs are high-stakes examinations, improving their test
reliabilities will greatly benefit society.&lt;br/&gt;