* 0241943
* Simulated-Based Estimation of Dynamic Discrete Games with an Application to Banks' Spatial Competition
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Victor Aguirregabiria, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2006
* USD 210,238.00

The research program develops new techniques for the estimation of structural
parameters in dynamic discrete games and applies these methods to study spatial
competition in the US banking industry. Empirical discrete games are useful
tools in the analysis of economic and social phenomena where strategic
interactions play an important role in explaining behavior. The estimated models
allow one to infer how different factors affect behavior, and one can evaluate
the effects of changes in economic policies.

This research project has three parts. The first part develops a class of
estimators that deals with two important issues in the estimation of dynamic
discrete games: the indeterminacy problem because of large numbers of possible
solution to a game, and the large dimensions in the solution and estimation of
these models. The method combines nonparametric techniques, to deal with the
indeterminacy problem, and simulation techniques to avoid the large dimensions
problem. This part of the project provides a class of estimators that extends
the range of estimable dynamic discrete games.

The second part of the project is to study the finite sample properties of the
proposed class of estimators. When the dimension of the state space is large
relative to the sample size, initial nonparametric estimates of players' choice
probabilities can be very imprecise, which induces significant finite sample
biases in the estimates of structural parameters. The proposed estimator is
consistent only when the number of simulations to approximate players' best
responses goes to infinity. The project proposes several techniques to reduce
these sources of bias and will provide researchers an automated procedure to
select the estimator in this class that minimizes mean square error.

The third part of the project applies these techniques to study competition in
the banking industry using a unique panel data set from the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation. This data set includes annual information on the location
and deposits of all banks' branches in US between 1994 and 2001. The estimated
model is then used to answer several questions including market power, mergers
and acquisitions, and the effects of the Reigle-Neal Act on competition in the
Banking industry.