* 0241406
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Inviting Outsiders In: Learning and Legitimation in Agency Policymaking
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Richard Hall, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 11/30/2004
* USD 11,842.00

Private information is a hallmark of bureaucratic power. On the one hand,
specialized knowledge and skills are essential for agencies to perform their
tasks effectively. On the other, however, such specialized knowledge may
insulate agencies from democratic influence. Not surprisingly, Congress has
created advisory committees composed of outside experts as a check on agencies'
informational power. A growing literature on political control of the
bureaucracy has called attention to these ancillary institutions. Yet,
government agencies themselves have created hundreds public advisory committees
to participate in agency policy-making. And, agencies call upon Congressionally
created committees even when they are not mandated to do so. What explains this
behavior? Under what conditions do agencies risk compromising private
information to seek public advice? Are they able to do so in ways that augment
their knowledge and policy-making leverage? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation takes up these puzzles. This dissertation argues that capable
agency leaders structure public advisory committee deliberations in ways
consistent with supporting agency reputation for expertise.
Existing&lt;br/&gt;scholarship focuses either on committees' informational
contributions or on their potential to confer legitimacy. The concept of
reputation, this research argues, invites us to understand learning and
legitimation as two facets of an overarching bureaucratic goal, not as a
dichotomy. An agency reputation for expertise, this research contends, hinges
both on demonstrated agency capabilities and on external perceptions of agency
policies and process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing and testing a theory of
agency reputation for expertise in the context of public advisory committees
advances extant scholarship in the fields bureaucratic politics, organization
theory, and institutional theories of inter-branch relations. This research also
bears on applied public policy issues of national importance: drug approval and
national education testing. The dissertation employs large- sample statistical
analysis coupled with analytic narratives to demonstrate whether and when agency
leaders in the Food and Drug Administration and the Department of Education
structure public advisory committee deliberations in ways consistent with
supporting agency reputation for expertise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These two
agencies were selected for their important internal and cross-agency variation,
which allow both within-agency and cross-agency generalizations. The overarching
dependent variable in this work is advisory committee use measured
systematically by looking at three sources of policy influence: agenda setting,
participation and timing. Independent variables measure policy conditions
including uncertainty, conflict, visibility, agency capability, and committee
characteristics in addition to political variables. The research is designed to
test rival hypotheses advanced in current
scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results from the FDA suggest that
by strategically compromising private information and inviting outsiders in,
agencies can mobilize a valuable political resource: a reputation for expertise.
Public information does not replace private information as a hallmark of
bureaucratic power: wise agencies are judicious in their agenda setting
strategies. But, public advice stands alongside private information as a
potential source of bureaucratic power.&lt;br/&gt;