* 0241770
* Applications of Nonparametric Methods in Econometrics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2005
* Yuichi Kitamura, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2005
* USD 176,226.00

This project develops practical tools for goodness-of-fit testing of models
subject to random censoring models subject to random censoring with specific
reference to duration models, and proposes a new method of analyzing non-nested
conditional models. The literature of duration analysis is econometrics is large
and growing. While many flexible duration models have been developed in the
literature to deal with important features of economic data, a large majority of
empirical econometric studies employ parametric duration models. It is,
therefore important to have convenient specification techniques tailored for
applied economists. Many researchers use x2 tests that rely on arbitrary sample
space splitting. Also, residual analysis is often employed to conduct informal
graphical analysis. While these techniques are useful, general specification
tests with sound statistical foundations are lacking. This research develops a
Kolmogorov-Smirnov type goodness-of-fit test for parametric conditional survival
functions. This test is easily modified to "concentrates" on model features of
interest to the researcher. An alternative specification test for parametric
hazard functions based on martingale residuals is investigated. It is common in
applied econometrics to write a model conditional on some variables, with
unspecified probability law of the conditioning variables. Choosing between
different types of conditional models is an important issue since it occurs
frequently in applied econometrics. If the two models are nested, many well-
established methods are available. There are, however, many situations not
covered by these conventional methods. Examples include: (1) comparison of a
conditional mean restriction model and a conditional median restriction model,
(2) comparison of conditional quantile restriction models for two different
quantiles, (3) comparison of two non-nested conditional mean restriction models,
and (4) comparison of a parametric likelihood model and a conditional
mean/median restriction model. There are no generally acceptable methods of
choosing between different models in these situations. The research offers a
likelihood-based measure of model fit that enables the researcher to compare a
broad range of conditional models in a unified manner. The key idea is to
introduce "likelihood" for semiparametric models such as conditional mean
restriction models and conditional quantile restriction models. The measure is
then used to develop a likelihood ratio test for model comparison. Some
practical issues for implementing the method are addressed.

The proposed research will yield software for scientists from many disciplines
to easily use the methods developed in this research.