* 0241313
* The Interaction of Affect and Deliberation in Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Paul Slovic, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2006
* USD 243,115.00

The proposed research attempts to articulate the interrelated roles of affect
and deliberation in guiding judgments and decisions. As used here, "affect"
means the specific quality of "goodness" or "badness" (i) experienced as a
feeling state (with or without awareness) and (ii) demarcating a positive or
negative quality of a stimulus. We have characterized reliance on such feelings
when making judgments or decisions as "the affect
heuristic."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in cognitive and social psychology and
cognitive neuroscience that informs us about two basic modes of thinking,
experiential and analytic. The experiential system is intuitive, automatic,
image-based, fast, and intimately associated with affective feelings. The
analytic system is deliberative, reason-based, and slow. There are strong
elements of rationality in both systems. It was the experiential system that
enabled human beings to survive during their long period of evolution. Long
before there was probability theory, risk assessment, and decision analysis,
there were intuition, instinct, and gut feelings to tell us whether an animal
was safe to approach or the water was safe to drink. As life became more complex
and humans gained more control over their environment, analytic tools were
invented to "boost" the rationality of our experiential
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We plan in this project to conduct experiments to
better understand the role of affect in decision making and the interaction
between the experiential, affect-based mode of thinking and more analytic and
deliberative processes. These experiments are designed to test specific
predictions about the way that individual and environmental factors such as time
pressure, cognitive load, age, mood, and instruction to think or give reasons
influence the balance of affective and deliberative processing and the judgments
and decisions that result from this processing. We shall also address the
broader impacts of this research, by demonstrating how the findings provide
insight into ways to improve a wide-range of important practical decisions about
matters involving finance, medical treatments, cigarette smoking, health
insurance, and risk perception.