* 0241430
* The North Brazil Current Rings Experiment:  Data Analysis and Synthesis
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2006
* Silvia Garzoli, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2006
* USD 428,413.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI/Institution: Johns / RSMAS Proposal No:
OCE-0241430&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During 1998-2000 a team of conducted the North
Brazil Current Rings Experiment (NBCRE). This program obtained the first
comprehensive observations of the North Brazil Current (NBC) retroflection, the
NBC ring formation process, and the physical structure and properties of NBC
rings as they translate northwestward along the western boundary. The goal of
the NBCRE is to understand the process of NBC ring generation and to quantify
the role of NBC rings in cross-equatorial and cross-gyre transport within the
Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (MOC). This proposal requests
support for analysis and synthesis of the data collected during NBCRE program.
The remaining analysis and synthesis tasks have been organized among the
principal investigators and this proposal requests support for the Miami PI's to
complete the synthesis of the shipboard ADCP data and CTD/LADCP station data
collected on four cruises to the region as well as data from current meter
moorings and inverted echo sounders deployed in the area of NBC ring formation.
Results from satellite altimetry and surface drifters and floats available in
the region (including some launched by our WHOI colleagues as part of the
project), and model results from MICOM simulations, will be also be included in
the collaborative analysis. The specific objectives of this proposal are to:
document the 3-D structure of the NBC retroflection and the large- scale western
boundary current system observed during the four research cruises, provide a
thorough description of the temporal variability of the NBC retroflection and
the physical processes involved in the separation of rings from the
retroflection, including upstream NBC variability and possible remote
influences, and determine the physical structure and watermass properties of the
rings after separation from the NBC and the volume of South Atlantic water they
trap and transport northward into the subtropical North Atlantic. Once
completed, this synthesis will provide a vastly improved understanding of the
phenomenology of NBC ring shedding and the significance of these features to the
North Atlantic circulation. In addition to increasing our physical knowledge of
the rings, the synthesis will serve as a baseline for future model evaluations
and model-based process studies in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;