* 0241638
* Collaborative Research: Anchoring and Insufficient Adjustment in Everyday Judgment
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Thomas Gilovich, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert E. O'Connor
* 03/31/2006
* USD 200,000.00

People's judgments are often inordinately influenced by the first information
that comes to mind. Judgments of others' perceptions are unduly tied to one's
own (Gilovich & Savitsky, 1999; Savitsky, Epley, & Gilovich, 2001; Keysar &
Barr, 2002), impressions of others' personalities overly influenced by initial
dispositional inferences (Gilbert, 2002) and answers to general knowledge
questions anchored on irrelevant information considered early in the processing
stream (Chapman & Johnson, 2002; Wilson, Brekke, & Centerbar, 2002). These
effects, and many like them, have traditionally been explained as insufficient
adjustment from an initial anchor or starting point, using what Tversky and
Kahneman (1974) called the "anchoring and adjustment" heuristic. In short,
people make judgments under uncertainty of all kinds by starting with (or
anchoring on) information that is presented to their attention or that comes
quickly and automatically to mind, and then serially adjusting their initial
impression until an acceptable judgment is reached. Although originally used to
explain numerical estimates, anchoring and adjustment has figured prominently in
numerous theories of social judgment.

Recent evidence has cast doubt on the "anchoring and adjustment" heuristic. In
particular, it has come to light that the experimental paradigm long used to
investigate anchoring and adjustment does not, in fact, involve adjustment at
all. These results, accompanied by failures to find conclusive evidence for a
process of adjustment outside this paradigm, have led some researchers to reject
the anchoring and adjustment heuristic altogether (Chapman & Johnson, 2002).

Research conducted with funding from a current NSF grant indicates that this
conclusion is premature: The anchoring and adjustment heuristic is alive and
well when one looks in the right places (Epley & Gilovich, 2001). This research
indicates that people adjust in a serial fashion from anchors they automatically
generate themselves as a value known to be close to the right answer but in need
of tinkering. It appears, furthermore, that the processing of such "self-
generated" anchors is common and pervasive in everyday life, making an accurate
understanding of them critical to a broader understanding of social judgment.

The studies proposed here are designed to expand the work begun on the existing
grant by: a) developing new methodologies for tracking the operation of true
anchoring and adjustment; b) more clearly identifying the exact nature of
anchors that stimulate adjustment and those that do not; c) expanding the scope
of the anchoring and adjustment heuristic beyond questions of general knowledge
and into social judgment more generally; and d) developing techniques for
overcoming insufficient adjustment.

