* 0241613
* Gene Flow and Species Diversity in Deep Sea Hydrothermal Vent Communities
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Robert Vrijenhoek, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/2008
* USD 313,131.00

This project will continue population genetic and molecular systematic studies
of organisms endemic to deep-sea hydrothermal vents and cold-water
sulfide/hydrocarbon seeps. Oceanic expeditions over the past 14 years have
amassed an extensive collection of ethanol- and cryopreserved specimens from
most of the known vent and seep habitats in the world. These specimens will
provide a foundation for assessing the evolutionary affinities of newly
discovered taxa in biogeographical provinces that presently are poorly
understood. Primary objectives are to explore two little known global regions
that might provide historical or present-day connections between major
biogeographical provinces in the deep-sea: the Easter Microplate region in the
eastern Pacific and the Lau/Fiji Basins in the western Pacific. Specimens will
be collected with manned or unmanned submersibles and preserved on board the
support vessel for subsequent molecular and morphological studies. Molecular
analyses (mostly DNA sequencing) will be conducted in a lab at the home
institution. Population genetic analyses will focus on assessing genetic
diversity and geographical structure, and on estimating modes of dispersal and
rates of gene flow within species. Continuing systematic studies will focus on
development of robust multi-gene phylogenies for the molluscan and annelid
groups that dominate vents. This work will contribute to phylogeographic and
systematic perspectives on the dominant species that live in these unusual
abyssal communities.

Numerous undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral students will benefit from
laboratory and oceanographic experiences associated with this project. New
information will be published in the professional literature and made available
to the public through web-based resources and presentations.

