* 0241148
* Specialization, Inequality, and the Labor Market for Married Women
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Casey Mulligan, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2009
* USD 300,910.00

Perhaps the most dramatic socioeconomic changes over the last century, and
especially the last three decades, is the increasing presence of women in the
labor market, the growing professional achievements of those women, and how most
of the increase occurred among married women. Over the past thirty years,
growing (within-gender) wage inequality has also been a dramatic and important
phenomenon. Previous studies have modeled and measured inequality and female
labor supply separately, even though the household specialization model implies
a strong link between the two series. Such a link is evident in a variety of
time series and cross-section data, and further research on household
specialization is important for a full understanding of both inequality and the
female labor market. &lt;br/&gt;Since the vast majority of prime-aged women live
with a husband, this project investigates the importance of family situations by
exploring some of the important implications of the household "specialization"
model, and the role in which the market wage structure plays in those models.
The investigator builds a simple mathematical model of household specialization
and shows (a) how wage inequality can affect female labor participation, (b) why
the wage structure is best understood in a family context, (c) why more wives
should enter the labor force than husbands leave it, (d) why a married person's
potential to be the primary family earner might be as an important predictor of
behavior as his or her gender. This approach is compared to other explanations
of historical female labor trends. New cross-section and longitudinal data sets
are constructed for the use of other family researchers, and to further study
the economics of specialization. Specifically, Census Bureau individual-level
data and Population surveys spanning the years 1940-2001 are used to construct
matched couples-level data sets with matched husband and wife labor market
information. One of these data sets will feature repeated cross-sections, and
the other repeated and overlapping two year-panels. The project also uses the
data to extend the Census Bureau's time series on the fraction of married women
who are the primary earner in their family (a relevant statistic for the
specialization model of labor supply, and other models of household decision-
making), and to explore additional cross-sectional and longitudinal implications
of the household specialization model. By the end of the project, the
investigator will have a full general equilibrium approach to the female labor
market, endogenizing wages, fertility, life cycle profiles, and the composition
of the married and single populations. This research may lead to some important
and surprising conclusions. As a study of a major change in the labor force, our
investigation will provide progress on general policy questions, like the
determinants of aggregate employment and income, the effects of policies with
the potential to distort the labor market, and the reasons why men and women
have different labor market outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;