* 0241298
* Coasts Under Stress II  Conference, New Orleans, Louisiana, March 2003
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2003,02/28/2006
* Norbert Psuty, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2006
* USD 5,000.00

Geographers have a long and distinguished history in the study of coastal
systems. Much of the research has addressed coastal development and resources,
coastal hazards, coastal geomorphology and nearshore processes, and coastal
environmental systems. Few venues have brought together these disciplinary
scholars working in the full range of coastal inquiry, however. Twenty-five
years ago, H. Jesse Walker organized a joint meeting of the (then) Commission on
Marine Geography of the Association of American Geographers and the (then)
Commission on the Coastal Environment of the International Geographical Union.
The effort was a symposium entitled Coasts Under Stress, which included paper
and poster sessions and a field excursion, Papers based on many of this
symposium's presentations were assembled in a special issue of the Zeitschrift
fur Geomorphologie. This award will support a comparable international
conference on critical issues in coastal geography. Sponsored jointly by the
Coastal and Marine Specialty Group of the Association of American Geographers
and the Coastal Commission of the International Geographical Union, this meeting
will bring senior and junior members of the profession to New Orleans, the site
of the 2003 AAG annual meeting. Paper and poster presentation over a two-day
period plus a four-day field excursion to study sites in the issue-rich Gulf
Coast will convey the results of recent research, spur intellectual exchange,
foster networking, and broaden the backgrounds and perspectives of participants.
Papers based on many of the 2003 conference presentations will be disseminated
through a special issue of the international Journal of Coastal Research. NSF
support will facilitate the participation of a number of grad students and
international scholars as well as help cover publication
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference should facilitate scholarly
attention and scientific inquiry into issues associated with the management of
finite resources in areas of high natural and cultural stress. Broader impacts
of the research will include fostering of international collaborations and the
provision of education and training opportunities for a number of graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;