* 0241614
* Chromophoric DOM: An Ignored Photoactive Tracer of Geochemical Process
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Craig Carlson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2007
* USD 534,680.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0241614&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chromophoric dissolved organic material
(CDOM), the colored fraction of the dissolved organic material (DOM) pool, is a
highly dynamic property found throughout the open ocean. CDOM is an optical
property; hence, its concentration can be quantified synoptically over large
spatial scales using satellite-borne sensors or in situ from a host of
autonomous platforms. Recent work demonstrates that net CDOM production is
related to heterotrophic bacterial cycling processes while its losses are due to
photobleaching. Vertical distributions of CDOM and in particular its surface
signature are therefore regulated by how vertical mixing processes redistribute
the basic processes of CDOM cycling. This suggests that CDOM may be an excellent
tracer of upper ocean exchanges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study,
researchers at the University of California - Santa Barbara will apply a
process-level description of CDOM cycling to test its utility as a geochemical
tracer. Specifically the research team will: (1) elucidate CDOM distributions
over a range of oceanic regimes on several meridional sections of the CO2/CLIVAR
Repeat Hydrography survey; (2) quantify and parameterize CDOM production &amp;
destruction processes with the goal of mathematically constraining the cycling
of CDOM; (3) evaluate the utility of CDOM as an upper ocean age tracer by
comparing with coincident tracer distributions from the Repeat Hydrography
survey; and (4) develop a one-dimensional model of CDOM dynamics for use across
a wide range of oceanic regimes with the goal of diagnosing mixed layer -
thermocline exchanges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project has broad
impacts beyond the world of academic ocean science. The three principal
investigators on the project are active instructors, and results of this
proposed work (and experiences gained) will be used in their course offerings at
both the undergraduate and graduate levels. This research will support a
dissertation of a graduate student at UCSB. All data will be freely available to
all interested parties via a website at UCSB and the CO2/CLIVAR Repeat
Hydrography Program. Finally, tf their scientific hypotheses prove correct, this
research could lead to the remote estimation of water mass exchanges between the
mixed layer and underlying waters from satellite orbit. A predictive
understanding of these exchanges is critical for understanding the oceanic fate
of anthropogenic compounds discharged to the atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;