* 0241684
* Change Blindness:  Representing Information Across Views
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Daniel Simons, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 06/30/2003
* USD 54,749.00

People often do not notice large changes to displays ranging from simple arrays
of novel objects to complex, naturalistic motion pictures. For example,
observers sometimes fail to notice when the central actor in a motion picture is
replaced by a different person during a cut to a different camera view. Yet, the
mechanisms underlying such change detection failures, or "change blindness," are
not well understood. The primary goal of this proposal is to investigate the way
in which our representations of the visual world influence our ability (or
inability) to detect changes when viewers intentionally search for a change and
when they do not anticipate a change. Experimental tasks will be used both in
and out of the laboratory thereby including conditions in which the
representation of visual scenes is tested under more ecologically valid viewing
conditions. Variables will include the magnitude of the change, the initial
viewing time, the delay between the original and changed display, and the
complexity of the scene. Another series of experiments will use both intentional
and incidental tasks to explore the detection of categorical changes to in
simple arrays of objects, photographs of natural scenes, and motion pictures. A
third series of experiments explores the possibility that we may form implicit
or even explicit traces of changed objects even when we are unaware of the
change itself. These experiments investigate whether failures of change
detection imply the lack of a representation or simply the inaccessibility of a
representation to awareness. Previous work on change blindness has assumed that
the failure to detect a change implies the absence of a representation. This
inference has led to the conclusion that people retain little information about
their visual world from one view to the next. The studies in this proposal will
explore the possibility that we represent more of our visual world than the
existence of change blindness might imply. By using both intentional and
incidental tasks with displays ranging from simple arrays of objects to complex,
dynamic scenes, these experiments will allow a more complete description of the
nature of our visual representations from one view to the next and of visual
short-term memory in general.

