* 0241144
* Promoting Active Reading Strategies to Improve Students' Understanding of Science
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2002,09/30/2006
* Danielle McNamara, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2006
* USD 2,348,008.00

The problem addressed by this project regards high-school students'
understanding of and ability to learn from difficult science texts. The first
purpose of this project is to examine high school students' and teachers'
knowledge about metacognitive reading strategies to better ascertain the need
for strategy interventions, as well as teachers' ability to provide such
training to students. The second purpose is to compare the effectiveness of
three reading interventions and to thereby identify more effective methods for
improving students' comprehension skills. The third purpose is to determine
whether the benefits of reading interventions depend on students' skills,
knowledge, or cultural environment. The fourth purpose is to develop a
computerized training program that adaptively assigns a student to an
appropriate training regime, and interactively provides reading training. Hence,
this project bridges the two focus areas of the IERI initiative concerning
reading skill acquisition and students' understanding of increasingly complex
scientific ideas. Within these areas, this project will address issues regarding
instructional practices in reading, the role of teacher learning and performance
on student learning, optimal interventions for students at-risk of reading or
academic failure, the development of better assessment techniques of knowledge
and skill, and the use of technology to improve assessment and learning.