* 0241879
* Social Studies of Modern Science in India, Spring 2003 at MIT
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2003,12/31/2003
* Abha Sur, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Keith R. Benson
* 12/31/2003
* USD 5,500.00

The post independence era has seen a vast expansion in the infrastructure of
science and technology in India, which now claims to have the third largest
scientific personnel in the world. Yet we know very little about the social and
cultural specificities of knowledge production and practices of science in
India. We know very little about the pedagogy, cultural substrate, and training
of Indian scientists who currently occupy significant positions (both in numbers
and in rank) in the increasingly multicultural, transnational, and global
scientific enterprise. Today, India is in the throes of increasing religious
nationalism on the one hand and accelerated technological development on the
other. In this milieu science, religion and nationalism have fused together in
the popular imagination. Assertions of the sanctity of science and technology as
well as the scientific validation of religion by the Hindu nationalists, as
manifested in the euphoria surrounding the "Hindu Bomb," point to the need for
understanding the processes of co-production of science, nationalism and
religion. Science has always been a site of political and social contestation.
In the earlier Nehru era as well, industrial development, and scientific
rationality had defined the terms of India's modernity but in distinctly secular
idioms. How do we understand the historical evolution of scientific structures
and practices in modern India? In order to address these issues, we would like
to organize a conference of scholars working on science-studies in India during
the Spring semester of 2003 at MIT. The conference will bring twelve junior and
senior scholars from a range of disciplinary and interdisciplinary backgrounds.
The participants will share their work as well as discuss how best to further
the emerging field of science studies in India. The papers will be collected in
an edited anthology. Our objective is to probe deeper into the different
perspectives of the scholars on nationalism, on local, religious and caste
identities, and on the nature of science, for instance, in order to understand
the ways in which different frameworks engender some questions and foreclose
others. Such an engagement is essential for consolidating the intellectual base
of the scholarship and for creating a vibrant and interactive community of
scholars working on science in India.