* 0241182
* Automated Alignment and Segmentation for Electron Tomography
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Qiang Ji, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 12/31/2007
* USD 296,494.00

0241182 Ji The current project addresses two procedural bottlenecks that limit
high throughput electron tomography: image alignment and volume segmentation.
Presently, image alignment requires the use of fiducial markers and is
relatively labor-intensive and error prone. An information theoretic procedure
is proposed that performs automatic image alignment without fiducial marks. The
proposed solution exploits the rich information content in tomographic images
and explicitly accounts for the unique transformation between images. Volume
segmentation is one of the most crucial, yet labor-intensive, time-consuming,
and subjective steps in electron tomography. Automated segmentation of tubular
objects can be very challenging because of extremely low object contrast
relative to the surroundings, a highly uneven and irregular surface topology,
and significant variations in cellular attachments. The proposed segmentation
approach consists of dividing the problem into three major tasks: 1) tubular
structure enhancement; 2) tubular structure detection; and 3) tubular surface
morphology reconstruction and detection of end structures. Towards the first
task, a model-based filter is proposed that will enhance cylindrical structures
while de-emphasizing the irrelevant structures. Towards the second task, a
robust feature detection technique is proposed to localize the tubular portion
of fibers. Towards the third task, a statistical local region growing technique
is proposed that will grow the detected underlying cylinder in all directions to
produce the surface morphology and internal discontinuities of the actual
structure. The proposed methods will have wide applicability to electron
tomography and other forms of medical imaging. The alignment methods are
completely general and the prevalence of microtubules and similar tubular or
fibrous motifs in cellular and medical imaging ensures wide applicability of the
segmentation methods. With appropriate modifications, the proposed segmentation
methods could be adapted to membrane and vesicle geometries. By addressing the
two bottleneck steps, the proposed methods have the potential to transform
electron tomography into a powerful, routine tool for research and diagnostic
investigations. These methods also have potential application to other medical
imaging projects. Thus, this project is designed to enable electron tomography
to realize its full potential for analysis of subcellular structure and function
in the post-genomic era. This grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative
to Support Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology. This is a joint
competition sponsored by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the
National Science Foundation and the National Institute of General Medical
Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of Health.