* 0241754
* International Conference on Urban Dimensions of Environmental Change: Science, Exposure, Policies, and Technologies, Shanghai, China, May 2004
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Zhaodong Feng, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2006
* USD 35,000.00

Research on the complex interactions among human and natural systems
increasingly has emphasized the need for careful collaborative and comparative
insights. Especially valuable have been efforts to explore human-natural
interactions in densely populated regions like the northeastern U.S. and eastern
China. This project focuses on the conducts o a conference that will deal with
urban dimensions of environmental change, which coordinated examinations of
science, exposures, policies, and technologies. The conference will be jointly
sponsored by Montclair State University of New Jersey and East China Normal
University, The conference will be held in Shanghai, China, in May 2004.
Conference participants will examine the causes, impacts, and responses to
environmental change in the world's major cities and urban areas. Relating to
both the science and the management of urban environmental change, topics for
the conference will include policy, regulation, technology, impact adaptation,
mitigation, and remediation. The conference will be organized into two parallel
parts. One part will be a workshop meeting of invited Chinese and U.S. scholars
who will present and discuss current research on urban environmental change. The
second part of the conference will be an "open meeting" of the urban
environmental change community involving a larger group of scholars as well as
practitioners giving presentations in organized paper and poster sessions. The
conference will address specific questions regarding contemporary urban
environmental management, such as the need for integrated management structures
that address the complexity, multiplicity, and interlocking nature of
environmental problems in urban areas; the implications of new and emerging
environmental stresses such as global climate change; and the need for increased
stakeholder involvement in urban political discourse. A second set of issues to
be discussed at the conference include how do current processes of urban
environmental change and management intersect with issues of vulnerability,
sustainability, and equity, all three of which are emerging as crucial issues in
both the developed and the developing worlds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The products
of workshop and open meeting should have immediate utility in both academic and
broader societal settings. The products should provide a better understanding
and definition of the theoretical constructs of current and future urban
environmental problems, as well as potential foundations for their management.
By design, the conference activities will encourage a dialog between researchers
and stakeholder practitioners. Specific products of the conference will include
a schematic diagram illustrating key elements and interconnections in a
reconceptualized framework for understanding of urban environmental change and
management; a set of potential empirical measures and indicators to be used for
comparative study of the character of urban environmental change and associated
management strategies; the specification of a set of key research and
information needs; and the specification of a set of research tools, methods,
approaches, and technologies that would be most useful for addressing the
research and information needs.&lt;br/&gt;