* 0241229
* Collaborative Research:  Development of New Digital Library Applications in the Context of a Aasic Ontology for Biosystematics Information Using the Literature of Entomology (Ants)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Thomas Moritz, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Griffin
* 03/31/2010
* USD 559,245.00

Proposal Number: IIS-0241229 Principal Investigator: Thomas Moritz

This international collaborative project proposes to design and test approaches
to mark-up and extraction of scientific date from a corpus drawn from the
biosystematics literature of entomology (ants) and to develop a set of
applications bases on an ontology for this topical area. Ontologies for natural
history information are particularly complex because of the diversity of the
source material and selected descriptors. The project will build on digital
library work underway at the American Museum of Natural History, on biological
informatics at Ohio State University and computer science at Universitat
Magdeburg in Germany. The project is jointly sponsored by the German Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft.

Biosystematics is the science that provides the definitional foundations for
organismic biology and for the applied science of biodiversity conservation.
Within zoological systematics, insects are a uniquely important group of
organisms with major impacts on human health and economics; ants constitute a
particularly important group of social insects accounting for a major part of
the biomass in tropical rainforests and displaying remarkable diversity and
behavioral variation. This proposal is designed to test approaches to mark-up
and extraction of scientific data from a corpus of texts drawn from the
biosystematics literature of entomology (ants) and to develop a set of
applications including powerful search and retrieval strategies to operate on
this corpus. Specifically, approaches to automated XML mark-up will be tested
using NMNH hypothesized Taxon-X Schema (derived from the implicit structure of
scientific publications in biological systematics and already under development
at AMNH). Then the corpus of marked-up literature will be used to explore the
automated extraction and application of imbedded scientific data including
scientific names, morphological characters, species distribution data (for
plotting in GIS and contribution to the emerging world database of biological
diversity) and collection locales/events for inclusion in a gazetteer of
collecting events.

Accomplishment of these goals will result in increased worldwide access and
usefulness of an extensive body of scientific literature that is now generally
restricted to users who have access to major research libraries. The project
will also stimulate interdisciplinary interaction between computer scientists
and domain specialists in a field that stands to benefit greatly from IT
research. The core work of this project will contribute to global efforts to
design and implement of similar, general purpose ontological services capable of
supporting biological and conservation education at all levels. These project
can contribute to research and education in biology by prototyping a model by
extending the practical usefulness of the enormous body of legacy literature in
biosystematics and contributing to the completion and continuing updating of
international biodiversity databases. The corpus of literature to be made
available on the Web -- as well as the methodology and protocols for managing
them -- occurring in the context of the Commonsphilosophy can create a new model
for international access to this literature offering access to biosystematics
libraries to those who have never before had such resources available.