* 0241078
* Collaborative Research: Using Formative Assessment to Develop Introductory Physics Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Alan Van Heuvelen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Daniel M. Litynski
* 10/31/2006
* USD 302,536.00

This collaborative effort is developing activities that integrate knowledge
building and formative assessment in the evaluation of learning at the
introductory physics level. Included in this effort is the development of
research-based formative assessment tools. These tools involve active engagement
methods with appropriate feedback in the form of test kits of activities that
are common in the practice of science and engineering. Such activities have been
found to be the most effective intervention to help students achieve desired
learning outcomes. Each kit includes six different types of activities, along
with templates and rubrics that instructors can use for evaluation, and that
students can use for self and small-group assessment of their own work. The
scoring rubrics assess students' development of science and engineering
abilities, and allow instructors to evaluate outcomes, improve the quality of
feedback (the most important part of formative assessment), and establish the
validity of the activities--do they assess the desired skills. The components of
the kits are being developed and tested in large-enrollment introductory physics
courses in two universities (one large research and one medium comprehensive
university) with 1600 students each year, in a high school physics course (100
students/year), and in methods courses for pre-service teachers (15
teachers/year). Dissemination of the kits occurs via the web and by a publisher
(hard copy and a CD), peer-reviewed papers, workshops and talks at national
meetings.