* 0241438
* An Observing System for Meridional Heat Transport Variability in the Subtropical North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2008
* William Johns, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2008
* USD 2,191,760.00

0241438 Johns&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop a
series of measurements that can provide a long-term, sustainable monitoring
system for the meridional ocean heat flux in the subtropical North Atlantic. The
goal is to provide continuous estimates of the heat flux and the meridional
overturning circulation that are of suitable accuracy for detecting important
trends and variability related to climate change. This goal is different from,
but complementary to, the more established method of occupying high-resolution
zonal trans-basin hydrographic sections to estimate the heat flux at irregular
intervals. Regular estimates are needed to determine the magnitude and dominant
time scales of variability, the climatological seasonal cycle, and to help
filter out the higher frequency "noise" that may alias the determination of
longer term heat ?ux variations from trans-basin sections that are widely spaced
in time. The proposed program is a collaborative effort between the PI.'s and
investigators from the Southampton Oceanography Centre in the United Kingdom who
are funded as part of the Rapid Climate Change (RAPID) program of the National
Environmental Research Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. contribution to
the proposed in-situ observation system consists of the following
elements:&lt;br/&gt;1. Florida Current monitoring using the operational
submarine cable, weekly shipboard Acoustic Doppler Current Pro?ler (ADCP) cross
sections from a volunteer observing ship, and quarterly hydrographic/lowered-
ADCP sections.&lt;br/&gt;2. Continuous moored time series measurements across
the Deep Western Boundary Current (DWBC) and Antilles Current region east of the
Bahamas, including semiannual hydrographic/&lt;br/&gt;lowered-ADCP
sections.&lt;br/&gt;3. Repeated (quarterly) high-resolution volunteer observing
ship XBT sections across the Atlantic from Gibraltar to Miami, on the "AX7"
line.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This component of the project will implement the
moored component of element (2) for a four year period beginning in winter 2004,
and to supplement element (3) with deeper reaching XBT's as a contribution to
the CLImate VARiability and predictability (CLIVAR) program. The U.K. will
support the trans-basin hydrographic cruises and an array of profiling moorings
along 26.5?N that will complete the continuous time series observing system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;