* 0241173
* Collaborative Research:  Revenue Maximization in Multi-Object Sales
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Daniel Vincent, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2007
* USD 244,544.00

Consider a monopolist who intends to maximize her revenue from selling several
objects but does not know the potential buyers' exact valuations for those
objects. Situations of this sort are common -- a government agency selling
spectrum licenses to one or many potential buyers, an automotive firm pricing a
variety of options for its new models, an art collector deciding whether to sell
all or part of the collection. When the seller only has a single object to sell,
it is well known how the sale should be conducted to maximize
revenue.&lt;br/&gt;When the seller has two or more objects to sell, it is not
known in general how the sale should be conducted in order to maximize revenue.
The project addresses this question in three related parts. First, the study
investigates the properties of all trading institutions that may be revenue
maximizing. Second, it examines the optimality of a very simple and commonly
used institution, "bundling," the posting of a price for each sub-collection or
bundle of goods. The study offers conditions under which bundling is optimal.
Finally, it explores the relationship between optimal pricing schedules in the
monopolist problem and the determination of optimal reserve prices in multi-unit
auctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contributes to our understanding in
several related areas -- multi-dimensional mechanism design, multi-unit
auctions, and price discrimination and bundling. Firms and governments
frequently must buy or sell many goods profitably. The project offers answers to
how this may be achieved. It also provides guidance to antitrust enforcement.
The bundling of products to raise revenues often implies some loss in social
efficiency. An understanding of the nature of revenue-maximizing schemes is
necessary in order to evaluate the social costs of this
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;