* 0241337
* Collaborative Research: Developing Diverse Leadership for Engineering
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Carroll Seron, CUNY Baruch College
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 04/30/2006
* USD 755,481.00

From a variety of sources and commentators, a persistent set of issues has posed
a challenge to the profession of engineering. From concerns about rapid advances
in technology to environmental protection to questions of gender and racial
fairness and representation, the profession of engineering faces important
challenges. Two new educational models are responsive to these professional
concerns, Smith College's woman-only program with a strong commitment to
nurturing a commitment to social responsibility and the new Olin College of
Engineering with a focus on blending entrepreneurship with
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of an engineering program at
Smith College and the establishment of an entirely new college of engineering at
Olin create an extraordinary opportunity to take advantage, by systematically
observing, what can be viewed as a natural experiment. To "control" for the role
of innovation in professional engineering education, two steps are proposed: (1)
the development of a systematic review, using secondary sources, of innovations
in engineering education and (2) parallel studies of students and other key
stakeholders at two other engineering programs, MIT and the University of
Massachusetts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test empirically the relationship between
neo-institutional theories of change and students' development, a six-year panel
study will be employed at four sites: Smith College, Olin College of
Engineering, MIT and the University of Massachusetts. Using both quantitative
and qualitative data, the investigators plan to follow a panel of students at
each school through their classroom and college relationships, summer
internships, and occupation immediately following graduate to develop a model of
how the several programs embed or overcome gendered and racial stratification in
the next generation of American engineers, among other issues. Also, they
propose to conduct interviews with key stakeholders at the respective
institutions at two points in time, year one and four of the
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Smith and Olin initiatives constitute an
unprecedented opportunity to examine the status, rationale, and norms that
surround separatist and coeducational models to insure equity and balance in the
professions and, as such, a unique opportunity to develop effective policy for
engineering education. For example, they offer an opportunity to explore the
norms and practices of engineering education that inhibit or promote creative
leadership for responsible change, including transformations in the gender and
racial composition of the profession. Equally, these initiatives provide an
unprecedented opportunity to test important propositions in neo-institutional
theories of social change and in theories of professional development. Together,
the coincident opening of two new programs in engineering education creates an
opportunity to contribute to the development of effective policies for
engineering education to enhance equity and to contribute to the development of
social science theory.&lt;br/&gt;