* 0241291
* Development of Late Holocene Paleomagnetic Dating Curves for the High Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2006
* Joseph Stoner, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 01/31/2006
* USD 104,210.00

New paleomagnetic observations on u-channel samples from two lakes on Ellesmere
Island suggest that Arctic lake sediments can preserve a robust record of
Holocene geomagnetic field behavior. The Principal Investigator will define,
within the limits of available sediment, the Holocene paleomagnetic record of
the High Arctic. The available cores provide both the quality of material and
the density of coverage necessary to meet established criteria for the
development of secular variation master curves. Relative paleointensity proxy
records will also be developed. The data will be tied to historical records and
placed on robust independent chronologies based on varve counts for lakes and
radiocarbon dating of marine sediments. The intellectual merits of this proposal
are two fold. First, recent geomagnetic observations from historical data
covering the last century, as well as the dynamo theory and modeling suggest
that the polar geomagnetic field is unique and possibly substantially different
than that of the rest of the Earth. Because there are no prior high-resolution
paleomagnetic observations from the High Arctic, the relationship between the
polar field and the main field at secular variation time scales is unknown. If
the polar field is unique, it should manifest as distinct secular variation
behavior, as suggested by historical data that show accelerated changes relative
to the mid-latitudes. Second, dating of Arctic sediments is difficult, and in
general, limited to those lakes producing varved sediments. Because of this,
paleo-studies are often limited to a small subset of the potential archives that
could provide high quality records. A primary objective of this research is the
inter-calibration of geomagnetic paleosecular variation (both directional and
intensity) with varve based chronologies which will be augmented by radiocarbon
dates on marine sediments studied in this proposal. Development paleomagnetic
master dating curves will result in an important new dating tool for the Arctic
that would be applicable to both lake and marine sediments, whether massive or
laminated. Based on the geology and the environment of the region, Arctic lake
sediments may in fact be optimal for paleomagnetic studies. The proposed
paleomagnetic study would be the first of its kind in the Arctic, and therefore
a range of sediments will be explored to test the robustness and applicability
of this record. Results from this study will have societal impact by providing a
new tool to help understand the past environmental variability of the Arctic
that is presently undergoing significant and accelerated change. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;