* 0241509
* Optimal Harvesting of Timber: Valuing Timberland with Stochastically Evolving Timber Volume and Prices Using Linked Biological/Geographical Data from British Columbia
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* John Rust, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 219,370.00

In environmental and natural resource economics, the management of renewable
natural resources is of considerable interest to economists because the prospect
of stewarding a resource forever has practical importance and real-world
relevance. Moreover, because past failures in managing certain renewable natural
resources properly have lead to the extinction of several species, developing
practical strategies for managing remaining renewable natural resources is both
timely and useful. This project investigates in detail the management of one
renewable natural resource, timber, in the province of British Columbia, Canada.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;For a Timber Supply Area (TSA) in British Columbia the
investigators have obtained unique access to extremely detailed site-level data,
which are used by timber-supply managers in the British Columbia Ministry of
Forests when making harvesting decisions. In particular, they have access to
elaborate linked biological and geographical data in the form of a Geographical
Information System (GIS) at the grid level which, in this case, is a hectare or
100 meters square. Thus, for every hectare in the Fraser TSA, which is located
near Vancouver, British Columbia and contains several hundreds of thousands
hectares, officials at the Ministry of Forests provide the investigators with a
wide variety of biological, engineering, and geographical information relevant
to harvesting timber. In addition, they also have access to the harvesting
strategies proposed and, in some cases, the decisions implemented by the
Minister of Forests, so they can compare our estimated decisions with actual
ones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In developing practical harvesting solutions for
timber, they apply the method of stochastic dynamic programming. The goal of the
project is to make the following contributions: First, this project takes
geography seriously, both in the planar sense and in the three-dimensional
sense. Second, it takes site-specific heterogeneity seriously both on the cost
side in terms of felling and transportation and on the growth and yield side in
terms of heterogeneous stands of timber. Third, it models initial conditions. In
particular, it does not take as the starting point a steady-state allocation, or
even an optimal allocation. Instead, it takes the existing uneven-aged timber
stand as given and derives the optimal policy function, the optimal timber-
harvesting profile, in terms of this age distribution. Fourth, this project uses
best-practice biological methods to model the dynamics of uneven-aged forest
growth and yield. Fifth, in the past economists and foresters have typically
demonstrated their methods by making extremely simple assumptions concerning the
stochastic nature of timber prices and volumes so that closed-form examples
could be solved. This research implements recent developments in computational
methods so that practitioners can solve numerically for the optimal policy
function in realistic biological, economic, and spatial environments.
&lt;br/&gt;