* 0241427
* Workshop on Firm-Level Gender Inequalities in Transitional Societies, Spring 2003
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Ivan Szelenyi, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2004
* USD 15,029.00

SES-0241427&lt;br/&gt;Ivan Szelenyi&lt;br/&gt;Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant provides funding for the PI to host a
planning workshop to develop a collaborative research project on "Firm-level
Gender Inequalities in Transitional Societies. Intra-firm level analysis is
necessary to answer some of the most pressing questions about merging social
inequalities in post-state socialists countries. The resultant project will
propose to use cutting-edge techniques tp complete firm level analysis that can
address the issue of whether and how men and women are allocated into different
job categories and what effect this allocation has on earning. The major goal of
the research is to better understand the mechanisms behind such processes, which
will increase our knowledge of the causes and consequences of occupational
segregation by gender and gender wage gap in both transitional societies and
advanced market economies. Research on the effects of gender as an ascriptive
category on labor market chances could guide future research in the area of
gender stratification, occupational mobility and labor market inequalities. A
project on firm-level gender inequalities would also inform labor policy aimed
at reducing discrimination in hire, promotion, and wage setting. The workshop
will include invited scholars from the post-state socialist region, as well as
experts in the fields of gender inequality and intra-firm analysis. During the
workshop participants will explore country-specific data availability, as well
as methodological and theoretical challenges of completing a comparative
research project on the topic. The objective the workshop is to develop a
collaborative comparative research agenda on firm level gender inequalities in
transitional societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;