* 0241002
* Collaborative Research:   Paleoenvironment and Paleoecology of a Late Cretaceous, High-Latitude Locality on Devon Island, Nunavut, Canada
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Jaelyn Eberle, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 05/31/2007
* USD 235,689.00

This is a collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators at the Universities
of Colorado and New Mexico. They will document the stratigraphy, paleontology,
geochemistry and geochronology of Late Cretaceous sediments in the Eidsbotn and
Viks Fiord grabens, on Devon Island in the Canadian High Arctic. Devon Island
was selected because a preliminary survey of the Eidsbotn graben in 1998
demonstrated that it holds an unusually diverse assemblage of marine organisms
and coprolitic trace fossils. This fossil assemblage represents a complex
ecosystem that was characterized by an apparently temperate Arctic environment,
even though it was subject to extreme photoperiodic seasonality. A study of this
unique site will provide the geological framework that will help reconstruct the
paleoenvironment of this high-latitude locality and substantially increase our
understanding of Late Cretaceous Arctic marine ecosystems. Reconnaissance
sampling of the Eidsbotn area revealed a wide variety of fossils, both whole and
fragments, and a high concentration of unusual green and cream-colored
coprolites. A systematic sampling of the Late Cretaceous paleontological
resources will provide stratigraphic and facies context, contribute more
material for taxonomic identification, indicate patterns of abundance, and
almost certainly reveal new Arctic taxa. The sediments are reported to contain
numerous bentonites, glauconitic sands, siltstones, and mudstones that are
overlain by a peat of an unknown age. Stratigraphic sections will be measured,
described and sampled for biofacies and geochemical analyses. Fossils will be
collected and taphonomic conditions described. Bentonite samples will be
collected for geochronological analysis of mica, sanidine, and zircon, and
palynological samples will refine the lithostratigraphy and elucidate the age of
the peat that overlies the Eidsbotn section. Petrographic and geochemical
analyses of coprolites will provide evidence of trophic interactions, and faunal
lists will indicate the structure and ecological niches in the paleoecosystem.
Oxygen isotopic analysis of the phosphate will contribute proxy sea-surface
temperature information and may provide evidence for water-column temperature
gradients, paleosalinity, and sedimentation rates. The suite of sedimentary and
paleontological resources in the Eidsbotn and Viks Fiords will provide a unique
opportunity to fully characterize the paleoenvironment and paleoecology of a
Late Cretaceous high-latitude marine locality, and to test paleoclimatic models
for that period. This project will also engage undergraduates, graduate
students, people from the Inuit community, and international and intercultural
discourse. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;