* 0241678
* The influence of gamete phenotype, gamete genotype and behavior on reproductive success in broadcast spawning invertebrates
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Don Levitan, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 01/31/2009
* USD 525,000.00

Selection via reproductive success can have a major influence on the evolution
of traits and patterns of gender dimorphism. Most research has focused on
scenarios in which selection is more intense for one gender than the other.
Generally, males are thought to compete for mates while females choose among
potential mates, resulting in high variance in male reproductive success and low
variance in female reproductive success. However, previous work has shown that
at some population densities, variance in both male and female success can be
high in broadcast spawning marine invertebrates. This project will address the
consequences of these patterns for fecundity selection in this primitive mating
strategy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three species of sea urchins will be used to
address how spawning behavior, population density, and gamete phenotype and
genotype influence reproductive success. Microsatellite markers will be used to
establish maternity and paternity of larvae generated from laboratory and field
experiments. The relative contributions of gamete recognition proteins and
gamete morphology to reproductive success will be assessed, and the consequences
of gender differences in spawning behavior in the presence and absence of gamete
competition will be examined. This study will provide insight into the
resolution of fecundity selection and gender conflict in the sea.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts will include the training of numerous
undergraduate, recent graduate and graduate student assistants. The research
program will be used as a mechanism to teach science in undergraduate and
graduate courses taught at both at Florida State University and at the Bamfield
Marine Sciences Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;