* 0241376
* The Great Escape: The Industrial Revolution in Theory and in History
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Gregory Clark, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2006
* USD 110,495.00

There have been only two basic economic regimes in history. Until perhaps 1800
all societies were in the Malthusian regime with slow productivity growth, and
fertility-determined living standards. Then came the Industrial Revolution and
the world of modern growth, with rapid and persistent productivity gains.
Recently economists have constructed many theoretical models to explain this
transition. A void exists, however, between theory and empirics. While models
have multiplied, we are still ignorant of the economic aggregates for any
country before 1830. Even in England, the best-documented pre-industrial
economy, there are no national income estimates before 1700. Those for 1700-1860
are weakly based, and were last significantly improved in 1985. The materials
exist, however, to estimate all the major economic aggregates for England to
1260, including skilled and unskilled wages, land rents, capital returns, real
output, output per capita, factor shares, aggregate Total Factor Productivity
(TFP) growth rates, TFP growth for many sectors of the economy, and tax
revenues. English institutional stability allowed much better survival of
records than elsewhere. And many of these materials are accessible because of
earlier incomplete efforts to assemble price and wage histories of England, such
as those of Rogers and Beveridge. This project completes that task. The
investigator has been working on estimating these aggregates for a number of
years. He has completed papers on many of the components needed: agricultural
wages (1210-1869), house rents (1550-1869), the housing stock (1550- 1869),
farmland rents (1210-1869), prices for 22 farm outputs (1500-1869), returns on
capital (1150-1869), days worked per worker (1560-1869). This project would seek
first the completion of the required series, adding fresh archival information
where necessary. Second it will put them together to form the national
aggregates. The resulting series, the national economic aggregates for England
all the way from 1260 to 1860, as well as the underlying data, will be made
available to scholars through a web page.

The preliminary estimates are surprising. The break in TFP productivity growth
rates circa 1770 is much less dramatic than has been assumed. More dramatic
accelerations in TFP growth rates can be observed: first around 1600 and second
around 1860. Also before 1860 the connection between the underlying rate of
technological innovation and TFP advance depended on largely accidental factors.
Further there are important changes in variables like rates of return on capital
and the skill wage premium long before the Industrial Revolution period.