* 0241558
* Collaborative Research: The Development of Memory for Temporal Information
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,08/31/2008
* William Friedman, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 08/31/2008
* USD 151,886.00

This project is designed to elucidate the development of children's memory for
the times of past events. It is an attempt to learn about the abilities of
children of different ages and the processes involved in this important human
ability. As part of a broader program of research by scholars who study the
developmental psychology of time, this work will help us better understand the
growth of temporal knowledge. The largest of the studies will provide normative
information about the abilities of children ranging in age from 4 to 14 years to
recall the times of events from the last three years. The interview will test
memory for the times, frequencies, and details of the events and measure
children's general knowledge of time patterns and their ability to use inference
and other reconstructive processes. Another study will entail examining trial
transcripts to determine the types of questions about time that attorneys ask
children of different ages and the relation between question form and accuracy.
Additional studies will be conducted to provide further information about the
development of the processes that underlie mature time-memory abilities. In one
study children will recall experimental events from 6 months earlier and
abilities related to reconstruction will be examined in detail. For example, the
interview will provide measures of memory for temporally relevant details of the
event and its contiguity to other events, general knowledge of time, and the
ability to select and evaluate information that could logically constrain the
time. Another study will focus on the development of children's explicit
knowledge of how to remember past times, by asking children about the processes,
properties, and limitations of remembering the times of past events. Still
another experiment will probe the development of children's memory for
information about the order of past events by having them judge the order of
experimental and school events from many months in the past. In the final
component of the project, methods will be developed and empirically tested for
improving the accuracy of children's testimony about the times of remembered
events. This will lead to the development of recommendations for forensic
interviews of children about the times of events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall,
the project is expected to improve psychologists', educators', and legal
professionals' understanding of an important aspect of memory development: how
children of different ages remember the times of past events. The work will also
provide information that will be useful to legal professionals and legislators
who must make decisions about the capacity of children of different ages to
testify about the times of events. Further, the project will lead to the
development of techniques for improving forensic interviews of
children.&lt;br/&gt;