* 0241640
* Collaborative Research: Obsolescence of Durable Goods and Aggregate Fluctuations
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Dmitriy Stolyarov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/2008
* USD 120,417.00

Obsolescence is the major reason for depreciation of durables in markets with
high rates of technological innovation. Since much of the technological
innovation is incorporated in new durables, modeling obsolescence of durable
goods is vital for our understanding of the macroeconomy. The dominant way of
thinking about durability is in terms of exponential physical depreciation.
Obsolescence is different from physical depreciation in two important respects.
First, obsolescence is not a continuous process. Development of new products is
costly, which is why new goods are introduced only periodically. For example,
new car models appear every year, and new generations of Intel processors appear
on average, every three years. Thus periodic arrival of new models makes
obsolescence discrete. Second, with obsolescence, the service flow from the good
is defined by its technological age. Computers become obsolete because they
cannot run the latest software. New car inventory is heavily discounted when the
latest models arrive, suggesting that obsolescence is important in cars as well.
Since durables age even if never used, consumers who purchase a new model with a
delay will enjoy a lower service flow. Thus obsolescence gives consumers an
incentive to coordinate their replacement decisions with new model
introductions. This way of thinking about obsolescence has not been fully
explored before, yet it may have profound effects on the patterns of
macroeconomic fluctuations. This project studies a class of dynamic economies
with durable goods subject to obsolescence. It looks a general equilibrium
models with competitive production of durable goods as well as models of durable
good markets with strategic producers.