* 0241349
* Sequencing for Nitrogen Fixation: An Oral History Project on Rhizobial Research Genomics
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Michael Fortun, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2006
* USD 147,574.00

This study will document and analyze the recent history (1970-present) of
symbiotic nitrogen fixation (SNF) research, conducting oral history and
ethnographic interviews with leading scientists to map both the major scientific
transformations that SNF research has undergone during this period, and the
changing social, political, and economic context in which SNF research has been
conducted. The study will also draw from participant observation at
interdisciplinary conferences and a review of the primary scientific literature.
The study will focus on research surrounding two economically and scientifically
significant symbiotic associations, that of the soybean (Glycine max) with the
bacterium B. phaseolus, and that of the model plant organism Medicago truncatula
(a relative of alfalfa) with the bacterium S. meliloti. The historical and
ethnographic study of the research activity and groups around these two
symbiotic systems will illuminate key achievements and trends in the field of
SNF research, and will provide rich empirical material for contributing to key
thematic areas in the social studies of science literature. The study will also
draw out the changing institutional and social context of SNF research, in a
period shaped by the energy crisis of the 1970s, the promise of profitable
agricultural biotechnology ventures in the 1980s, ecological concerns, and
visions of sustainable agriculture and reduced reliance on synthetic
fertilizers, for both the U.S. and the developing world. The study has two
primary aims: To create new knowledge about the effects of technological change
within the sciences, and within SNF research in particular; To create new
knowledge about the political-economic, institutional, social and ethical
dimensions of scientific research on nitrogen fixation. The study will result in
presentations at conferences, journal articles, and a book It will also
contribute to existing literatures focused on the scientific and institutional
effects of the diffusion of genomic technologies since the 1970s; on the
importance of model organisms in the development of genetics research; on the
history of theories of symbiosis; on changing modes of institutional support for
science since the 1970s; on the shape and effect of interdisciplinary
collaboration in the sciences; on the role of women in the sciences; and on the
ethical thinking of scientists.

