* 0241133
* Structure and Diffusive Motion in Confined Multi-component Colloid Suspensions
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Stuart Rice, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 02/28/2007
* USD 501,400.00

Stuart Rice is supported by a grant from the Experimental Physical Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division to perform experimental and theoretical
studies of the properties of quasi-two-dimensional systems. The systems studied
are suspensions of uncharged monodisperse colloid particles in very thin cells.
The proposed experimental studies are based on digital video microscopy
measurements and image analysis, while the theoretical tools include computer
simulations, statistical mechanics, and hydrodynamics. Particular questions to
be addressed include 1) the influence of the interplay between the range and
strength of the direct (non-hydrodynamic) colloid-colloid interaction and the
scale of confinement on the structures of the phases that a dense colloid
suspension can support; and 2) the effects of the interplay between the direct
colloid-colloid interaction, the hydrodynamic interactions in the suspension,
and the scale of confinement on the diffusive motion of pairs, triplets, etc.,
of colloid particles in a quasi-two-dimensional or quasi-one-dimensional
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main thrust of this project is to
understand the structural and dynamical features of confined colloid systems and
the application of that knowledge to other systems. The studies will lead to a
deeper understanding of the properties of liquid systems that, because they are
constrained to two-dimensional motion, exhibit unique thermodynamic behavior.
This work will also enhance insight about the self-organization of colloids, and
hence the nature of cell membranes, and it may ultimately have important
applications for nanotechnology and the control of microfluidic devices. In the
course of these studies undergraduate and graduate students as well as
postdoctoral researchers receive training in the use of state-of-the art
experimental and theoretical techniques.&lt;br/&gt;