* 0241557
* Visual Processing in Deaf Signers: Psychophysics and Brain Imaging Studies
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Karen Dobkins, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 04/30/2007
* USD 439,055.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Dobkins and colleagues will
conduct a three-year study to investigate the perceptual and neural consequences
of early-onset sensory deprivation. The study of deaf individuals, who have been
auditorily deprived since birth and who rely upon a visual language (i.e.,
American Sign Language, ASL) for communication, affords a unique opportunity to
investigate how and the degree to which sensory processing within the remaining
senses (specifically vision) is modified as a result of altered sensory
experience. It has long been thought (mostly through anecdotal evidence) that
the deaf "see" better (and that the blind "hear" better). However, owing to the
difficult nature of communication between hearing researchers and deaf subjects
(who speak different languages and are part of different cultures), surprisingly
little is known about visual processing in the deaf. To investigate this issue,
we use both psychophysical techniques (i.e., asking subjects to report about
stimuli presented to them on a video monitor, e.g., "did the stimulus move up or
down?") and brain imaging techniques (which localize and measure neural activity
elicited by visual stimuli) to characterize differences in visual processing
between deaf and hearing subjects. In our prior NSF studies, we focused on
visual motion processing, with the notion that motion may be particularly
important to deaf subjects, since 1) ASL comprehension relies heavily on the
motion of the hands and 2) in the absence of auditory cues, deaf subjects may
rely on motion in their periphery to help orient them to objects entering their
visual field. The results of these studies revealed a robust right visual field
/ left hemisphere dominance for motion processing in deaf signers, which can
potentially be accounted for by proposing that perceptual processes required for
the comprehension of language (motion processing in the case of ASL) get
recruited by the left, language-dominant hemisphere. In the current proposal, we
expand on these findings by testing deaf and hearing subjects on motion
processing, as well as two other domains of vision, namely color and form
processing. In addition, as an extension of our previous attentional studies, we
will investigate whether attentional resources differ between deaf and hearing
subjects, particularly in the peripheral visual fields. Finally, in combination
with these visual studies, we will conduct linguistic studies that examine the
degree to which language is lateralized to the left hemisphere within individual
subjects. This will allow us to investigate further the proposed link between
the deaf's visual and linguistic experience. The intellectual merits of this
proposed activity include advancing our knowledge of how developing sensory
areas of the brain reorganize themselves in response to altered sensory input,
which should have implications for principles of brain development in general.
From the clinical standpoint, the results may be useful in designing
compensatory programs for auditorily-deprived persons, who could be trained to
exploit those aspects of sensory processing that are most adaptive in response
to altered sensory input. Moreover, with the frequency of cochlear implants on
the rise, our findings may be helpful in designing special features for these
prosthetic devices in deaf individuals. &lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts of these
projects include a strong outreach component; by their very nature, they include
people from an underrepresented group (i.e., deaf people) as subjects. They also
attract deaf people to be trained as researchers in our laboratory. Finally, in
addition to reaching a broad audience (including researchers in the fields of
psychophysics, neuroscience, development and linguistics) through conferences
and journal publications, the results of these projects are brought to both
undergraduate and graduate students at UC San Diego through the PI's teaching of
courses such as "Sensation and Perception" and "Physiological
Psychology".&lt;br/&gt;