* 0241579
* Experimental Investigation of Organic Synthesis in Submarine Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Thomas McCollom, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2007
* USD 317,000.00

It is widely thought that abiotic synthesis is a widespread source of organic
compounds in submarine hydrothermal systems and the igneous ocean crust. Yet,
with the possible exception of methane, organic compounds with a demonstrably
abiotic origin have never been identified in samples from these environments,
and criteria to distinguish between abiotic compounds and organic compounds
derived from biological sources have not been established. Consequently,
laboratory studies are required to establish the characteristics of organic
synthesis in hydrothermal environments for comparison with natural samples.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is a series of laboratory experiments that
is characterizing the products of abiotic organic synthesis reactions under
hydrothermal conditions. In particular, the experiments are: (1) investigating
which minerals in the ocean crust are capable of catalyzing organic synthesis
and under what conditions, (2) characterizing the composition and relative
abundance of organic synthesis products, (3) measuring the isotopic
fractionation of organic synthesis from CO2, and (4) evaluating how the product
composition and isotopic fractionation vary as a function of environmental
variables such as temperature and CO2/H2 ratio. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results will provide criteria that will allow abiotic compounds to be identified
in future studies of organic matter from hydrothermal systems and the ocean
crust. Since abiotic organic compounds are believed to play a significant role
in providing nutrients to microbes in these environments, the results will also
help in understanding the distribution and abundance of heterotrophic microbes
in surface and subsurface habitats. In addition, since hydrothermal systems were
prevalent on the early Earth as well as on other planetary bodies, the results
will aid in interpretation of the origin of organic matter in rocks from ancient
hydrothermal systems, samples form Mars, and meteorites. &lt;br/&gt;