* 0241561
* Collaborative Research: Cobble landscape structure, spatial gradients in predation, and variable demographic bottlenecks in the American lobster
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Kevin Hovel, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/2007
* USD 161,922.00

Understanding how pre- and post-settlement processes interact to govern the
dynamics of marine open populations remains a central issue in marine ecology.
In this study the American lobster Homarus americanus is used as a model system
to determine how nursery habitat structure influences post-settlement mortality
and dispersal. The central theme of the study is to find if cobble landscape
structure (i.e., patchiness) and gradients in lobster population density,
predator abundance and predator diversity along the New England coastline
interact to cause regional variation in the strength of a hypothesized juvenile
lobster demographic bottleneck. As juvenile lobsters reach the emergent phase
they must forage outside of cobble shelter and may become shelter limited even
though they have not reached a size refuge from predators (e.g., groundfish).
The underlying hypothesis is that cobble patchiness and shelter limitation will
cause a demographic bottleneck that limits lobster abundance in regions of high
predator density (e.g., southern New England) but not in regions of low predator
density (e.g., Maine). Supplementing more than a decade of state-supported
postlarval settlement surveys along the New England coast, and NOAA-supported
sidescan sonar, remote vehicle and scuba surveys to evaluate the regional
linkage between lobster abundance and habitat use with indices of cobble habitat
structure and settlement strength this NSF-sponsored research will complement
the surveys with manipulative experiments. These are aimed at determining if
regional differences exist in: (1) lobster movements among habitat patches; (2)
predation risk; (3) local shelter limitation; and 4) shelter fidelity
(propensity to switch shelters). In each of two sites in four regions (Rhode
Island, Massachusetts, mid-coast and eastern Maine) the investigators will
construct experimental landscapes consisting of one fragmented and one non-
fragmented cobble patch array. The proportion of juvenile lobsters moving from a
source patch where they are released to surrounding destination patches within
these landscapes will be correlated with array type, predator abundance,
predation risk, and lobster population density to infer the relative
contributions of dispersal and mortality in lobster losses from settlement
patches. In a separate experiment, size arrays of artificial shelters will be
deployed to quantify the degree of size-specific shelter limitation by region.
Corresponding predation experiments will be conducted to determine how
vulnerability to predation varies regionally. The lobster size that is both
locally shelter-limited and still vulnerable to predation will indicate the size
at which juveniles are subject to a demographic bottleneck. Finally, they will
tag lobsters to measure shelter fidelity to determine how movements between
shelters correlates with lobster density, predator indices, or habitat
patchiness among sites. Results of these integrated projects will be broadly
disseminated. The American lobster is the most economically important single-
species fishery in New England. By addressing the black box of lobster post-
settlement processes, these scientists will contribute to a long-standing
scientific vision of developing a large-scale spatially explicit model that
couples pelagic and benthic processes to predict harvests in space and time.
Their results will aid resource managers and the fishing industry in the
continued development of predictive tools for the fishery. Student training is
also integral to this work: the proposed research will form the basis for a
thesis or dissertation for an SDSU graduate student, and at least four
undergraduates per year will serve as interns earning academic credit. Another
important educational component of this project is the continued development of
an interactive CD and web-based activity called Hatch-to-Catch already
recognized by the National Science Teachers Association as a useful educational
tool for K-12 learning (see www.scilinks.org).