* 0241651
* Cross-Sectional and Time Series Approaches to Small Area Estimation:  Methods and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2003,10/31/2007
* Tharuvai Sriram, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 10/31/2007
* USD 210,000.00

This research project will develop classical and Bayesian model-based
statistical procedures with the primary goal of providing accurate estimates for
small areas, representing local geographical regions and/or demographic
subgroups of population. Primary motivation for this research stems from the
need for precise estimates of small areas which facilitates the federal
government's ability to initiate, formulate, and finally implement various
socio-economic programs in order to address, among others, various public health
issues, and income and poverty at local levels. Usually, most population surveys
are designed to achieve a high level of efficiency at the global level which
leads to direct survey based estimates of smaller areas having large standard
errors. In many surveys (e.g., the Current Population Survey and the Current
Employment Statistics Survey), data also are collected over time providing
useful time series. This project will exploit the time series nature of data and
produce reliable estimates of small areas by borrowing strength from information
across small areas as well as those available over time. Explicit models will be
developed incorporating linear as well as some recently developed nonlinear time
series models. In this context, the study will develop suitable statistical
methodologies such as empirical best linear unbiased prediction, empirical Bayes
and hierarchical Bayes estimation methods to produce reliable small area point
and interval estimates useful in various federal and local government programs.
Markov chain Monte Carlo methods will be used in fitting Bayesian models.
Software based on SAS, FORTRAN, S-plus, and SCA will be developed for
implementing methodologies developed in this project. Furthermore, measure of
accuracy of small area estimators will be assessed through second order
approximations for the mean squared error of these estimators, even when the
underlying distributions are unspecified, to check if the end results are robust
against non-normality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of this project lies
in its relevance and direct tie to some of the on-going programs in the Census
Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics. This research will lead to precise
estimates of (i) poverty rates and median family income in the Small Area Income
and Poverty Estimates program launched by the Census Bureau, (ii) U.S. civilian
unemployment rates, and (iii) accurate employment counts for major industries in
various regions. This research will, on the one hand, advance statistical
methodology for small area estimation and, on the other hand, apply various
newly developed methodologies to statistical issues important to society.