* 0241006
* Wireless Technology:  Issues on QoS Stability, Sensitivity, Flow &amp; Congestion Control in Wireless Broadband Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/25/2002,07/31/2005
* C-K Toh, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 07/31/2005
* USD 166,317.00

There has been a lot of research work on Wireless ATM in the past 5 years; most
of the research works are geared towards mobility and connection management. The
former is concerned with location and handoff management while the latter is
concerned with signaling for call setup and teardown. What are remaining are
still some very open issues that demand answers. In supporting QoS in Wireless
ATM, the variation of QoS availability over space and time is different from one
wireless cell to another. Mobile calls that are established at call setup may
longer to able to maintain their QoS demands if the mobile host migrates from
cell to cell, unless pre-allocation of network resources are made in advance
(however, this is very inefficient). The trend so far has been towards an
adaptive end-to-end Mobile QoS framework for Wireless ATM networks. Although
this proposal addresses mobile QoS for Wireless ATM, it is not another
duplication of existing efforts. Instead, we are investigating this area of work
from another dimension - applying the know-how of control and network theory and
protocols. It shall address challenging research issues at the network and
transport layers and hence this proposal demands vertically integrated
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most end-to-end QoS adaptation framework attempts
to ensure the QoS (normally the bandwidth and delay requirements) over both
wired and wireless links are consistent after a handoff. However, such handoffs
can occur on the two remote ends of the mobile-to-mobile connection. If the
adaptation protocols are not well designed, the WATM can experience instability
problems. The fact that a mobile host or the network triggers an adaptation is a
sign of pro-active reaction. This is called sensitivity. A highly sensitive
system can also cause substantial signaling overhead and result in network
congestion and instability. The instability refers to a regenerative phenomenon
where another adaptation process is triggered even before the current one is
completed. The innovative approach is to apply control theory and to derive new
network algorithms. We plan to introduce a set of damping procedures to control
sensitivity and instability associated with continuous and transient oscillation
in QoS adaptation. Our plan is to derive these adaptation damping procedures and
to implement them on a WATM simulator/testbed to evaluate the feasibility of the
approach and the resultant stability and sensitivity of the system under
different traffic load, degree of mobility and number of users. This area of
this research proposal, therefore, enhances QoS support and more importantly,
the reliability, availability and performance of future broadband wireless
network systems. It views the understanding of underlying dynamics associated
with QoS adaptation paramount to building high performance and reliable wireless
broadband systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part of the research concerns
with ABR and VBR flow control in WATM networks. While there has been much on-
going research associated with ATM flow and congestion control, little is
devoted to wireless flow and congestion control in WATM networks. This proposal
reveals the impact of the dynamics associated with SS (Stability and
Sensitivity) in QoS adaptation on ABR/VBR flow control. This is a very genuine
problem since current rate-based flow control relies on the use of feedback
cells and these cells can be lost as a result of host mobility. The innovative
approach has two components: (a) the separation of rate allocation and signaling
in a vertically integrated design, (b) the optimization of flow control
functions in both space and time. It intends to develop and validate a theory of
protocols that enables max-min optimization, enhancing stability and minimizing
sensitivity to an appropriate level. Protocols designed based on this theory
will be amenable to rigorous analysis and proofs of behavior.&lt;br/&gt;