* 0241236
* Efficient Simulation of Protein-Membrane Interactions by Implicit Solvent Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Peter Butko, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 10/31/2007
* USD 520,479.00

This project aims to develop a new computational model for studying protein
conformation changes upon membrane interactions. Its objectives are to (1)
develop a robust and efficient parallel iterative algorithm for solving the
Poisson-Boltzmann equation; (2) define a new biomolecular potential-energy
function through a large reduction of the number of conformation-freedom
variables for a family of particular proteins; (3) develop a new sparse matrix
compress scheme for programming an efficient application-tailored preconditioner
in an optimal order of memory locations; (4) develop a parallel iterative
algorithm for constrained molecular dynamics simulations; and (5) train
undergraduate and graduate researchers for the post-genomic era. Specifically,
the new algorithms and the new model will be applied to studying the molecular
mechanism of membrane damage induced by the protein toxin Cyt1A upon membrane
interactions. The theoretical results will also be compared to laboratory data
produced by biochemical and biophysical methods such as fluorescence
spectroscopy, surface tensiometry, and electron microscopy. Synthesis of the
computational and experimental data may bring new insights to the manner of
membrane permeabilization and damage by proteins that do not transverse the
lipid bilayer.&lt;br/&gt; Efficient algorithms and modeling of protein-membrane
interactions can save considerable amounts of time, money, and laboratory effort
in biotechnology, medicine, agriculture, and the food, pharmaceutical, or
defense industries. The new algorithms and the new model developed in this
project can significantly simplify computing complexity in simulations of large
protein-water-membrane systems. They can also be applied to various biomolecular
simulations. In fact, numerical solution of the Poisson-Boltzmann equation plays
a central role in implicit solvent models. The molecular potential energy
function is a cornerstone of molecular modeling, and the minimization of the
molecular potential energy function and the molecular dynamics simulation are
two fundamental tasks in computational biology. Furthermore, the chosen model
protein, the toxin Cyt1A, has been used as an environmentally-safe insecticide
specific against mosquitoes and blackflies. Elucidating its mode of action may
help the industry increase the toxin's efficacy by targeting specificity and
synergism with other insecticides. Additionally, through the collaboration
between a mathematician/computer scientist and a biochemist/biophysicist,
students involved in this project will be trained in a virtual hub of
mathematics, computer science, and the life sciences. This grant is made under
the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support Research Grants in the Area of
Mathematical Biology. This is a joint competition sponsored by the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the National Science Foundation and the National
Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of
Health.&lt;br/&gt;