* 0241885
* RUI: Scale-Dependence of Flow Effects on Coral Reef Community Primary Production
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2008
* Robert Carpenter, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 10/31/2008
* USD 500,288.00

Understanding the control of material fluxes in marine environments is a major
goal of oceanography. In coastal marine environments, there is a growing
appreciation for the role of hydrodynamics in modulating these fluxes. Coral
reefs are among the most productive ecosystems in the ocean and water flow is
central to maintaining high rates of photosynthesis in reef primary producers.
On many reefs the major primary producing component is comprised of free-living
algae that form a thin veneer over dead coral. Rates of photosynthesis by reef
algal turfs on spatial scales of tens of centimeters are enhanced significantly
by water motion, and similar patterns have been demonstrated for rates of
nitrogen fixation. Metabolic and nutrient uptake processes of other reef
organisms are also positively related to flow speed on similar spatial scales.

This project will develop a more complete understanding of the role of water
flow in modulating coral reef primary production by: 1) examining the generality
of how flow effects reef community primary production at larger spatial scales
and how surface roughness affects this relationship, and, 2) investigating in
more detail the small-scale interactions between algal turf physical structure,
flow, and boundary layer dynamics, as this will allow a coupling between the
ecological process of disturbance and the physical processes of hydrodynamics
and mass transfer. Using both correlational and experimental methods, explicit
hypotheses about the effects of flow, shear stress, and roughness on net
community primary production at several spatial scales will be tested.

Broader impacts include a significant contribution to the development of human
resources in marine science via training of both undergraduate and graduate
students and a postdoctoral researcher, and better understanding of flow effects
on a critical marine ecosystem.

