* 0241540
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Social Networks, Civic Capacity and Urban School Reform: A Multi-Level Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Melissa Marschall, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 12/31/2003
* USD 11,997.00

This dissertation examines the extent to which civic capacity drives reform and
thereby directs which problems are tackled and the nature of the solutions
offered. Stone (1998) maintains that civic capacity is the mobilization of
various stakeholders in support of a community wide cause. These stakeholders in
most large urban systems include professional educators, parents, the business
sector, community-based actors, and, in some cases, city hall. The building
blocks for civic capacity are civic mobilization and shared understanding. The
former addresses the degree to which various sectors of the community come
together in sustained support of school reform and related efforts to improve
educational opportunities and performance; the latter involves the extent to
which stakeholders, or what Stone also references as the urban regime, share a
common understanding of the education problem at
hand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While Stone's approach to civic capacity and urban
regimes provides a new and important framework for conceptualizing urban
education reform, it does not permit the development of an inferential theory
that predicts both the effects of school reform on the community and the effects
of the community on school reform. Interrelationships among civic capacity,
institutions, social networks, and community organizations have neither been
clearly specified nor analyzed empirically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For example,
what kinds of institutional changes are related to increased citizen
participation in local&lt;br/&gt;institutions and local policy-making? What
types of interorganizational linkages foster citizen participation? How are
these relationships related to school reform? In addition, empirical challenges
remain. Most studies do not have a longitudinal base with which to track changes
in civic capacity over time, are limited to single city case studies, or fail to
fully operationalize key concepts. Thus, we have continued to build the case for
the urban regime theory in theory, we have failed to test
its&lt;br/&gt;empirical validity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation
addresses these theoretical and empirical challenges. Theoretically, it offers
the first explanatory theory of the development of civic capacity and its effect
on the success of reforms. In particular, the student proposes a Social Network
Theory of School Reform that builds upon Stone's work and adds dimensions from
sociological theories. This theoretical framework allows the student to address
the following questions: How is cooperation established? What types of
relationships are forged and which are maintained over time? How do various
demographic, political, and social factors contribute to or diminish a city's
ability to develop civic capacity for&lt;br/&gt;education reform? Empirically,
the student measures --- over time --- the levels of inter-community
organization, cooperation and interaction for school reform.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By pooling together data from multiple sources, the
student will measure the elusive concepts of civic cooperation and civic
capacity, and thus shed new light on questions of how relations among community
organizations and schools are structured, how levels of community participation
and support contribute to the social organization of communities, and how
systemic school reform influences these relationships and processes.&lt;br/&gt;