* 0241070
* Topics in Group Formation, Inequality and Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Debraj Ray, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2006
* USD 247,488.00

This research project studies various aspects of group and coalition formation;
the implications of such processes for economic efficiency, social polarization,
and inter group conflict. The research project has three main components. First,
several facets of group and network formation will be studied. At a theoretical
level, the objective is to analyze group formation in the presence of farsighted
economic agents. These topics have already been a major focus of past research
by the principal investigator, but the new focus here is on network formation, a
versatile concept that encompasses many standard theories of coalition
formation. In addition, group and network structure will be investigated in
leading special cases, such as those pertaining to insurance, information, or
technology diffusion. Second --- and complementary to the first part --- the
notion of ``social polarization" across economic, religious, or ethic groupings
will be introduced and studied. It will be argued, both theoretically and
empirically, that social polarization is closely connected with the incidence of
social conflict. This claim will be evaluated by an empirical study of
polarization and its correlates, as well as through behavioral models of social
conflict in which the polarization of characteristics plays an explicit role.
Finally, the project will apply some of these ideas to the escalating
communitarian violence in India over the past two decades. The economic and
demographic characteristics of different religious and caste groups in India
will be studied, and such characteristics connected with the outbreak of
religious or ethnic violence at the district level. In addition, several data
sources will be combined to create a unique dataset for studying conflict and
distribution in the Indian context.

Group formation is central to questions in economic theory, political economy,
and sociology. This project describes --- among other things --- a methodology
for thinking about coalition formation. This approach is likely to have
implications for game-theoretic models, industrial organization, and political
economy. From a more applied viewpoint, polarization is a topic of central
interest, both to theorists working on inequality, as well as to practitioners
seeking correlates of outcomes such as low growth, violent crime, and civil
wars. Finally, the study of Hindu-Muslim and caste conflict is possibly the
first that links economic and demographic variables to ethnic or religious
conflict. This sort of analysis has implications not just for ethnic conflict
within India but for conflicts in other parts of the world.