* 0241506
* Informational Foundations of Economic Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Larry Samuelson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 268,194.00

This project seeks explanations for individual and collective behavior that is
not readily explained by standard economic theory. Standard economic theory
assumes that people are relentlessly self interested and rational, in the sense
that they are concerned only with their own consumption and invariably make
choices to optimally configure this consumption. However, growing evidence makes
a persuasive case that this view is wrong on two counts. People are routinely
concerned with more than their narrowly defined self-interest. For example,
Americans contribute billions of dollars to charity each year. People also
regularly rely on behavioral rules of thumb rather than subjecting every choice
to a detailed analysis. Standard economic theory suffices for many purposes, but
is ill equipped to deal with many other important questions. Framing a policy
response to the recent growth in economic inequality requires an examination of
how preferences and motivation extend beyond considerations of pure self-
interest. Understanding the performance of our economy, including the recent
stock market bubble, requires knowledge of how rational decisions are sometimes
displaced by potentially inappropriate behavioral rules.

This research combines techniques from evolutionary psychology with techniques
from economics to examine how people make decisions. The point of departure is
that biological and cultural evolution has influence the way people make use of
information and reach decisions, just as it has influenced more obviously
physical characteristics. The project begins with theoretical research examining
how evolution is likely to have shaped our decision-making capabilities in
response to environmental challenges and resource constraints. The work will
then proceed to applied and theoretical applications of these models. The result
will be insight into why one's evaluation of one's own consumption often depends
upon one's past consumption or the consumption of others; why prices and markets
are used to allocate some goods but not others; how trust and reputations for
cooperation can be built and can allow mutually beneficial interactions that
would otherwise be impossible; and how we should make welfare comparisons and
evaluations in a society characterized by such behavior.

The goal of the research is a better understanding of economic and social
behavior. The research will provide better tools for analyzing and evaluating
economic interactions and for designing economic policies. The work on trust and
cooperation will provide the foundations for a theory of institutional design
that will allow us to structure the economy so as to rely more heavily on
inherent incentives as the basis for mutually beneficial behavior, while relying
less on explicit legal and government intervention. The work on interpersonal
consumption links will provide the foundations for policies to deal with income
inequality. Ultimately, the result will be a reevaluation of the rigidly
individualistic view that characterizes much of current economics.