* 0241354
* Investigating the Characteristics and Consequences of Interannual Variations in the Northwest Atlantic's Deep Western Boundary Current
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Ruth Curry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 06/30/2009
* USD 3,717,589.00

0241354 Toole&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will build understanding
of the mechanisms and rates of North Atlantic Deep Water export to lower
latitudes and the relationships of varying deep water flow to the upper ocean
circulation. This knowledge will help clarify the response of the ocean to
variations in air-sea exchange and ultimately, the ocean's role in global
climate change. The overturning circulation of the Northwest Atlantic Ocean at
mid-latitude involves poleward transport of warm water by the Gulf Stream and
equatorward flow of colder intermediate and deep waters. Comprehension of how
these limbs of the global current system and their associated regional
recirculations vary on decadal time scale is incomplete. Limiting advance in
understanding is the lack of long, well-resolved records to document interannual
signals in water properties, stratification, and transport of the Deep Western
Boundary Current (DWBC) system. Importantly, anomalies created at subpolar
latitudes may be profoundly altered or even blocked by the Gulf Stream.
Conversely, subpolar anomalies may influence the position, strength, and/or
stability of the Stream, and in turn affect patterns of air-sea exchange
throughout the North Atlantic. This project will document temperature, salinity,
tracer, and velocity variations of the DWBC upstream of its Gulf Stream cross-
under point by maintaining a moored array over the slope south of Woods Hole,
and occupying a hydrographic section along this line semi-annually. The array
(named Station W in memory of Val Worthington) will quantify changes in DWBC
water properties, stratification (potential vorticity), and transport. The high-
spatial-resolution sampling possible from the ship will help verify that the
array resolves interannual signals (as well as return water samples for
shoreside tracer analyses). In addition to raw observations, value-added
products such as time series of core properties and transport by water mass will
be produced and distributed. Equally important, the project will explore whether
a subset of our proposed array is su?cient to index water property and transport
variations in this area, setting the stage for a long-term ocean observing
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observations proposed will explore and test
theoretical ideas about the interaction of the Deep Western Boundary Current and
Gulf Stream. Graduate students enrolled in the introductory physical
oceanography course will participate on the proposed cruises, introducing them
to observational oceanography. Moreover, the program will support one Ph.D.
student whose dissertation research will focus on the acquired data. All
observations and resulting data products will be expediently made available to
the community via the internet with the intention of fostering widespread use of
these data so that any member of the community can utilize them in their own
research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;