* 0241169
* Dissertation Enhancement Research:  Habitat Fragmentation and the Responses of Hantavirus Host Communities in Panama: A Test of the Dilution Effect Hypothesis
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Terry Yates, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 10/31/2005
* USD 26,614.00

0241169&lt;br/&gt;Yates&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program thesis
enhancement project will support thesis dissertation research by Mr. Gerardo
Suzan under the supervision of Dr. Terry L. Yates of the University of New
Mexico. The research, in collaboration with the Dr. Armiens Blas of the
Instituto Conmemorativo GORGAS in Panama, aims to study the way that changes in
natural environments resulting from human activity affect the distribution of
the reservoir for Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome and the risk of outbreaks in
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In its simplest form, the dilution effect
hypothesis suggests that high biodiversity reduces the frequency of some rodent-
borne diseases. If so, several emerging zoonotic diseases may be related to the
loss of biodiversity. Small mammal species richness and distribution in six
Panamanian national parks with varying degrees of anthropogenic disturbance and
size will be used to test this hypothesis. Preliminary surveys indicate that the
lowest species richness was found in human dominated habitats where the
hantavirus reservoir in Panama was exclusively collected and point to the
conclusion that anthropogenic disturbance favors the hantavirus reservoir
distribution, and possibly explains recent outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will establish a database for species distribution among different biomes,
identify potential areas of highest disease risk based on the degree of habitat
fragmentation, and, ultimately, increase our understanding of rodent reservoir
ecology as it relates to anthropogenic activities. The basic conclusions of this
project may apply to other vector-borne diseases in different regions of the
world. If biodiversity and disease risks are strongly correlated, conservation
of natural resources becomes even more important.&lt;br/&gt;