* 0241732
* Valence Politics with Activists: Empirical and Theoretical Models of Multicandidate Competition
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Norman Schofield, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 04/30/2004
* USD 50,000.00

The spatial voting model is a sophisticated methodological device to study the
interaction of political agents (whether candidates, or political leaders) and
voters. However, the theory has predicted that all agents will be drawn to the
electoral center in order to maximize votes. The conclusion, then, is that
political competition is void of any relevance. Past research by the principal
investigator and his colleagues strongly suggests that this conclusion is
empirically invalid, both in polities based on proportional representation and
in those based on plurality rule. Recent work by the researcher has shown that
the mean voter theorem requires a domain constraint, on the support of the
distribution of preferred policies of the electorate. Empirical analysis shows
this constraint to be violated in polities as varied as Israel, Britain, the US,
the Netherlands, etc. Instead, if electoral uncertainty is low, then parties
should optimally position themselves at a distance from each other in the policy
space determined by the differences in popularity (or valence) of the agents.
"Popularity" is measured in the probit and logit models as constants in the
voter utility functions. Under proportional representation, agents with low
popularity are shown to leave the electoral center. Under plurality rule (as in
Britain), agents with high popularity will contest the center. This research
models the way activist coalitions make contributions of time and money to their
preferred candidates. In order to maximize vote shares, agents will optimize
between activist coalitions and the electoral pull of the center. The theory
presented here develops the nature of response by agents to these electoral
incentives. However, the rationality of activist contributions has not, as yet,
been incorporated into the model. The investigation involves collaboration with
Paul Whiteley of Essex University. Whiteley's work has focused on British leader
popularity and activist support, and he has developed regression models of the
relationships between these variables. The collaborative research draws on this
research, together with completed probit models of voter and elite preferences,
to construct an interactive model of activist behavior and political response.