* 0241662
* Enhanced New Production During Winter Mixing: A Missing Component of Current Estimates
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 12/31/2006
* USD 887,391.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0241662&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photosynthetic
uptake of CO2 by oceanic phytoplankton and the export of the resulting organic
carbon to the deep sea comprise a biological pump (Volk and Hoffert, 1985),
capable of extracting globally significant amounts of CO2 from the atmosphere.
As a consequence, it is important from the perspective of the global carbon
cycle to understand both the present efficiency and the main controlling
mechanisms of this important carbon pathway. In the open ocean the biological
pump is driven by new production of organic matter (production supported by
externally supplied nutrients) and export of that organic matter to depth. Many
methods have been employed to estimate new production, with varying degrees of
agreement. In the Sargasso Sea, for example, geochemical estimates of new
production largely exclude the winter mixing period (because their fundamental
assumption are valid only during stratified periods). Biological methods suggest
that the pre-stratification period can be as important, in terms of new
production, as the remainder of the year. Those biological estimates are poorly
constrained and based on sparse data. Because of the enormous spatial extent of
subtropical gyres similar to the Sargasso Sea, uncertainty in the rate of new
production and organic matter export in those systems leads to large uncertainty
in biologically-driven carbon fluxes at the global-scale. Recent data suggest
that in the Sargasso Sea, the passage of weather fronts leads to increased new
production during the winter mixing period. Some oceanographers believe that
these events lead to enhanced nitrate input, followed by a rapid biological
response and accumulation of biomass, and an equally rapid export of that
biomass to depth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at the
Bermuda Biological Station for Research carry out a process-oriented study of
new production and its control during the period before formation of the
seasonal thermocline in the BATS/BTM/OFP region near Bermuda. Researchers from
Oregon State University, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, and the
University of South Carolina will also participate in some aspects of the study.
This sea-going effort will be conducted during two 30-day cruises (one in 2004
and one in 2005) during the winter mixing period when the passage of these
fronts is most common and when few data are available to constrain new
production estimates. It will be crucial for this study to sample from a fully
weather-capable research vessel, which can stay out and continue operations
through most winter storms. The team will use direct measurements of nitrate
entrainment, nitrate uptake, phytoplankton community structure change, and
dissolved and particulate organic matter export to elucidate the linkages
between new production and export production as well as determine the main
biological responses to short-term physical forcing. Particular emphasis will be
placed on biogeochemically critical phytoplankton groups such as diatoms and
coccolithophorids, which can exploit transiently favorable conditions of the
kind hypothesized to occur in late winter/early spring and which play a
disproportionately large role in organic-matter export in many
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of ocean function is no longer
important just to practicing ocean scientists. This project will provide
information critical for biogeochemical modelers seeking to constrain future
predictions of changes in the oceanic biological pump, and will also provide
information of interest to students, teachers and the general public. If in fact
a significant, and previously unmeasured, amount of new production occurs in
subtropical gyres during the winter mixing period, then biological processes in
the central ocean gyres play a greater role in the global carbon cycle including
regulation of atmospheric carbon dioxide than we recognize at present.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;