* 0241562
* A p-Adic Riemann-Hilbert Correspondence and A p-Adic Theory of Mixed Hodge Modules
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Matthew Emerton, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 05/31/2004
* USD 56,864.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the investigator and his
collaborator intend to develop an analogue in the p-adic setting of the Riemann-
Hilbert correspondence between perverse sheaves and D-modules on algebraic
varieties over the complex numbers. The Hilbert correspondence generalizes De
Rham theory, and establishes a deep connection between the topology of a given
complex algebraic variety (as encoded in the category of perverse sheaves on the
variety) and the behavior of systems of differential operators defined on the
variety (which are encoded as D-modules on the variety; that is, as sheaves of
modules over the sheaf of rings of differential operators on the variety). The
proposed p-adic analogue would perform a similar function for varieties over the
p-adic numbers. It would yield an equivalence between the (currently
conjectural) category of ``crystalline perverse sheaves'' on such a variety, and
the (again conjectural) category of weakly admissible filtered D-modules
equipped with a Frobenius operator. The category of crystalline perverse sheaves
is believed to carry both geometric and also arithmetic information about the
variety to which it is attached, and would for example be a natural ingredient
in a p-adic analogue of Beilinson's theory of regulators. This gives some hint
of the important role that such a category of sheaves can be expected to play in
the local analysis at p of systems of Diophantine
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of solving equations is one of the
most basic in mathematics, going back at least to the mathematicians of ancient
Greece, such as Diophantus. He studied the problem of solving equations in whole
numbers; such equations are now known as Diophantine equations. Since the work
of Descartes and Fermat, it has been understood that geometry provides a
powerful tool for analyzing systems of equations, even if one is at first more
interested in the equations from an arithmetic point of view. For this reason,
the development of powerful geometric tools is important for progress in the
theory of Diophantine equations. In this project, the investigator and his
collaborator intend to develop such tools, by extending known techniques in the
usual so-called archimedean geometry to the context of non-archimedean, or
p-adic, geometry. This geometry, which has a strong arithmetic flavor, provides
a crucial geometric setting for the analysis of Diophantine equations, and these
techniques are expected to yield several new developments in that analysis. Such
developments are important not only because they enrich what continues to be one
of the center pieces of the mathematical tradition, but because the theory of
Diophantine equations has deep interconnections with the theory of discrete
processes, and especially with the theory of codes, so that progress in theory
of Diophantine equations can be expected to yield progress in these fields.