* 0241037
* Severe Convective Storms and Tornadoes
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Howard Bluestein, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 04/30/2007
* USD 798,074.00

The main objective of this research project is to improve understanding of the
genesis, and the kinematics and dynamics of severe convective storms and
tornadoes. The objective will be met primarily through analysis of data
collected in both prior and future field experiments and through numerical
simulation experiments. Mobile Doppler radar datasets from field experiments
will be analyzed to detail the structure and evolution of tornadoes and their
parent vortices and the vertical circulation associated with the dryline, a
feature along which severe convective storms are often initiated. In particular,
why some supercell storms produce tornadoes, while others do not, will be
investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamics of convective-storm interaction
and the role of the intersection of a dryline with a baroclinic boundary in
triggering convective storms will be investigated using controlled numerical-
model simulation experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, two new radar
systems will be tested for use in severe storm/tornado research: one is a
mobile, rapidly scanning, phased-array Doppler radar; the other is an existing
system that will be fitted with a spaced antennae, which could provide
transverse-wind measurements in addition to line-of-sight wind measurements. A
collaborator under another NSF award is developing these radar systems (Dr.
Andrew Pazmany, ATM-0242166). If the new radar systems are successful, then much
higher quality datasets will be available for analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
is anticipated that this project will ultimately lead to a more accurate
prediction of severe weather events.