* 0241574
* Regional Trade Agreements as Security Institutions
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Kathy Powers, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2005
* USD 55,990.00

Regional trade agreements (RTAs) are trade institutions that can also be
security institutions. Trade institutions specify rules for trade among members.
Security institutions specify rules that prescribe how member states jointly
address mutual security concerns among the membership. Though it is little
known, RTA treaties may, and often do, include military alliance agreements and
security components within their framework. RTA membership often consists of
former and present enemies as well as longtime rivals that do experience
militarized conflict. Scholarly inquiry has analyzed the conditions under which
regional trade agreements diminish militarized conflict indirectly through
increased economic interdependence due to RTA-induced trade liberalization. The
researchers in this investigation examine the direct impacts of RTA structure on
conflict via the security components built into the structure of the RTA
institution. Conflict among member states may lead to the transformation of RTAs
into security institutions. RTAs as security institutions not only influence the
occurrence and severity of militarized conflict among its members, but such
belligerence between members or in the region leads to institutional change
within RTAs. RTAs become security institutions in part because their members
face immediate and pressing security concerns. Hence, it is necessary not only
to see how RTAs influence conflict but also how conflict influences the RTA.
This implies a theory of international institutions, and in particular of
institutional change, that the researchers develop and empirically test. The
objectives of this study are two-fold: to develop and empirically test a model
of (1) how variations in RTA security structure shape militarized conflict among
member states and (2) how militarized conflict among member states alters RTA
security structures during the period1950-2000. To accomplish these objectives,
project activities include extending the existing RTA data set from African
states and security integration in their twenty-plus regional trade agreements
to all RTAs in the world during this time period. The broader impact of this
project extends to integration of education and discovery as well as diversity.
In terms of integration into education, graduate research assistants will be
trained in the research process and present results at meetings; a new dataset
will be incorporated into class assignments. Diversity is integrated through
personnel: an African-American female assistant professor as the principle
investigator and results will be disseminated at the National Conference of
Black Political Scientists. Research infrastructure will be enhanced by products
produced from project activities including a new data set. On the policy side,
light will be shed on the consequences of policymakers using trade organizations
to address regional security. International institutions are involved in dealing
with almost all conflicts in the world today. It is imperative for diplomats and
leaders to understand how institutions are used to mediate conflicts, and how
conflicts are likely to put institutional change on their agendas.