* 0241371
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the Terror Management Analysis of Affective, Cognitive, and Motivational Factors in Mortality Salience Effects
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Jeffrey Greenberg, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2008
* USD 386,378.00

This project expands the study of terror management theory, a broad analysis of
human behavior that is directly relevant to understanding the psychological
processes involved in recent trends toward increased ethnic and intergroup
conflict and violence. The theory proposes that the potential for anxiety
engendered by the human awareness of the fragility of life and the inevitability
of death drives people to grasp onto culturally based conceptions of the world
that enable them to view life as orderly, meaningful and permanent, and
themselves as valuable contributors to this meaningful reality. Terror
management theory suggests that connections to nations, ethnicities, religions,
and other cultural institutions function to manage the potential for anxiety
that results from awareness of the precarious nature of the human condition.
This new program of research will use contemporary methods for assessing
conscious and non-conscious processes to further our understanding of the basic
motivational, emotional, and cognitive processes underlying the human
inclinations to cope with fear by investing in and defending our own belief
systems and modes of self-esteem striving, and the role that such processes play
in human conflict. One set of studies will explore the operation of potential
and unconscious anxiety in these processes. A second set will examine the
cognitive architecture of the belief systems that protect people from this
anxiety and the role that unconscious activation of belief systems and
ideologies play in promoting inter-group bias and conflict. A third set will
explore how concerns about death relate to other existential issues such as the
needs for certainty, structure, meaning, and simple answers to basic questions
about life and the nature of reality. The final set will explore how terror
management concerns interact with approach motivation in leading to change and
growth in existing systems of belief and values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;