* 0241389
* Economic Liberalization, Democratization, and Social Policy Reform: Latin America and the Caribbean, Iberia, and the Antipodes
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2005
* John Stephens, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 02/28/2005
* USD 62,753.00

The basic aims of this research project are to construct a data set for pooled
cross section and time series analysis of social policy in 9 countries in Latin
America, Iberia, the Caribbean, and the Antipodes from 1950-2000, to collect
information for a comparative historical analysis of the origins and
transformations of social policy, and to bring quantitative and qualitative
methodologies to systematically analyze options for and constraints on social
policy relating to economic liberalization and transitions from authoritarian to
democratic political systems. The ultimate goal is to identify the economic and
political constraints posed by these processes of transformation and the
conditions that allow for building or maintaining strong social safety nets and
effective social services. The project will establish causal links between the
level of economic development, consolidation of democratic institutions, and the
nature and actions of social and political actors. It will answer the question
of where and why options for building or preserving effective social safety nets
and social services existed, and where and why governments pursued these options
or failed to do so. The project will have several broader impacts: Through
conference presentations, scholarly articles, and a book, the project will
contribute to a better understanding by policy makers in governments and in
international development institutions of the ways in which open markets,
political power distributions, and political institutions shape options for
creative policy design and political coalition building in support of effective
social policies. The project will also contribute to education and training of
graduate students by involving them as research assistants and co-authors.
Finally, the data set will be made publicly available and will facilitate
research on a number of questions in comparative political economy and social
policy.