* 0241211
* GOALI:    Low-Order Dynamic Modeling and Nonlinear Model Predictive Control of Cryogenic Gas Separation Plants
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2005
* Michael Henson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/2005
* USD 251,670.00

This NSF GOALI project is a joint effort between the University of
Massachusetts/Amherst and Praxair aimed at the development and implementation of
nonlinear model predictive control (NMPC) technology for cryogenic air
separation plants. The planned methodology involves the construction of low-
order distillation column models based on nonlinear wave theory. The wave
modeling approach will be applied to the problem of triple column plant used to
separate nitrogen, oxygen and argon. The low-order models will be compared to a
rigorous cryogenic plant simulator developed using the Aspen Technology suite of
dynamic simulation tools. The nonlinear wave-modeling framework will be used to
develop NMPC technology specifically designed for cryogenic air separation
plants. The planned control strategy will be evaluated utilizing the Aspen
simulator as a surrogate for an actual cryogenic separation plant. The project
will culminate with the implementation of the triple column NMPC controller at
the Praxair Laporte, Texas plant site.

Cryogenic gas separation plants produce large quantities of liquid and/or
gaseous products for the chemical and steel manufacturing industries. Domestic
consumption of electricity by industrial gas producers is estimated to be over
$700 million per year. Continued deregulation of the electric utility industry
will lead to more frequent and unpredictable changes in electricity costs. This
will dictate fundamental changes in the operating philosophy of gas separation
plants. Large production rate changes and more frequent startups/shutdowns will
be required to take full advantage of time-varying utility costs. Consequently,
small improvements in automatic process control have the potential for
substantial economic benefits. Preliminary economic analysis for a
representative plant indicates that the proposed control technology has the
potential to recover $120,000/year of products lost during startups. The
research will provide Praxair with a control system prototype for the 60
cryogenic air separation plants in the United States and will provide impetus
for other domestic gas suppliers to implement nonlinear control technology.