* 0241092
* Structure-Composition-Property Relationships in Complex Intermetallic Phases:  Experimental and Theoretical Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Gordon Miller, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 01/31/2007
* USD 390,000.00

This project involves combining experimental and theoretical approaches to
search for and study new complex intermetallic compounds that will have
interesting structural and magnetic properties with possible applications to
environmentally friendly refrigerants and magnetic sensors. The compounds
targeted consist of active metals (sodium, potassium, strontium, barium, and
rare-earths) with combinations of magnetic elements (iron, cobalt, nickel) and
the post-transition elements (aluminium, germanium, indium, silicon and
germanium): such compounds should adopt beautifully complex structures involving
metal clusters that are controlled by optimizing metal-metal bonding, but also
showing arrangements giving interesting magnetic properties through exchange
interactions coupled to their orbital overlaps, i.e., magnetocaloric effects and
magnetostriction. These studies will lead to fundamental understanding of how
intermetallic compounds form and the factors that control structure in magnetic
systems. If we are successful to optimize the magnetocaloric effect, we may find
a material effective for refrigeration near room temperature that is
environmentally benign and economically feasible. Young scientists will learn
state-of-the-art techniques in air-sensitive, high temperature synthesis,
diffraction and in the theoretical calculation of electronic
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to form and study new compounds
between different metallic elements, called intermetallic compounds. One
component of these new compounds will be magnetic elements, like iron or cobalt,
which will allow us to probe new compounds to serve as materials for
refrigeration in place of chlorofluorocarbons ("magnetic refrigeration"). Such
compounds use magnetism to perform refrigeration, which is a more efficient
process and the materials are also more environmentally friendly than current
substances. An important fundamental goal of this research is to understand what
factors control the formation and growth of intermetallic compounds, so that we
may ultimately be able to design materials with specific electrical or magnetic
properties. We plan to achieve this goal by searching for new intermetallic
compounds through careful synthesis, through measurement of the structure and
arrangement of elements in their crystals, through determination of their
magnetic properties and through computer modeling. Students involved with this
project will learn state-of-the-art techniques in metals synthesis,
characterization and theoretical modeling. This project, which combines
experimental and theoretical work, will prepare these students for careers in
academia (for training our next generation of scientists and engineers) or in
industry (where they can apply new techniques for the fabrication of new
materials).