* 0241861
* Human Capital, Social Capital and Infant Health:  Evidence from New Panel Data
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Janet Currie, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/29/2008
* USD 179,456.00

Infant health is a key determinant of an individual's future success in life.
For example, surviving infants of low birth weight are more likely to suffer
from learning disabilities and other cognitive problems. Moreover, children of
lower socioeconomic status have much poorer birth outcomes on average. To the
extent that infant health is compromised by the mother's lack of opportunity, it
represents a mechanism for the intergenerational perpetuation of poverty and
inequality. This project assembles a new panel of data on infant health using
California's Vital Statistics Natality Records for 1982 to 2001. This panel
allows them to follow mothers between births in order to answer three
outstanding questions about the relationships between human capital, social
capital, and the determinants of infant health. &lt;br/&gt;First, how does
maternal education affect infant health in a rich country such as the United
States? Can spillovers from maternal education to infant health be considered as
an additional return to education? Do estimated effects of maternal education
differ with socioeconomic status, immigrant status, or race/ethnicity? In order
to answer these questions this project compares the infant health outcomes of
siblings whose mothers increased their education between births to those whose
mothers did not. The project also examines the channels through which increased
education improves infant health. Second, can "network effects" explain
geographical/ethnic correlations in the use of publicly funded maternity care
services. Many researchers have noted strong correlations &lt;br/&gt;between
behaviors of women in networks defined using geographical and ethnic/racial
affiliations, but it is difficult to prove that there is a causal link. A panel
of data allows the researchers to control for many unobservable determinants of
infant health which have confounded previous non-experimental studies. Moreover
this project tests the prevalent hypothesis that estimated network effects
reflect shared information. If networks act by transmitting information, then
the estimated effects should be larger among mothers who have not previously
used public maternity care services, since mothers who have &lt;br/&gt;already
experienced the services will know how to access them and do not need to gain
this information from networks. The panel permits comparisons of the estimated
effects of networks on women who did and did not previously receive the services
in order to conduct this test. &lt;br/&gt;The third question is how the
implementation of Medicaid managed care in California &lt;br/&gt;has affected
access to maternity care services. The construction of the panel enables the
project to ask, for example, whether Medicaid mothers who are constrained to
join Medicaid managed care organizations become less likely to enroll in
Medicaid, use certain hospitals, to receive services, and ultimately to have
healthy infants. This project assesses the extent to which an important change
in access to health care for low income mothers has played a role in
ameliorating or acerbating inequalities due to differentials in health at birth.
&lt;br/&gt;