* 0241447
* Mechanical consequences of flexibility for benthic marine organisms
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Mark Denny, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/2005
* USD 348,026.00

Scientific context and intellectual merit: Mechanically flexible, benthic plants
and animals are ubiquitous members of coastal communities in nearly all marine
systems. Such organisms move passively in response to flow as water moves past
them. However, the full effects of this motion, and in particular the way it
influences an organism's vulnerability to flow-driven disturbance, is poorly
understood. Traditionally, the view has been that a compliant construction
enhances the ability of sessile plants or animals to cope structurally with
time-varying water motion. However, more recent research has noted that passive
movement in flow can also have subtler consequences. For instance, an attached
organism that is swept back and forth by ocean waves acquires momentum, and this
momentum can impose a subsequent inertial force when the mass of the organism is
eventually decelerated upon reaching the limits of its range of motion. Such
complexities emphasize the need for a more complete and consistent examination
of the biomechanical and survivorship implications of flexibility for intertidal
and subtidal organisms. Without these further examinations, attempts to develop
quantitative and mechanistic predictions of the mortality consequences of flow
(long recognized as a dominant agent of disturbance and as a critical factor
influencing population dynamics in these communities) will remain ineffective.
Meeting this need is the goal of the proposed study.

Research efforts will focus on measuring real-time forces applied to flexible
organisms in the field and comparing those forces to quasi-static estimates
based on hydrodynamic shape factors (drag coefficients determined previously for
the same sample individuals) and simultaneously recorded flows. Differences
between actual and quasi-static time series of force will then be used to
quantify the way in which the passive motion that intrinsically accompanies
organism flexibility alters applied force. Multiple sets of recordings will be
conducted within three distinct fluid-dynamical "realms" on the shore (subtidal,
submerged intertidal, and regions subjected to direct wave impingement where
organisms are emergent between waves). Laminarian kelps, including the
ecologically important Macrocystis pyrifera, Nereocystis luetkeana, Egregia
menziesii, and Alaria marginata will be employed as focal species.

Results will be compiled and expressed in terms of underlying nondimensional
parameters that together govern organismal dynamics across species and the three
shoreline realms. Relationships among the nondimensional parameters will be
examined quantitatively and synthesized overall to develop a general, coherent
framework that defines how flexibility influences imposed force across a wide
range of organisms living across a full spectrum of flow environments. This
ensuing biomechanical framework will then be used to predict actual rates of
flow-mediated mortality for kelps in the field as a function of the
nondimensional parameters, and these predicted rates will be compared to the
observed rates across tagged individuals of a spectrum of sizes, growing in a
range of water depths and heights on the shore.

Broader impacts: The activities proposed here have important implications for
predicting the response of critically important community players (Macrocystis
provides necessary habitat for hundreds of coastal species, including many with
economic and recreational value) to ongoing shifts in wave regimes due to global
climate change. Biomechanical insights will also inform issues of coastal
engineering where kelps affect nearshore currents and sediment transport, and
the field of biomimetics. In addition, there are strong educational/partnership
implications, since undergraduate and graduate assistants, both paid and
volunteer, will be involved intimately in core experiments and analyses. Such
opportunities will provide for rigorous, team research experiences that foster
the scientific development of students early in their careers. Results of the
project will be further conveyed to wider audiences via the incorporation of
results into formal university courses, books written for the general scientific
arena, and through existing ties with public-sector agencies. Basic intellectual
exchange and discourse will be enhanced through a close collaboration that
brings together scientists and labs from three institutions.