* 0241282
* Primacy of Affect in Automatic and Deliberative Processing of Political Persons, Groups, and Issues
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Milton Lodge, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2006
* USD 224,991.00

In a series of experiments carried out under an earlier project employing an
attitude priming paradigm, the researchers found strong support for the
automaticity of affect toward political leaders, as well as for groups, and
issues. Then to explore the impact of prior attitude on political judgment the
researchers looked at how citizens evaluated arguments about two public
policies, affirmative action and gun control. They found strong evidence,
especially among those subjects who feel the strongest and are the most
knowledgeable about an issue, of a prior attitude effect, a disconfirmation, and
a confirmation bias, with all three of these effects of prior attitude promoting
attitude polarization. In the 1st year of this investigation, building on the
demonstration of the automaticity of affect for political leaders, groups, and
issues the researchers test basic premises of the primacy of affect hypothesis.
Their first pair of studies explores the creation and updating of automatic
affect, with one experiment using a fictitious political candidate and the other
using real but unknown U.S. Congressmen as stimuli. In years 2 and 3 the
investigators turn to the "so-what?" question. They undertake studies testing
the primacy of affect theory; to wit: that when one's affect is directly linked
to a political object, be it leader, group, or issue, this affective tally will
be "primary" in that it enters the judgment process first and dominates
subsequent judgments and evaluations from start to finish. Taking their lead
from social identity theory which links one's self identifications to affect the
researchers explore how one's political identifications (starting with party,
ideology, and symbolic identifications and then turning to the most general "we"
vs. "they" primes) will spontaneously impact how citizens think about and
evaluate new political information that is directly or indirectly linked to self
Employing a subliminal variant of the attitude-priming paradigm (to rule out
conscious considerations), the investigators predict that the priming of self-
identification will automatically invoke a strong affective response which will
significantly impact one's political attitudes, orientations, and judgments.