* 0241930
* Nonperturbative methods for quasiperiodic discrete Schroedinger equations on the line
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2003
* Wilhelm Schlag, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 01/31/2003
* USD 37,725.00

ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal deals with various aspects of discrete
Schroedinger equations&lt;br/&gt;on the one dimensional lattice with
deterministic potentials. So far, in &lt;br/&gt;collaboration with Jean Bourgain
and Michael Goldstein, the author has &lt;br/&gt;considered quasi-periodic
potentials given by ergodic shifts on tori, &lt;br/&gt;potentials obtained by
means of the skew-shift on the two torus, as well as &lt;br/&gt;potentials
defined in terms of strongly mixing dynamics, such as the doubling
&lt;br/&gt;map on the circle or hyperbolic automorphisms on the two torus. In
each of &lt;br/&gt;these cases, positivity of the Lyapunov exponent, regularity
of the &lt;br/&gt;integrated density of states, and Anderson localization were
studied. &lt;br/&gt;At this point, we are planning to address several remaining
questions, &lt;br/&gt;including the following ones:&lt;br/&gt;1) Is the Lyapunov
exponent positive in case of skew-shift potentials &lt;br/&gt; for small
disorder ? &lt;br/&gt;2) Is it possible to obtained detailed information on the
nature of the &lt;br/&gt; eigenfunctions in the quasi-periodic case assuming
only positivity of &lt;br/&gt; the Lyapunov exponent ? In fact, do the non
perturbative techniques&lt;br/&gt; allow the definition of the essential support
as described in the &lt;br/&gt; perturbative regime by Sinai and Froehlich,
Spencer, Wittwer ? &lt;br/&gt; These questions are intimately linked with Y. G.
Sinai's recent work on &lt;br/&gt; "anomalous transport in quasi-periodic
media", and would provide better&lt;br/&gt; and more precise information on the
subdiffusive behavior of the random&lt;br/&gt; walk considered by Sinai.
&lt;br/&gt;3) Is it possible to extend the nonperturbative methods to strips, or
the &lt;br/&gt; two-dimensional plane ?&lt;br/&gt;4) Is the integrated density
of states Holder continuous in the case of &lt;br/&gt; several frequencies or
the skew-shift ? &lt;br/&gt;5) What can be said about the statistics of the
level-spacings of the eigen&lt;br/&gt; values for the case of the skew-shift
?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, the study of random Schroedinger operators
started with Phil&lt;br/&gt;Anderson's work in the late 1950's, for which he
received the Nobel prize.&lt;br/&gt;Before his work it was believed that small
random impurities in a crystal&lt;br/&gt;would not significantly change its
conductance. Anderson, however, showed &lt;br/&gt;that this is not the case:
Arbitrarily small random impurities occurring&lt;br/&gt;independently at each
lattice site turn a conductor into an insulator. Since&lt;br/&gt;his work, which
was not mathematically rigorous, the development of a precise&lt;br/&gt;theory
of "Anderson localization" has been pursued by many mathematicians.
&lt;br/&gt;It turned out that there were connections with deep results from
several &lt;br/&gt;areas of mathematics. For example, Fuerstenberg's theorem on
products of &lt;br/&gt;random matrices was a crucial tool in the development of
the theory. &lt;br/&gt;These works attracted the attention of physicists,
particularly experts in &lt;br/&gt;statistical mechanics. To this day, there is
an active and fruitful exchange &lt;br/&gt;of ideas between mathematicians and
physicists in this subject. In fact, the &lt;br/&gt;interest in random phenomena
and methods has intensified quite notably in &lt;br/&gt;physics in recent years,
as many important problems posed by statistical &lt;br/&gt;mechanics have proved
to be rather deep mathematical challenges whose &lt;br/&gt;solution has lead to
significant advances of probabilistic techniques.&lt;br/&gt;It is our hope that
the projects set forth in this proposal will further&lt;br/&gt;advance our
insight into the models of statistical mechanics as well as &lt;br/&gt;providing
useful tools for mathematicians working in ergodic theory, analysis,
&lt;br/&gt;and mathematical physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;