* 0241246
* Computational Statistics For Phylogenetic Trees
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Susan Holmes, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2010
* USD 737,913.00

0241246&lt;br/&gt;Holmes&lt;br/&gt; Classical statistics has developed various
averages, projections and representations based on linear algebra. In recent
years, non-numerical data and parameters have emerged. The object of this
project is to provide ways of averaging, building confidence regions, running
Monte Carlo algorithms, doing regression and testing models for rooted binary
trees. Currently biologists validate their phylogenetic trees by perturbing the
data through a simple bootstrap of the columns of DNA sequences and then
summarizing the collection of trees obtained by associating p-values to the
branches of a consensus tree. This reduces the problem to a collection of
binomial parameters, losing much of the multivariate information. A more
geometrical procedure based on confidence regions in tree space is preferable
and overcomes the multiple testing problem. The projects extends both Bayesian
and frequentist inferential procedures for binary trees to a nonparametric
context using a complete geometric construction of the relevant tree space. The
mathematical tools include probability theory, topology and algebraic
combinatorics. Collaboration with Louis Billera and Karen Vogtmann (Cornell
Mathematics Dept.) has enhanced our mathematical understanding of tree space.
The space of trees has negative curvature, thus we know we can define geodesics
on this space as well as convex hulls. Many of the actual distance computations
can have exponential complexity, good approximation algorithms are important for
the applications considered. This work helps think about the statistics of
biological networks as generalizations or mixtures of trees.&lt;br/&gt; A new
type of data has appeared in genetics and molecular biology, these data are not
real numbers or vectors, but trees, family trees or phylogenetic trees relating
different species and hierarchical clustering trees relating different genes
according to their differing expression patterns. This project provides programs
for visualizing and doing statistics on these new data, we will provide the
biologists with open source computer packages that they can use to analyze their
own data. For instance, classical linear regression is based on projections; in
the same way if we want to compare two sets of trees, we will use distances and
methods for projecting in tree space. The project includes two workshops, one
for mathematicians in the first stage, to publicize some of the harder open
problems, and another in the last year to teach biologists how to use the
geometrical tools developed in matlab or R in practical examples. This grant is
made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support Research Grants in the Area
of Mathematical Biology. This is a joint competition sponsored by the Division
of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the National Science Foundation and the
National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the National
Institutes of Health. &lt;br/&gt;