* 0241517
* Mechanism of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) Viewed from Scale Interactions in the Frequency Domain
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2005
* T. Krishnamurti, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 02/28/2005
* USD 260,949.00

The project will investigate the evolution of the Madden-Julian Oscillation
(MJO) in the tropics from diagnostic analysis of observations and numerical
modeling of the atmosphere and the coupled atmosphere-ocean system. MJO is a key
component of intra-seasonal variability, and plays a significant role in
modulating the circulation and precipitation variability in the tropics and the
extratropical Pacific/North American region. MJO also influences the Asian-
Australian summer monsoons. Because of being sandwiched between two notable
fluctuation time-scales--the shorter time-scale weather and the longer time-
scale seasonal-to-interannual variability--MJO has not received the needed
research attention up until recently. Dr. Krishnamurti (FSU) will investigate
the role of intra-frequency interactions in MJO genesis and evolution. High-
resolution numerical models of the atmosphere and the atmosphere-ocean system
will be integrated to understand the spatio-temporal structure of the boundary
layer fluxes of moisture, sensible heat, and momentum, in context of MJO
variability. The project is driven by the PI's hypothesis that MJO time-scale
flow components amplify from frequency interactions with a pair of synoptic
time-scale (2-to-6 days) circulation features, particularly in the planetary
boundary layer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The socio-economic impacts of Asian
monsoon forecasts are felt by more than two billion people on the earth. The
passage of intra-seasonal waves seems to have substantial impact on the wet and
dry spells of the monsoon. This work has the potential to lead to real time
prediction models of the MJO that can provide important guidance for sustained
wet and dry spells of the monsoon.