* 0241998
* Next Generation Flux Meters For Enhanced Geochemical And High-Resolution Real-Time Benthic Flux Monitoring
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Kevin Brown, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 03/31/2007
* USD 236,704.00

P.I. Brown, Kevin (SIO) Proposal #: 0241998&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title:
Next Generation Flux Meters For Enhanced Geochemical And
High-&lt;br/&gt;Resolution Real-Time Benthic Flux
Monitoring&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt; This proposal will
fund the development and construction of two prototype instruments that measure
fluid flux in cold seep environments typical of continental margin areas. These
instruments have an improved capability for long-term monitoring of flow
transience, from tidal to multi-month scales, and geochemical sampling. The
funds will be used to build and sea test (a) an electronic optical flow system
(OFS) and (b) an enhanced osmotic flow meter system (CAT II) optimized for
geochemical sampling (including noble gasses). These two benthic measurement
devices can be used in conjunction or separately to measure fluid flow and
fluxes of dissolved chemical species of interest in cold seep environments in
the following ways: a) real-time fluid flow measurements when used in
conjunction with satellite/buoy or cable observatories, b) measurement of
transience in fluid flow from tidal to multi-month time scales, c) enhanced
seabed coupling with remote collection chambers to negate current induced noise,
d) reduced dead space in collection chamber improving response time for
geochemical sampling, and e) increased chemical sampling ability with the
addition of gas sampling capability for noble gases and
methane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will test the new instrumentation in lab
simulations, offshore, and in situ through deployment in a seep area where other
measurements are available for comparison. The Pi is also actively pursuing a
test at a prototype deep-water, acoustically linked, moored-buoy seafloor
observatory on the Nootka Fault off Vancouver Island in the Northeast Pacific.
The~18 month long moored-buoy site is at an active area of seepage and the buoy
will be fitted with an ocean bottom seismometer (OBS), an acoustic-doppler
current profiler (ADCP), temperature, chemical sensors, bottom pressure and pore
pressure sensors, different types of seep meters, and a conductivity-
temperature-depth (CTD) sensor. These additional data will enable the PI to
correlate his results with several different types fluid flow estimation methods
(e.g. the pore pressure sensors) as well as with different potential impulses
driving any transience in flow (i.e. tides, ocean currents and
seismcity).&lt;br/&gt;