* 0242990
* Development and Application of Bromodeoxyuridine Immunochemical Techniques for the Molecular Analysis of Actively Growing Bacterioplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Ena Urbach, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2004
* USD 122,784.00

The focus of this study is the development and application of new, molecular
techniques to identify actively growing bacterioplankton species and estimate
new cell production by individual bacterioplankton taxa. The work builds upon
recently published techniques. The motivation for the research is the desire to
provide a powerful, multifunctional analog to established methods for measuring
bacterial production. 3H-thymidine (3 H-TdR) incorporation is the most commonly
used method for inferring bacterial biomass productivity in natural populations.
Its use is based upon the assumption that all bacteria in subject populations
can incorporate exogenous TdR into nascent DNA, and that the relationship
between H-TdR incorporation and productivity is nearly equal among species.
However, it has not been possible to test these assumptions, and thereby
validate application of 3 H-TdR incorporation to measurements of marine
bacterioplankton production. This is because nearly all dominant marine bacteria
are currently unculturable. We have developed a suite of techniques applying
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU), an immunogenic TdR analog, to the analysis of
microbial growth in natural populations. The main advantage of BrdU techniques
over 3 H-TdR incorporation is that immunochemical purification of BrdU-
containing DNA, combined with established methods for the analysis of 16S rRNA
genes, can be used to identify bacteria incorporating BrdU` in natural samples.
This provides a means of determining which community members are contributing to
measurements of bacterial productivity made using BrdU, enabling validation of
the technique. In addition, with the completion of experiments outlined in this
proposal, it may be possible to use BrdU to estimate biomass production by
individual bacterioplankton taxa.

The proposed research includes experiments using cultured bacteria and coastal
bacterioplankton to optimize BrdU` techniques, calibrate BrdU and 3 H-TdR
incorporation to growth for culturable relatives of unculturable taxa, identify
BrdU-incorporating taxa in bacterioplankton and estimate their taxon-specific
growth. For completeness, additional experiments will compare numbers of BrdU-
positive to 3 H-glucose and 3 H-leucine-incorporating cells in bacterioplankton,
assess the BrdU-incorporation potential of apparently inactive taxa in
bacterioplankton, and also determine whether BrdU and H-TdR are incorporated by
the same bacterioplankton taxa. Finally, BrdU methods will be used to determine
whether different bacterioplankton taxa synthesize DNA during different portions
of the diurnal cycle.

The experiments in this proposal include analyses of some bacterioplankton
samples collected off the Oregon coast and address the question of whether
different taxa synthesize DNA at different times of day in open ocean and
coastal environments. However, the experimental design does not purport to
analyze global patterns of active bacterioplankton taxa, their roles in food
webs, or biomass production by specific taxa. These types of large-scale
experiments are a goal for the future. Here, we propose an ordered series of
experiments to strengthen and calibrate BrdU methods so that future experiments
can be conducted on sound theoretical and technical bases. This research should
provide a powerful new addition to the oceanographer's molecular biology
toolbox.