* 0242592
* Improvement of Microphysical PaRameterization through Observational Verfication Experiment (IMPROVE):  Data Analysis and Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* John Locatelli, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 05/31/2007
* USD 1,348,264.00

Regional mesoscale models are becoming the central tools for the operational
forecasting of local weather systems and quantitative precipitation forecasting
(QPF) for periods of 0-48 h. Over time model resolution has continuously
increased and model parameterizations of physical processes have become more
sophisticated. Even so, improvements in QPF have been comparatively slow. Apart
from resolution and initial conditions, the key model component that affects QPF
is the bulk microphysical parameterization (BMP) of cloud and precipitation
processes. There are considerable uncertainties in many of the assumptions on
which BMPs are based. The only way to clearly evaluate the performance of a BMP
(and to improve it) is to compare microphysical processes and predicted
hydrometeor distributions in model simulations with in situ (airborne) and
remotely sensed (e.g., radar) observations. In addition, it is critically
important that the microphysical measurements be obtained concurrently with
observations of wind, temperature and humidity, so that errors in the simulated
microphysics can be isolated from errors in these other predicted
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end, the Principal Investigator initiated a
study entitled "Improvement of Microphysical PaRameterization Through
Observational Verification Experiment "(IMPROVE) to compare representations of
cloud and precipitation processes in current mesoscale models with detailed
measurements and observations. Two field studies were conducted during the past
two winters: one examined precipitation produced by frontal systems as they
approached the coast of Washington; and the second examined the orographic
modulation of precipitation in situations of strong, moist airflow across the
Oregon Cascades barrier. A rich data set was gathered during a total of 26
Intensive Observing Periods (IOPs) that covered a wide variety of frontal and
orographic precipitation systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award the
Principal Investigator will continue with analysis of the IMPROVE data. First,
observational data will be reduced and analyzed to ascertain the physical
processes leading to the development of precipitation and to produce temporal
and spatial distributions of concentrations, size distributions, reflectivity
factor, etc., for the various hydrometeor species. Second (and parallel to the
observational analysis), mesoscale model simulations of the observed cases will
be performed with resolution of ~1 km, making use of four dimensional data
assimilation to produce the best possible simulations in terms of kinematic,
thermal, and moisture distributions. As with the observations, the model
simulations will be analyzed to ascertain temporal and spatial distributions of
the hydrometeor species and model sensitivity tests will be conducted to
ascertain the key physical processes that led to those distributions. Third, the
microphysical processes and hydrometeor distributions determined from
observations will be compared to those that occurred in the model simulations.
This will provide the basis for modifications to the BMP. Finally, these
modifications will be evaluated in model simulations of the wide variety of
storm systems studied during IMPROVE, as well as in daily operational forecast
runs of the University of Washington's real-time regional forecast system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of the research proposed here has direct
potential benefits to society through improved QPF. To further broaden the
benefits of the proposed research, and to increase general awareness of
mesoscale numerical weather prediction (NWP) models, a lay-accessible web site
on IMPROVE and NWP will be maintained. The use of NWP web sites in local K-12
science classrooms will be encouraged through interactions with teachers, and
the PI and staff will interact with the operational forecasting community to
help the transfer of research results to applications.&lt;br/&gt;