* 0242255
* Dependent Preferences and Over-Time Instability in Survey Responses
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Dean Lacy, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2006
* USD 199,977.00

People frequently give different answers at different times when asked their
opinions on important political issues. This tendency of the public to offer
unstable survey responses has led many public opinion researchers to conclude
that "Large portions of an electorate simply do not have meaningful beliefs,
even on issues that have formed the basis for intense political controversy
among elites for substantial periods of time" The reach of this conclusion
extends beyond public opinion polls, market research, and election surveys. If
so many people know so little about issues, the very foundations of democratic
government are called into question. Survey responses may be unstable over time
due to an inability of surveys as currently constructed to capture the
complexity of people's preferences. The investigator has found in a set of
limited surveys that many people have dependent preferences on a host of policy
issues. A person has dependent preferences when her preference on one issue
depends on the outcome of other issues. Yet most of the research in public
opinion assumes that people have independent preferences, or that their
preference on one issue is not linked to the outcome of other issues. The
researcher proposes a national, three-wave panel survey of 1200 adult US
citizens. The survey includes new questions to detect dependent preferences,
revealing the connections that people see across issues. The investigator
hypothesizes that respondents who have dependent preferences in the first wave
of the survey will be the most likely to change their survey responses over-time
as they react to a changing world. Two survey waves will occur before the
November 2004 national elections; one survey wave, after. The survey data will
reveal which people have dependent preferences, and for which issues. The
investigator also works on new statistical models to classify changes in survey
responses as random or systematic. As the researcher has shown in previous
research, unstable survey responses may be due to dependent preferences among
respondents. Even if dependent preferences are reasonable, well-formed, and
stable, they may compel people to exhibit survey responses that appear
irrational, ill-formed, and unstable. Third, uncovering dependent preferences
opens a new set of questions for survey researchers to explore. Who has
dependent preferences, and why? If this proposal is funded, the data gathered
will be available to the general public and scientific community, along with
data on respondents' demographic characteristics, information levels, attention
to politics and the media, political predispositions, and vote intention and
vote choice in a presidential election. These data may provide answers to many
puzzles in the literature on voting behavior, public opinion, and election
campaigns.