* 0242138
* The Problem of Realism in Defense Simulations
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Sharon Ghamari-Tabrizi, Ghamari-Tabrizi         Sharon         M
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2009
* USD 134,945.00

Nearly every aspect of American military practice transits through a simulation.
In the 1990s, modeling and simulation (M&S) acquired a central role in
individual and crew training, mission rehearsal en route to deployment,
operational planning, strategic and tactical analyses, testing and evaluation,
acquisitions and prototype development, and long-range future studies. With the
advent of M&S in the post-cold war decade, the adequacy of the correspondence
between the Pentagon's simulations and actual circumstances has been pushed
sharply into focus. This project is to study the meanings of realism as they are
understood by simulators in several labs and workplaces. In the course of a two-
year ethnography of three primary field sites, the project will examine the
meaning, function, effectiveness, and qualities of the realism in simulations or
war-games. Specifically, it will investigate how their perception of realism
shapes their assumptions, their design choices, and guides their interpretation
of their work. Sources for the information will be technical papers, meetings,
presentations, work-in-progress, and interviews. Particularly attention will be
paid to the evaluation of the accomplishments of simulation realism: how they
elucidate, justify and interpret the effectiveness of their products. Given the
interdisciplinary nature of the project teams, the project will track will how
they translate, interpret tacit assumptions across the boundaries of academic
disciplines, corporate cultures, and federal and individual armed service
guidelines and regulations. One aim is to evolve a contingent sense of the
circulation of the many kinds of capital that comprise
scientific/technical/cultural work; namely, the funds, expertise, authority,
alliances, as well as consensus and controversial ideas that give life to each
organization. Accordingly, participants will be asked to draw a map of the
specific constellation of internal and external interests and substantive
research problems at their particular site. These maps will orient to the
organizational culture of each locale and to the multiple allegiances with which
each production site for defense simulation must necessarily engage. The
research will add an ethnography of the social world of military R&D to the
existing literature in science studies. Other interested readers will be new
media scholars who explore distributed, interactive, and/or immersive cultures.
These latter typically do not address the scientific or technical apparatus of
these technologies. Moreover, among culture critics who have focused attention
on the dangers to civil society of the "cyborg soldier," none have had the
opportunity to spend months at a time in military laboratories and war-gaming
installations for intensive observation and reflection. This research will fuse
the two: providing an ethnographic study of military simulations that the
simulators are eager to have, while engaging the larger literatures on new
media, cyberculture, and the anthropology of technoscience. The ideas from the
project will be shared with the informants through informal talks and briefings
at my field sites, and through publications. Lectures on the work will be
presented to the faculty and students of the three doctoral programs in the US
in M&S: the Naval Post-Graduate School, the University of Central Florida, and
Old Dominion University. An important part of the project is to bring military
simulators into contact with scholars for face-to-face dialogue.