* 0242048
* The Seafloor Bio-Fuel Cell: Long-Term Power and Effects on Sedimentary Organic Matter
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Clare Reimers, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 02/28/2006
* USD 573,163.00

P.I. Reimers, Clare (OSU) Proposal #: 0242048&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Title: The Seafloor Bio-fuel Cell: Long-term Power and Effects on Sedimentary
Organic Matter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt; The long-term
goal of this research is to fully develop seafloor bio-fuel cells so they may
outperform batteries as the power source for many forms of autonomous marine
instrumentation. Electrochemical devices placed across the sediment-water
interface can harvest low- levels of power for long periods of time by using
natural, continually renewed, chemical resources in sediment as fuel and
dissolved seawater oxygen as oxidant. This new technology functions much like a
microbial fuel cell, taking advantage of the voltage gradient that occurs in the
top few centimeters of the sediment column. Bacteria that ordinarily shuttle
electrons to substrates such as FeOOH or S0 have been shown to attach to the
buried electrode (anode) as a biofilm. These microorganisms are suspected to
generate electricity by direct reduction of the anode. &lt;br/&gt; In this
proposal the PI outlines engineering and science goals to advance the seafloor
bio-fuel cell closer to future applications. Specifically the goals are to: (1)
assemble a surface-ship-deployable prototype that will lead to devices that are
both a power source and bottom weight for a sensor mooring, (2) run both short
and long-term performance tests of prototypes in environments targeted for ocean
observatory science, (3) evaluate the effects of continuous versus cyclic energy
harvesting on performance during tests, and (4) understand linkages between
performance, microbial enrichments and organic matter oxidation. An underlying
assumption that will determine the ultimate utility of these power sources is
that seafloor bio-fuel cells can tap nearly all the chemical energy stored as
organic matter in anoxic sediments. In other words, seafloor bio-fuel cells
should generate the same degree of organic matter remineralization as chemical
oceanographers have termed the oxygen effect. To test this premise and
accomplish these goals, the PIs propose two cruises to stations on the Oregon
continental shelf and rise. During each cruise measurements necessary to
quantify background sedimentary organic matter remineralization processes and
oxygen-exposure history will be performed. Four bio-fuel cell devices will be
deployed, recovered after 3-day tests then redeployed for up to one year at each
site. Sediments will also be collected for laboratory experiments with two-
chambered bio-fuel cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;