* 0242102
* GLOBEC-NEP: Topographic Control of Mesoscale Variability in the Gulf of Alaska
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* David Musgrave, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/2007
* USD 370,211.00

This project addresses studies of the physical and biological distributions and
processes and their effect on juvenile salmon recruitment on the Gulf of Alaska
shelf. The overriding theme of the project is that along-shelf and cross-shelf
mesoscale structures are due to bathymetric control of the currents. Physical
oceanographic characteristics associated with this are the Alaska Coastal
Current, its offshore excursions in the Seward Eddy and Seward Counter Eddy, the
shelfbreak front, slope eddies and meanders and the deep flow. These features
affect the transport and distribution of deep-water zooplankton that are alleged
to be an important food source for juvenile salmon and may determine their
survival. An undulating, underwater, towed vehicle (SeaSoar) is being used to
continuously map salinity, temperature, depth and bio-optical properties.
Surface samples of the above, nutrients, and chlorophyll fluorescence are being
measured continuously using similar sensors. The PIs are using an Acoustic
Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP) to measure along- and cross-track current
velocities to 150 m depth. The PIs will calibrate the above with on-station
samples of salinity, temperature, nutrients and phytoplankton. The broader
impacts of this study include training of two PhD students in multidisciplinary
oceanography and a better understanding of the effects of oceanographic effects
on salmon variability in the Gulf of Alaska.