* 0242292
* High-Resolution 3-D Simulations of the Thermospheric Response to Magnetic Storms, Substorm Surges and the Diffuse Aurora
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Lawrence Lyons, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 264,519.00

The investigators will study the response of the E region neutral thermosphere
to enhanced auroral forcing. In particular, the aim is to explain and understand
phenomena observed within the dawn and dusk recovery phase diffuse aurora, and
the thermospheric response to expansion phase surges and new phenomena observed
during large magnetic storms. These topics involve areas that are of importance
to the space physics and aeronomy community where knowledge is limited. Previous
work entailed the simulation of thermospheric response to the dawn sector
diffuse aurora using a 3-dimensional (3-D), high resolution, non-hydrostatic,
composition-dependent model. The model was able to reproduce the very strong
shears in the region of the dawn sector diffuse aurora and unstable regions
below the shears, within the same altitude range as those found in the ARIA
(Atmospheric Response in Aurora) rocket measurements. The results of the
previous research project suggested that propagating tidal modes play an
important role in producing the observed structure, in addition to geomagnetic
forcing. In this study, the investigators will model the effects of enhanced
auroral forcing on the region of the dawn and dusk sector diffuse aurora, for a
series of rocket campaigns, using the 3-D high resolution model. The model will
be used to determine the mechanisms responsible for producing the observed
structures in both the dawn and dusk diffuse aurora, how and why the dusk
response differs from the dawn response, the effects of changes in the
interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) on wind magnitudes and structures, and the
sensitivity to changes in conditions of solar and geomagnetic activity and tidal
forcing. The investigators will also determine the dynamical, thermal, and
compositional response of the E region thermosphere to the intense precipitation
associated with expansion phase auroral surges, as well as the thermospheric
response to recently observed large magnetic storms which show characteristics
inconsistent with the effects of substorms. The results of the research will be
made available to the scientific community, and will include systematic details
of the response of the winds, composition and temperature in the E region
thermosphere to the enhanced auroral forcing associated with magnetic storms and
substorms for varying solar and geomagnetic activity, IMF orientation, and tidal
forcing. The model will also be made available for use in collaborative research
projects and for research and teaching studies involving graduate and
undergraduate students.