* 0242243
* Mixed Messages in Caterpillar Saliva: Disruptive and Deceptive Signals for Plant Defenses
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Gary Felton, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 05/31/2003
* USD 11,802.00

Saliva of blood-feeding arthropods injected into their vertebrate hosts contains
many chemical compounds used to prevent the clotting of blood, which are
important in evading host detection. Although both plants and animals produce
diverse defenses against their parasites, and in stark contrast to the blood
feeding arthropods, very little is known about how the saliva of caterpillars
interfere with host plant defense responses. This project will determine if
caterpillar saliva assists in evasion of plant defenses by observing whether
caterpillar saliva: 1) attenuates the enzymatic defenses of the host plant
ingested by caterpillars, and 2) disrupts plant signaling pathways involved in
defense induction. Experiments are designed to test the ability of saliva and
the predominant salivary enzyme in the corn earworm, glucose oxidase, to affect
transport and activity of the defense signal peptide, systemin, and biosynthesis
of jasmonic acid in plants. Both systemin and jasmonic acid are known to mediate
increased production of oxidative enzymes and insect resistance. The ability of
salivary glucose oxidase to induce salicylic acid production, required for the
expression of systemic acquired resistance against plant pathogens, inhibition
of jasmonic acid synthesis, and subsequent insect resistance will also be
tested. Several caterpillar-plant combinations will be used to test the
importance of these mechanisms. Completion of these objectives will provide a
conceptual framework for the comparison of adaptations plant-feeding arthropods
use against their hosts to those of blood feeding arthropods. These experiments
may furnish the first evidence that herbivore saliva plays a role in suppressing
host enzymatic defenses and disrupting defense signal pathways used by plants to
resist herbivore attack.