* 0242134
* Equilibrium and Nonequilibrium Signatures of the Quark Gluon Plasma at High Temperature and Density
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Daniel Boyanovsky, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 05/31/2007
* USD 235,729.00

The new generation of ultrarelativistic heavy ion colliders, RHIC at Brookhaven
and LHC at CERN&lt;br/&gt;will open a window to the Early Universe when it was
one microsecond old. In these experiments&lt;br/&gt;a new state of matter-the
quark gluon plasma- will be formed. This state prevailed when
the&lt;br/&gt;Universe was younger than a microsecond with temperatures larger
than 1012 K. This novel state&lt;br/&gt;is also conjectured to exist at the core
of the densest stars in the Universe-neutron stars- and to be&lt;br/&gt;the
primary constituent of hypothetical quark stars. The density in these
astrophysical objects is&lt;br/&gt;about 1015gr/cc, these stars are the remnant
of the most powerful events in the present
Universesupernovae&lt;br/&gt;explosions. The properties of neutron stars and the
existence of quark stars is currently&lt;br/&gt;being studied by a host of
satellite missions: HST, Rosat, Chandra, XMM-Newton and
forthcoming&lt;br/&gt;neutrino telescopes.&lt;br/&gt;Assessing potential
observables and experimental signatures of the quark gluon plasma
requires&lt;br/&gt;studying the strong interactions in an unprecedented regime
of temperatures and densities. Furthermore,&lt;br/&gt;in ultrarelativistic heavy
ion collisions the quark gluon plasma is expected to be a
transient&lt;br/&gt;state with an unprecedented short lifetime of the order of
10-22 seconds, undergoing a phase transition&lt;br/&gt;to a phase in which
quarks and gluons are con.ned inside hadrons. Thus the challenge is
to&lt;br/&gt;extract observational signatures fromthe short-lived and rapidly
evolving plasma. The focus and&lt;br/&gt;goal of this proposal is to implement
the methods that we developed during the last several years&lt;br/&gt;to study
equilibriumand non-equilibriumexp erimental signatures of the quark gluon plasma
and&lt;br/&gt;the phase transitions in ultrarelativistic heavy ion collisions
and in compact stars. In particular&lt;br/&gt;we focus on: i) electromagnetic
signatures (photons and lepton pairs), ii) transport phenomena&lt;br/&gt;and
properties of .uctuations as potential observables of the phase transitions,
iii) astrophysical&lt;br/&gt;processes that lead to observational signals of
quark matter in strongly magnetized neutron stars&lt;br/&gt;and quark stars:
photon and neutrino emissions.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual challenge: This is a truly
interdisciplinary programat the forefront of nuclear&lt;br/&gt;and particle
physics and astrophysics and cosmology. Many of the methods, in particular
transport&lt;br/&gt;phenomena strongly out of equilibrium also overlaps with
timely problems in condensed matter&lt;br/&gt;physics: femtosecond relaxation in
semiconductors. Thus we expect that the program will also&lt;br/&gt;have a broad
impact in many areas. The possibility of opening a window to the Early
Universe&lt;br/&gt;with earth-bound accelerators and studying the densest stars,
the remnants of the most energetic&lt;br/&gt;events in the Universe-Supernovae
explosions-is clearly one of the most fascinating endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;Broad
interest: The appeal of studying the Early Universe and some of the most
exotic&lt;br/&gt;objects in the present Universe goes beyond the scientists
working in these areas, and reaches to&lt;br/&gt;the broad audience. The general
public is fascinated about the latest discoveries in cosmology
and&lt;br/&gt;particle physics, and eager to listen and learn more. The
symbiosis between cosmology, astrophysics&lt;br/&gt;and nuclear and particle
physics lends itself to being an e.ective vehicle to transmit the new
and&lt;br/&gt;fascinating discoveries and to highlight the importance of the
di.erent areas to unravel the ultimate&lt;br/&gt;mysteries of the
Universe.&lt;br/&gt;The projects described in this proposal are a continuation
of the research done under the&lt;br/&gt;previous Grant: N.S.F. PHY-9988720
(5/31/00-5/31/03) and is estimated for a period of three&lt;br/&gt;years.