* 0242440
* Affinity Interactions in Capillary Separations
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Robert Kennedy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2006
* USD 395,000.00

In this project supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
Professor Robert Kennedy and co-workers at the University of Florida will
develop novel analytical methods that allow proteins to be detected and
quantified based on their affinity for natural binding partners. In the methods,
fluorescently-labeled ligands for classes of proteins will be added to samples
and the resulting complexes will be separated by capillary electrophoresis and
detected with laser-induced fluorescence. Binding systems that will be
investigated include labeled GTP to detect G-proteins, NADH to detect
dehydrogenases, labeled phosphopeptides to detect proteins containing src
homology 2 domains, and src homology 2 domains to detect phosphorylated
proteins. The method is expected to provide high sensitivity (attomole detection
limits are expected), high speed (analysis on the second to minute time scale
are possible) and facile automation. The methods are expected to be useful for
tracking the expression level of proteins or for discovery of novel proteins and
binding partners of proteins. As signal transduction in biological systems
relies extensively on molecular recognition, these affinity methods are expected
to be especially useful in experiments aimed at uncovering the regulation of
receptor-mediated changes in cells. The methods will be tested on pancreatic
beta-cells where they may ultimately be useful in developing a better
understanding of insulin secretion &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sequencing of the
genome has provided a blueprint for life. The blueprint is actually the code for
all of the proteins that are made in a cell. Cells are not readily defined
however even by all of the proteins that they make. What are the functions of
the proteins? How do they interact with each other? How are the interactions and
functions controlled? A short answer to these questions is that proteins are
controlled by their affinity i.e., ability to bind selected targets or partners
within the cell. In this project, a method is sought that allows proteins to be
rapidly and sensitively detected based on their affinity for a particular
molecule. Importantly, the method will allow all the proteins with a given
affinity to be separated and detected. The new method will be at least 1000
times as sensitive as existing methods and can be performed in seconds or
minutes rather than hours. This new method will allow new proteins or protein
mixtures to be rapidly screened for certain binding properties or functions. It
will also allow classes of known proteins to be rapidly assayed. The speed and
sensitivity of the assays will enable applications in diverse fields such as
drug discovery, signal transduction (i.e., understanding intracellular chemical
communication), and biotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;