* 0242626
* Foundational Tools for Data Literacy
* EHR,DRL
* 04/15/2003,11/30/2007
* Christopher Hancock, TERC Inc
* Continuing grant
* Michael Haney
* 11/30/2007
* USD 2,525,317.00

This two project would revise and expand an existing software package, TableTop,
as well as field test and disseminate tools that support students in K-12 in
data representation and analysis. It specifically deals with data literacy and
provides tools that are age appropriate. Both a general-purpose data tool that
would be usable across a range of student activities and the supporting
instructional and assessment materials will be developed.

The project builds on the earlier TableTop that is used in an estimated 85,000
classrooms. The original package is user-friendly and depends on visual
representations, icons, and batched operations. The proposed project will
produce an expanded set of version for various platforms and at level
appropriate for different grade levels. It will include a revised and expanded
interface that incorporates many of the features requested by teachers. It will
support sharing across the web, easy access to many formats of data, an
interface with Google, and the capability to work with various data collection
devices such as PDA's.

This project has the potential to reach large numbers of students through a
dissemination plan that supports curriculum developers incorporating these
materials in their courses. The letters of support and the list of curriculum
collaborators indicate that the project could be wide reaching, including both
mathematics and science, K-12.