* 0242139
* Tracers of Biological Productivity and Gas Exchange
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Steven Emerson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2007
* USD 724,993.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0242139&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The export of
carbon from the surface of the ocean is one of the processes controlling the
partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) of the atmosphere, which greatly
influences the climate of the Earth. Changes in atmospheric pCO2 over glacial
time scales are often interpreted as a response to changes in the ocean's
biological carbon pump. Models of the carbon pump are limited by our
understanding of mechanisms that control it in different areas of the ocean.
Satellite color images hold great promise for determining the biological pump
globally, but only if the images can be ground truthed by field measurements. To
date this calibration has been achieved in only four places in the ocean: the
long-term time series locations and parts of the Equator.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at the University of
Washington will develop experimental methods of improving our knowledge of the
ocean.s biological carbon pump. The research program is twofold. First they will
deploy four oxygen sensors and a GTD on the new mooring at HOT to measure a
profile of O2 in the euphotic zone and the surface concentrations of N2. They
believe that this will be sufficient to determine the net biological oxygen
production. Two methods will be tested for calibrating the oxygen sensors in
situ. This research will develop methods to determine the oxygen mass balance
(and hence biological carbon pump) on moorings at other locations in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second, and much smaller, aspect of the project
builds on the research team's analytical ability to determine N2, Ar and Ne in
seawater. They will conduct a field program to study the concentrations of these
gases as a function of wind speed on several short cruises in the Drake Passage
of the Southern Ocean. The goal is to develop a correlation between bubble flux
and wind speed. This knowledge could be used to characterize the bubble process
in locations where it is not possible to measure these gases and to improve
estimates of the biologically produced oxygen flux from the ocean using
climatological surface ocean oxygen concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of this proposal include the benefits to society that will result from
understanding the marine biological pump well enough to incorporate it into
ocean-atmosphere models that will be used to predict future climate. The
proposal also promotes education of a graduate student who will work on the
project. &lt;br/&gt;