* 0242166
* Polarimetric and Spaced Antenna Velocity Measurements of Severe Storms and Tornadoes with Mobile Radars
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* David McLaughlin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 04/30/2006
* USD 480,626.00

The research supported under this award is focused on the development of
advanced, mobile radar systems to be used in meteorological research. Specific
research efforts are the following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Implement and
validate a dual-polarized spaced-antennae transverse velocity measurement
technique with the X-band radar to measure scatterer velocity component
perpendicular to the beam pointing direction. This technique, in combination
with conventional Doppler measurements, will lead to the collection of two-
dimensional velocity field data with a single, spaced-antennae Doppler radar
system. The intellectual merit of this effort is significant, as two-dimensional
velocity measurements have been difficult and only been accomplished with coarse
resolution, vertical-pointing wind profilers, coordinated measurement with
multiple radar systems or with a scanning radar which requires the assumption of
a uniform wind field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Develop and test polarimetric
calibration techniques and rain rate and hail mapping algorithms for the X-band
radar. The intellectual merit of this research effort is the potential for
quantitative precipitation mapping at a spatial resolution that is not possible
with the more common S-band weather radar systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Field
test and collect high temporal resolution (10-20 second update) volume (0-24 deg
elevation, 360 deg azimuth, to 30 km range) reflectivity and Doppler velocity
field data in storms with a mobile X-band phased array Doppler radar system,
which is being partially developed under support from the Office of Naval
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this research, Dr. Pazmany will
coordinate his activities with Dr. Bluestein of the University of Oklahoma
(ATM-0241037). Dr. Bluestein is an atmospheric scientist and the primary
objective of his research is to use observations and numerical models to study
various aspects of severe storms and tornadoes. Dr. Pazmany and his advanced
radars will contribute to the observational base to be used by Dr. Bluestein.
Due to this joint research effort, it is anticipated that the broader impacts of
the proposed activity will ultimately lead to a more accurate prediction of
severe weather events.