* 0242623
* Conjugated Diruthenium Metallaynes:   Monomers, Dimers and Oligomers
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2003,11/30/2005
* Tong Ren, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 11/30/2005
* USD 435,000.00

The Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program supports the
research of Tong Ren, Department of Chemistry, University of Miami,
investigating highly conjugated oligomeric diruthenium metallaynes. These
consist of diruthenium "paddle wheels" alternating with polyalkynes. The
diruthenium unit is supported by bridging ligands such as 2-anilinopyridinate,
N,N'diarylformamidinate, or N, N'-dimethylbenzamidinate. These dimers are linked
by two, four, or six carbon bridges. The ruthenium units may improve electronic
communication and delocalization in the oligomer. The multiple redox states
accessible by these metal-metal bonded species allows interesting magnetic,
electrophoric and chromophoric properties. Ren is also investigating the use of
terminally functionalized oligomers that serve as molecular "alligator clips",
making a nanoscale electrical connection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These compounds
are being studied as potential "molecular wires", single molecules that can
conduct electricity in a nanosized electronic circuit. Fundamental studies of
electronic communication and conductance in these molecules may lead to
molecular electronic devices. Scientists working on this project will learn
modern synthetic and characterization skills as well as nanopatterning and
nanojunction techniques. &lt;br/&gt;