* 0242555
* Tres Zapotes Archaeological Project 2003
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Christopher Pool, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2005
* USD 194,848.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Christopher A. Pool and his
colleagues will conduct a two-year project of excavation and laboratory analysis
at the archaeological site of Tres Zapotes, Veracruz, Mexico. With an
archaeological record that spans the two millennia between 1000 B.C. and A.D.
1000, Tres Zapotes is the key site for understanding the emergence of Classic
period civilization from ancient Olmec roots in Mexico's southern Gulf Coast
lowlands. Olmec chiefdoms flourished from 1500 to 400 B.C., creating
Mesoamerica's first great sculptural tradition and establishing social,
political, and religious patterns found among such later civilizations as the
Classic Maya. Such was the impressiveness of Olmec culture and the extent of its
influence that some scholars regard it as Mesoamerica's "Mother Culture".
Research at major sites in the eastern part of the Olmec heartland has long
emphasized the collapse of this precocious culture around 400 B.C. Dr. Pool's
previous research at Tres Zapotes paints a very different picture, however. Far
from suffering a decline, this regional Olmec capital grew to cover 2 square
miles (500 ha) between 400 B.C. and A.D. 300, becoming the largest center of the
succeeding Epi-Olmec culture in the southern Gulf lowlands. Among the
significant accomplishments of Epi-Olmec culture were the development of one of
the earliest and most sophisticated writing systems in the Americas, the
invention of the equally sophisticated Long Count calendar later employed by the
Classic Maya, and the formalization of the political institution of kingship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Pool and his colleagues will investigate the political
and economic processes that fostered these cultural developments. Specifically,
the project tests a "confederation" model of Tres Zapotes political economy in
which leaders of competing political factions united to rule the Tres Zapotes
polity by emphasizing a corporate strategy of reciprocal obligations and
communal ritual while monopolizing the ideological and economic sources of power
within their respective factions. Excavations of Olmec and Epi-Olmec contexts in
formal civic-ceremonial complexes and craft production areas will provide the
data to test this model. Excavations in the formal complexes are designed to
recover information on the degree to which they were contemporaneous, variation
in their functions through time, differential access to valued resources, and
the symbolic content of artifacts and public monuments. Excavations in craft
production areas, including those attached to formal complexes and non-elite
households, will assess variation in the organization and products of
manufacture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will
shed new light on a crucial but poorly understood period of ancient Mesoamerican
history, and it will contribute to theory on the role of political economies in
the evolution of complex society and the formation of states. Its broader
impacts include the training of Mexican and North American students in field and
analytical techniques, the fostering of international collaboration with Mexican
professionals, and it will enhance the local infrastructure for future
research.&lt;br/&gt;