* 0242321
* Collaborative Research: Larval behavior and supply-side ecology: Consequences of dissolved verus adsorbed chemical cues
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Richard Zimmer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/2008
* USD 292,703.00

Supply-side ecology has punctuated the role of large-scale physical-
oceanographic processes in determining recruitment success. Although large-scale
flows, such as upwelling, thermal fronts, tidal bores, and storms, could
episodically bathe the shoreline with larvae, they are not entirely responsible
for localized variations in larval supply and settlement. These smaller-scale
distributions are due, in part, to interactions between planktonic larval
behaviors and the flow regime. No longer considered a novelty associated
strictly with laboratory still-water conditions, waterborne chemical cues have
growing visibility as causative factors in larval settlement over a range of
hydrodynamic regimes and taxa. Because of technology limitations, however,
previous studies have demonstrated only the potential capacities of dissolved
signal molecules on behavior or settlement. They have neither provided a
mechanistic basis for broader-scale ecological effects nor achieved dynamic
similarity between dissolved chemical environments of experimental and natural
field settings. A synthetic theory is therefore yet to emerge on interactions
between the transport of waterborne compounds, behavioral responses of the
larvae, and dynamics of the flow regime. This research project explores the
ecological relevance of chemical signal molecules in a remarkable biological
system, where alternative cue types and larval developmental morphs occur within
a single species and habitat. Moreover, novel research methods are applied to
overcome many classic stumbling blocks in larval-settlement research. Use of
reliable chemical markers for the natural cue, non-invasive methods for
computer/video imaging larvae in moving water, and controlled cue release from a
polymer gel will facilitate flume and field research that is dynamically scaled
for both the chemical and physical regimes. The research involves, first, field
measurements of the naturally occurring ranges in dissolved cue concentrations
and flow variables. Second, flume studies quantify behavioral responses of
larvae to the waterborne cue, and test experimentally effects of the two cue
types (waterborne and surface-adsorbed), separately and together, on settlement.
These studies build toward the third, most ecologically meaningful research
component, field experimental manipulations aimed at resolving how dissolved
versus adsorbed cues determine juvenile distributions in nature. This research
links mechanisms acting at small scales in the water column with settlement on
the bed, passive transport with active behavior, and chemical ecology with
hydrodynamics. The work will help fill the gap between relatively large-scale
supply-side processes and individual-scale exploration of the bed. Given the
highly interdisciplinary nature of this research, graduate and undergraduate
students will be stimulated to cross disciplinary lines and embrace new
technology as they develop into young scientists. Students from underrepresented
groups will be employed through the CARE and LEADS Programs at UCLA and the CEA-
CREST center at CSULA, and they will be encouraged to participate in both flume
and field work. Further, this project will foster collaboration among two
professors at a Ph.D.-granting institution (UCLA) and a new faculty member at a
principally undergraduate university (CSULA), having 84% minority enrollment.