* 0242324
* Proxy development and paleoclimate of El'gygytgyn Crater Lake, NE Siberia
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Julie Brigham-Grette, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 12/31/2005
* USD 99,317.00

This award will be funded by the Arctic Natural Sciences Program and the
Paleoclimate Program in the Division of Atmospheric Sciences. This is a
collaborative proposal by the Principal Investigator at the University of
Massachusetts, with Russian colleagues in Magadan, St. Petersburg, and
Vladivostok, and German colleagues at the Alfred Wegener Institute and
University of Leipzeg. Lake El'gygytgyn is located within an 18 km wide
meteorite impact crater that formed 3.6 million years ago in a remote part of
northeastern Siberia (Chukotka) and in a region of situated between two robust
atmospheric features, the Siberian High and Aleutian Low. The strength of the
Aleutian Low is intimately linked to systematic changes in the tropics as
reflected by analyses of variations in the robust Pacific-North American pattern
(PNA). The systematics that produce the PNA pattern are believed to have robust
linkages over long time scales with global circulation, allowing an evaluation
of inter-hemispheric teleconnections under variable boundary
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;In 1998, a 300,000-year sediment-core climate-record was
retrieved from Lake El'gygytgyn, the oldest terrestrial Arctic record yet
recovered. This record reveals reversals between oxic and anoxic lake-bottom
conditions, conceivably driven by the presence or absence of permanent ice cover
through summer and linked to changing regional atmospheric conditions.
Therefore, it is important to understand the dynamics of the lake ice,
specifically determining the environmental conditions in which it forms and
melts and its effects on lake circulation. &lt;br/&gt;This research project will
provide an understanding the post-depositional modification of the sediments and
controls on a number of proxies yielding a climatic signal of hemispheric
significance. Future field programs will incorporate the acquisition of new
gravity cores for study of the sedimentology and mineralogy along with the
biogeochemistry of the organic matter, and the isotopic geochemistry of the lake
waters and sediment porewaters. These modern to recent process linkages will
then be compared to the paleorecord to better quantify reliable core proxies of
lake biogeochemistry at time of deposition. One of the primary goals of this
project is to confirm or revise the proxy geochemistry from the lake record to
consider why shifts in atmospheric circulation (as inferred from some matches
with the Greenland Ice core record) persist long enough that they are recorded
in a lake in Siberia. One does not expect the entire Arctic to respond in
synchroneity, so it is important that records from different parts of the Arctic
be compared to more fully understand how changes in one part of the Earth system
impact other parts of the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;