* 0242607
* Shape Memory Alloy Activated High Pressure Optical Cell for Biological Studies
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Parkson Chong, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 05/31/2008
* USD 272,952.00

This award supports the development of high-pressure optical cells (HPOC) whose
design incorporates the use of shape memory alloys (SMA) to facilitate the
separation and the mixing of reactants. The HPOC will be constructed using an
activated plug mechanism that separates, for example, an enzyme from its
substrate. After loading, the optical cell will be brought to the desired
pressure and temperature with the reactants still separated. At this point, an
electric signal will trigger a spring-like mechanism made of SMA that pulls the
plug and allows mixing of the reactants. Concomitantly, a periodic shape change
of the SMA will provide agitation and pumping, thus serving to thoroughly mix
the components. The design goal will be to achieve complete mixing within 100
milliseconds of the plug pull-off. If fully successful, the new HPOC will
represent an significant improvement over pressure cells in current use. The
effort will involve two faculty members, one at Temple University and one at
Drexel University, with complementary expertise in high pressure studies of
biochemical systems and materials science. Both will work closely in the design
of the SMA-activated plug mechanism as well as the testing, interfacing, and
calibration of the instrument. This project will offer a unique opportunity for
training graduate students at the interfaces of engineering, biochemistry,
biophysics, and hyperbaric biology, and will involve several undergraduate
students from the Temple University-Community College of Philadelphia bridge
program. Moreover, through this project, a new course module entitled "High
Pressure Biology, Physics, and Instrumentation" will be developed by the PI and
Co-PI for graduate and upper-level undergraduate students enrolled in mechanical
engineering, materials, chemistry, physics, bioengineering, and various life-
science departments at both institutions.