* 0242546
* Increasing US Participation in the 2nd International Steroids and Nervous System Conference, February 22-26, 2003; Torino, Italy
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Cheryl Frye, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 02/29/2004
* USD 15,474.00

This symposium is on "Increasing U.S. participation in the 2nd International
Steroids and Nervous System Conference". This conference will update our current
knowledge by describing new research on the relationships of steroid hormones
synthesized in different organs and the nervous system. Participants in this
program will include undergraduate students, graduate students, post-doctoral
fellows, and faculty. The symposium will engage participants in discussions
regarding novel aspects of glucocorticoids and mineralcorticoids, non-classical
mechanisms of steroid action, steroid regulation of reproduction, glial cells as
targets for steroids, and the behavioral effects of steroids. Symposia, poster
presentations, meet the professor lunches, and organized discussions on
international research opportunities will encourage interactions between
students, junior scientists, and senior scientists that are internationally
recognized for their accomplishments. The organizing committee is committed to
fostering the development of young scientists. Funds will help defray travel
costs for participants to attend the meeting. The impact of this will extend to
numerous fields of study, such as neuroendocrinology, behavioral neuroscience,
animal behavior, and population biology. This meeting is a follow-up to the 1st
International Meeting on Steroids and the Nervous System (NSF Supported), which
was an unqualified success. Proceedings from the present meeting will be
published as an issue of The Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences.