* 0242287
* Special Session on International Research Collaboration, MRS Meeting, Boston, Massachusetts
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2003
* Alexander King, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 11/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

This project is an information exchange between research managers and policy-
makers from several countries in the form of a workshop, held at the Fall
Meeting of the Materials Research Society (MRS), in 2002. Mechanisms of
governmental research funding will be highlighted, along with a description of
the technical areas (related to materials) that are of interest, for each of the
participating countries. This information will form the basis of discussions of
the mechanisms by which joint research programs can be created, in which funding
is provided for the researchers principally by their own respective governments.
The workshop sessions will be open to the attendees of the MRS Fall Meeting, who
will be active participants in the discussion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: It is anticipated that this project will result in improved
articulation of research funding programs in different nations, significantly
facilitating the creation of joint research programs in Materials Science &amp;
Engineering, between US-based researchers and those in other countries. It will
encourage the creation of jointly-formulated proposals which allow the
leveraging of research assets and expertise found diversely around the globe.
The resulting experience with international collaborative research will form a
strong basis for the extension of the models used here to all research subject
areas supported by the various research agencies involved.&lt;br/&gt;