* 0242105
* Society for Risk Analysis First World Congress on Risk, to be held Brussels, Belgium, June 22-25, 2003
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2005
* Robin Cantor, Society For Risk Analysis
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2005
* USD 80,000.00

The International Society for Risk Analysis ("SRA") has begun the groundwork for
a series of World Congresses on Risk Analysis in the 21st century. In
partnership with other scientific, governmental and professional organizations
interested in risk, SRA is launching the first of this series in 2003. The First
World Congress will be held at the Sheraton Brussels, June 22-25, 2003.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unifying theme for the First World Congress is "Risk
and Governance," which reflects the worldwide trend toward making better use of
risk-oriented concepts, tools, and processes (derived from both research and
practice) in public decision making and risk management. Specific objectives of
the First World Congress are to (1) stimulate dialogue on emerging risk issues
of worldwide interest, (2) share insights about analytic methods and decision
processes used in different regions of the world, (3) demonstrate and
disseminate recent advances in risk assessment, management, and communication,
and (4) build an organized, international community of individuals dedicated to
advancing the state of the art and promoting appropriate use of risk-related
tools, concepts, and procedures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ensure broad
participation by various critical communities and decision makers interested in
risk analysis at the First World Congress, SRA will use support from the
National Science Foundation to provide travel stipends in three key
areas:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Travel and lodging support for plenary speakers,
breakout leaders, and rapporteurs; &lt;br/&gt;2. Travel and lodging stipends for
participants from developing countries and Central and Eastern European
countries; and&lt;br/&gt;3. Travel and lodging stipends for junior faculty or
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;