* 0242286
* Lake-Sediment Records of Holocene Droughts, Indigenous Agriculture, and Prehispanic Vegetation and Fire Regimes in Northwestern Costa Rica
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Sally Horn, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2005
* USD 197,724.00

Stratigraphic analyses of sediment profiles from lakes and wetlands provide key
data for understanding long-term interactions between humans and the natural
environment. This research project focuses on the development, interpretation,
and evaluation of lake-sediment records from six lakes on the seasonally dry
lower Pacific slope of Volcan Miravalles in the Cordillera de Guanacaste of
northwestern Costa Rica. Sediment cores have already been recovered from the
lakes, which formed as long ago as 8,000 years in association with lava and
lahar flows from the volcano. The researchers will analyze sediment
stratigraphy, macroscopic and microscopic charcoal, and pollen and diatom
assemblages to document Holocene climate, vegetation, and fire regimes. They
also will document prehistoric and historic human landscape modifications within
and surrounding the lake basins, including the timing of the initiation and
spread of maize cultivation. The researchers will interpret lake-sediment
records in light of information on modern plant species distributions, modern
pollen and diatom assemblages, and local and regional archaeology to reconstruct
the environmental histories of individual lakes and watersheds. Reconstructions
from each lake will be compared with each other and with paleoecological records
of environmental history from other sites in Costa Rica and elsewhere in Central
America. These comparisons will enable to researchers to differentiate among
signals of natural vs. human-induced environmental change, to assess the degree
of spatial variability in the histories of environments and human impacts, and
to explore possible links between climate and cultural history. A key objective
of the research is to determine whether the lake-sediment records preserve
evidence of the late Holocene droughts documented in northern Central America,
and if so, how the timing and ecological and human impacts of these drought
episodes compare. The project should help examine, for example, whether Holocene
climate change had a major impact on cultural development in northwestern Costa
Rica, as is believed to have been the case in the Yucatan region. Another
objective of the research is to provide historical context for current land-
management plans aimed at restoring tropical dry forest ecosystems degraded by
agricultural development in recent centuries. Such efforts focus on fire
exclusion as a primary means to restore forests to pre-disturbance conditions,
but long-term records of fire and vegetation that might justify (or prompt
revision) of this management approach are lacking.

Past climate dynamics are the key to the present and future. Natural climate
variation of the past affected natural and human systems as will future human-
induced climate change. Tropical climate dynamics are crucial to basic
understanding of global dynamics, yet they remain poorly understood themselves.
This project will improve scientific knowledge of tropical climate and ecosystem
history and of relationships between natural environmental change and
variability and human culture. The results will also help to inform current land
management in northwestern Costa Rica. The research undertaken in this project
will provide educational opportunities for several graduate and undergraduate
students and for a K-12 teacher who will participate in the project's field
work.