* 0242535
* Laboratory Measurements of Heat and Salt Fluxes in Double-Diffusive Interleaving
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Ruby Krishnamurti, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2007
* USD 178,399.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0242535&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two classes of
experiments on doubly diffusive intrusions will be conducted in the laboratory.
The first is the intrusive interleaving produced in the classical arrangement of
property discontinuity when a sluice-gate is withdrawn which had separated salt-
stratified water from sugar-stratified water. (Salt in the laboratory experiment
is used as a proxy for cold in the ocean, slow-diffusing sugar as a proxy for
ocean salt.). The second is a new arrangement in which a continuous horizontal
gradient of salinity is density-compensated by an opposing continuous horizontal
gradient of sugar, and interleaving intrusions grow everywhere simultaneously.
These experiments will be performed for doudbly-stable, for salt-fingering, and
for diffusive stratification. For both classes of flows modern quantitative
measurements techniques such as particle-Image Velocimetry for horizontal and
vertical components, color polarimetry and synthetic Schlieren for sugar
concentration and density field will be used to determine the horizontal and
vertical fluxes of temperature (T) and salt (S), as they vary with imposed
gradients. The anticipated results of this study are (1) a determination of flux
laws relating fluxes of T and S to imposed gradients; (2) a determination of
relationship of horizontal to vertical fluxes and (3) a diagnosis of instability
mechanisms and test of linear stability theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
discovery of flux laws which can be scaled up to determine the magnitude of
horizontal mixing in oceanic fronts is anticipated. Since the resulting modified
waters participate in the global thermohaline circulation, the degree of mixing
modifies the poleward transport of heat which is a crucial component of the
consequences of global warming. Teaching and training will be promoted through
the integration of research results and use of the laboratory facilities in many
layers of teaching, including graduate students and undergraduate Honors Science
Seminar students projects and an international partnership with the Dept. of
Environmental Engineering, University of Genoa.&lt;br/&gt;