* 0242806
* Seventh International Conference on Southern Hemisphere Meteorology and Oceanography; Wellington, New Zealand; March 24 - 28, 2003
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Ronald McPherson, American Meteorological Society
* Standard Grant
* Lydia Gates
* 01/31/2004
* USD 25,000.00

The award provides travel support for U.S. and foreign students and postdoctoral
researchers to attend the Seventh International Conference on Southern
Hemisphere Meteorology and Oceanography (7ICSHMO), to be held in Wellington, New
Zealand from March 24-28, 2003. The award will be administered by the American
Meteorological Society (Dr. Ron McPherson, Exective Director), and will provide
travel assistance to young researchers who would otherwise be unable to attend
the meeting. The conference themes include a) Southern oceans and air-sea
interaction, 2) Atmospheric chemistry in the Southern Hemisphere, 3) Tropical-
extratropical interactions and teleconnections in the Southern Hemisphere, 4)
Role of cryosphere in southern climate, 5) South American monsoon, and 6)
Southern climate and society issues. The 7ICSHMO meeting will be held at the Te
Papa National Museum of New Zealand, in Wellington. The lead organizers of the
workshop are Dr. George Kiladis (NOAA Aeronomy, Boulder) and Dr. Jim Renwick
(National Institute for Water and Atmospheric Research, New Zealand. The
workshop format includes 5 keynote talks: Kevin Trenberth (USA, NCAR Climate and
Global Dynamics Division); Chris Folland (UK, British Meteorological Office),
Stephen Rintoul (Australia, CSIRO Division of Oceanography), Dean Roemmich (USA,
Scripps Institution of Oceanography), Per Nyberg (USA, Cray Research), and
possibly, Anne Thompson (USA, NASA/GSFC). The 5-day meeting will run two
parallel sessions, and the 16-member strong program committee comprising of
leading scientists from the United States, Brazil, Botswana, New Zealand,
Australia, and Argentina, has put together exciting sessions for the benefit of
mainstream researchers as well as graduate students and post-docs. The meeting
program is available from the conference web-site
(http://metsoc.rsnz.org/7icshmo/index2.html).