* 0242419
* Content-Based, Context-Aware Role Based Access Control for Secure Distributed XML Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Arif Ghafoor, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Xiaoyang Wang
* 06/30/2009
* USD 348,937.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a comprehensive security framework using
content-based and context-aware access control models for XML-based applications
in distributed heterogeneous multi-enterprise environments. Such applications
include electronic commerce, finance and banking, manufacturing, corporate
databases, health-care and other on-line services and businesses. For these
applications, information access may need to be restricted due to the
sensitivity, importance or the relevance of the content of the information,
time, location and other contextual information obtained at the time the access
requests are made. The proposed framework will be built upon role-based access
control (RBAC) models. In this project the following tasks will be
pursued:&lt;br/&gt;development of a content and context-based generalized
temporal RBAC model (CC-GTRBAC) for XML documents and extension of XML language
for the proposed model. The extended language will be used to develop a security
model that will allow protection of XML document sources at various levels
including conceptual, XML schema and XML instance levels.&lt;br/&gt;extending
CC-GTRBAC to develop a secure multi-enterprise environment for distributed XML
documents. &lt;br/&gt;development of an experimental prototype of a distributed
XML environment to check the efficacy and viability of this research.&lt;br/&gt;