* 0242252
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Urban Ecology of Potable Water Behavior and Human Health: San Cristobal de Las Casas, Chiapas, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Elois Ann Berlin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2006
* USD 17,820.00

Lack of potable water and proper sanitation causes millions of deaths annually
in the developing world. This dissertation research project will assess how
household characteristics and spatial factors affect the quality of water people
consume, and how water quality differences affect illness patterns in a small
city of southern Mexico. The research, in collaboration with local specialists,
will create an electronic map of the city; will test a sample of homes for water
quality, will conduct in-depth interviews with a sample of urban residents on
their use of water and understanding of water-borne illness, and will survey the
incidence of illness as well as relevant household characteristics. The study
will provide an improved understanding the social and spatial causes of water
problems and disease in developing world cities.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
include training local students in public health and social science research,
and the provision of an electronic map of water resources and problems for local
planners and decision makers. Aside from contributing to the training of a young
social scientist, this project will create knowledge that will be useful in a
broad range of similar situations. This research is supported by the Cultural
Anthropology Program and also by the Americas Program of NSF's Internaitonal
Office. &lt;br/&gt;