* 0242229
* Combined Functional MRI and Intracranial Recordings in Humans
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Allan Bush, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* Stacia Friedman-Hill
* 05/31/2007
* USD 898,952.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Bush and colleagues will conduct a
three-year project aimed at combining functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) and intracranial recordings (ICR) with validated tasks to provide vital
new data about (1) The neural mechanisms and interactions of cognition, emotion
and vigilance, (2) the relationships between both increases and decreases in
neuronal activity and the fMRI response, and (3) local and distant cortical
responses to acute brain lesions. While the studies will involve patients having
brain surgery for intractable illnesses (obsessive-compulsive disorder,
depression, or seizures), the investigations are not focused on pathophysiology
or treatment. Instead, we seek to take advantage of these rare opportunities to
obtain both fMRI measures and neuronal recordings in essentially cognitively
intact humans in order to address a number of unresolved neuroscientific and
neuroimaging questions. Three groups of experiments are proposed. First, we will
study the neural substrate of cognitive-emotional-vigilance interactions and
fMRI signal decreases. Meta-analyses and pilot dataindicate that cognitive
challenges decrease fMRI signal in brain regions that monitor/regulate the
internal state (emotions, motivation) like perigenual anterior cingulate cortex
(pACC)/ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), and in those that monitor the
external environment (vigilance) like amygdala, posterior cingulate cortex
(PCC), and portions of posterior parietal cortex. Few studies have focused on
fMRI signal decreases, and neuronal contributions to this effect are unknown. We
will combine fMRI and ICR to demonstrate double dissociations. We predict: (1)
cognitive challenge will activate task-specific cognitive brain areas (dorsal
anterior cingulate cortex [dACC], dorsolateral prefrontal cortex [DLPFC]),
emotional stimuli will activate pACC, and fearful faces will activate amygdala,
(2) cognitive challenge will conversely decrease fMRI signal and neuronal
activity in emotion-vigilance regions (pACC/vmPFC, amygdala, and PCC). The
second group of experiments will combine fMRI and ICR to extend prior work on
local cortical heterogeneity.a concept important for cognitive neuroscience and
for understanding the neuron-fMRI relationship. Monkey single unit studies
indicate many cortical areas are heterogeneous (i.e., contain different
functional cell types, such as anticipation/timing, target detection, response
selection, and feedback cells), and that the proportions of these cells vary
regionally. Our study (Bush et al, 20021) showed regional cellular proportion
data from monkeys could be used to predict parametric fMRI responses in human
dACC, but direct quantification of cortical composition of humans is needed. We
will combine fMRI and ICR to: (1) confirm local heterogeneity in human dACC,
pACC, and DLPFC and parietal cortex, and (2) quantify and compare regional
proportions of each cell type. The third group of experiments will use
longitudinal fMRI and behavioral measures to assess local and distributed
cortical plasticity and recovery processes that occur in response to a focal
cerebral lesion (cingulotomy).&lt;br/&gt; This proposal is ideally suited for
this funding mechanism, as it: (1) represents innovative research that will
advance our understanding of the neural bases of cognition, emotion and
vigilance, (2) will provide a more sophisticated understanding of how cognitive,
emotional and vigilance processes interact and influence one another, (3) will
provide important new data on the relationship between parametric increases and
decreases in neuronal activity and the measured fMRI response, knowledge that is
crucial to the proper interpretation of virtually all types of functional
neuroimaging studies (fMRI, PET and SPECT), (4) will help delineate separate
roles for pACC and amygdala, (5) uses a rarely available approach (combined fMRI
and ICR), (6) leverages studies of clinical populations with adventitious
lesions to elucidate normal brain mechanisms, (7) studies a new concept (local
intracortical heterogeneity), (8) will establish and quantify local
intracortical heterogeneity of different regions, a concept essential to the
development of neurobiologically accurate computational models of cognitive,
emotional and perceptual processes, (9) will help link comparative human and
monkey studies, (10) will provide new data on cortical plasticity and recovery
of function following focal cerebral lesions, and (11) can improve future
studies of local and distributed (interregional) network
interactions.&lt;br/&gt; This proposal outlines specific plans for education and
training at multiple levels (from independent investigators and postdoctoral
students down to middle school levels). In addition to disseminating findings
through publications, scientific meetings, and invited lectures, we are already
planning two separate workshops and a freely available database. It will broaden
participation of underrepresented groups (the PI, being one of few minority fMRI
researchers, actively supports diversity efforts). It will provide
infrastructure support for future combined fMRI-ICR studies and strengthen
nascent collaborative relationships. Finally, there are many potential benefits
to society. (1) Improved understanding of cognitive, emotional and vigilance
processes can help those with cognitive or mood disorders (ADHD, schizophrenia,
Alzheimer's, depression, anxiety and bipolar disorder). (2) It can have a direct
benefit for those who will be surgically treated for intractable OCD,
depression, epilepsy, and pain. (3) Better understanding of cerebral recovery
can help those with neurological insults like strokes or traumatic brain
injuries. (4) Better understanding of reward circuitry and impulse inhibition
may help those with impulse control and substance abuse disorders.&lt;br/&gt;