* 0242518
* Fast and Accurate Algorithms for Structured Matrix Computations: Applications and Software
* CSE,CCF
* 08/23/2002,10/31/2004
* Vadim Olshevsky, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 10/31/2004
* USD 225,771.00

Proposal #0098222&lt;br/&gt;Georgia State University &lt;br/&gt;Olshevsky,
Vadim&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous applications in sciences and engineering, as
well as in computational, applied and pure mathematics give rise to problems
involving matrices with Toeplitz, Hankel, Vandermonde,
Cauchy&lt;br/&gt;structures, along with many other patterns of structure.
Standard mathematical software tools [e.g., MATLAB, Mathematica, MathCad, Maple,
LAPACK], are based on standard [structure-ignoring]&lt;br/&gt;methods, and
therefore their use is often not appropriate for obtaining a satisfactory
solution. Here are two major reasons. First, ignoring the structure artificially
squares the size of the data, which requires unnecessary storage and an
extremely large amount of CPU time. Secondly, many structured matrices
are&lt;br/&gt;extremely ill-conditioned, which means that all available standard
methods may fail to produce even one correct digit in the computed solution. The
only way to overcome these difficulties is to exploit the special structure of
such matrices, and to design more efficient algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is the study of several known and several new
theoretical and computational problems related to structured matrices which
arise in several applied areas, including signal and image processing, system
theory, and control theory. This research involves the development of new
accurate&lt;br/&gt;fast and superfast algorithms for several new classes of
structured matrices arising in rational matrix interpolation and approximation
problems with norm constraints (passive interpolation). This study will also
focus on various stability problems for matrix polynomials, and on various
problems in the&lt;br/&gt;theory of error-correcting codes.&lt;br/&gt;