* 0242958
* Genetic history of Peru
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2003,01/31/2004
* Beatriz Lizarraga, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 01/31/2004
* USD 79,986.00

Debate about the patterning of genetic diversity in human populations has
centered on the importance of language, geography, and gene flow. Because of the
diversity of languages and environments, Peru is an ideal place to investigate
these issues. For this project, samples are being obtained from geographically
diverse parts of Peru and from different language and ethnic groups, although
the project will focus in particular on populations speaking Quechua and Aymara
languages. The general aim of this research is to examine autosomal,
mitochondrial DNA, and Y chromosome markers in order to investigate the spatial
distribution of present-day diversity and the extent of admixture between native
and non-native peoples. In particular, differences between male and female
patterns of admixture will be studied. In addition, hypotheses about the
relationship between genetics, geography and language in the central Andes will
be tested. This project will investigate the prehistoric migrations into South
American and the relationship between the language families in Peru and other
parts of the Americas. This research will be conducted at the Laboratory of
Molecular Anthropology at the University of New Mexico and in Peru at the
Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos and Universidad Ricardo Palma. This
project will also include training of both American and Peruvian students and
public outreach through Spanish and English versions of a web page about the
project.