* 0242956
* SGER: Coupling a Slab Ocean and Sea Ice Model to the Community Atmosphere Model
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Cecilia Bitz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 05/31/2004
* USD 44,235.00

The PI will develop a simplified version (a slab rather than full ocean
component) of the Community Climate System Model (CCSM). She will study its
equilibrium climate sensitivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In practice, a slab ocean
model is highly intertwined with the sea ice formulation, and the PI has been at
the forefront of the CCSM sea-ice component development and
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;She has started this work and has made much
progress to arrive at a working model. This grant will enable her to continue
with the slab ocean model development and play an active role in maintaining the
sea ice models that she helped build for the CCSM. She will also use the slab
ocean model coupled to the CCSM atmospheric component to explicitly measure the
sensitivity of the simulated climate to sea ice
feedbacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An immediate need for this work was expressed at
the June, 2002 CCSM workshop and subsequently endorsed by the CCSM Scientific
Advisory Committee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific merit of this project is
to evaluate how feedbacks associated with sea ice thermodynamics contribute to
climate sensitivity, an important issue in the debate about global
warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project is to provide a
new functionality for the community of CCSM users. Also, this development effort
will strengthen ties between NCAR and the university community.