* 0242186
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Anxiety and Ethnocentrism: Coalitional Psychology in Two Populations
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Daniel Fessler, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/2004
* USD 12,188.00

0242186&lt;br/&gt;Fessler / Navarrete&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research by an
anthropology graduate student asks: 'How does culture interact with the innate
psychological mechanisms that produce ethnocentrism?', and 'Why does adherence
to in-group ideology increase in times of danger?' The project seeks to explain
why people adhere to and tenaciously defend their worldviews. It tests the
proposition that inclusion in cooperative ventures is premised on
predictability, and predictability is a function of commonality in cultural
values, therefore displays of ethnocentrism are tantamount to advertisements
intended to recruit coalitional support from in-group members in times of need.
Research will be conducted in two regions, urban Southern California and rural
Costa Rica. These cultures differ along the dimension of
individualism/collectivism, a factor predicted to influence the salience of
different forms of threat. Investigations will combine qualitative ethnographic
approaches with controlled psychological experiments to explore how culture,
ideology, and individual differences in personality affect how people evaluate
in-groups and out-groups in times of threat or social conflict.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The terrorist attacks of 9/11 as well as many of the
genocidal wars of the last decade revolve around differences in worldviews,
which manifest as violent ethnocentrism. By elucidating the psychological
mechanisms that generate ethnocentrism and the cultural factors that exacerbate
it, this project may provide diplomats, policy makers, and defense analysts with
a firmer foundation on which to make decisions in the effort to avoid,
ameliorate, or end violent conflicts that stem from cultural
differences.&lt;br/&gt;