* 0242596
* BSCS Science:  An Inquiry Approach -- A Phase II Proposal
* EHR,DRL
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2010
* Rodger Bybee, BSCS Science Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 02/28/2010
* USD 4,470,291.00

Under Phase I, BSCS has developed two semesters of instructional materials --
one for grade nine and one for grade ten -- using an assessment-driven
development process. Classroom based field trials produced evidence that
students had significant gains in student learning across different school
settings and different ability groups. BSCS also developed a curriculum
framework for materials for grade 6-11 that addresses the National Science
Education Standards. Each year students learn fundamental concepts in life,
Earth/space and physical science. In addition, in each year, there is a short
unit on scientific inquiry and a unit that presents the learner with a new
context for applying understandings and integrating the sciences. In this
project BSCS completes the research based module development for grades nine and
ten, and continues the work for grade eleven, so that the standards for high
school science are addressed in a multidisciplinary approach that exposes
students to both Earth/space science and physical science to greater depth than
traditionally. In addition to the student materials, annotated teacher editions
and a teacher resource CDROM are developed. A comprehensive teacher development
guide for implementing multidisciplinary science is produced along with
comprehensive implementation support for school districts. &lt;br/&gt;