* 0242921
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Phase Transitions in Confined Aqueous Environments
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2003,09/30/2009
* Sohail Murad, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2009
* USD 34,995.00

0242921&lt;br/&gt;Murad&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a cooperative
project in chemical engineering entitled the US-India Cooperative Research:
Phase Transitions in Confined Aqueous Environments. US PI Sohail Murad,
University of Illinois Chicago and K.G. Ayappa, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore will study the structure, phase behavior and dynamics of water as a
function of varying concentrations of dissolved ions when water is present as an
inhomogeneous fluid. The overall objective of this research is to advance the
state-of-the-art understanding of fluids confined by impermeable and semi-
permeable membranes. The improved understanding of such systems can result in
more efficient processes for enhanced oil recovery, for water purification by
reverse osmosis, and could provide better heterogeneous catalysts. These
processes have important technological, environmental and societal
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out jointly by
research teams at the University of Illinois, Chicago and at the Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore. A key objective of this project is to expose
American students to the Indian research and academic environment. With the
important role that India is expected to play in the coming decades, this will
be an invaluable experience for students entering an increasingly global
marketplace. &lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly supported by the Office of
International Science &amp; Engineering and the Division of Chemical and
Transport Systems. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0242921&lt;br/&gt;Murad&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports a cooperative project in chemical engineering entitled the US-India
Cooperative Research: Phase Transitions in Confined Aqueous Environments. US PI
Sohail Murad, University of Illinois Chicago and K.G. Ayappa, Indian Institute
of Science, Bangalore will study the structure, phase behavior and dynamics of
water as a function of varying concentrations of dissolved ions when water is
present as an inhomogeneous fluid. The overall objective of this research is to
advance the state-of-the-art understanding of fluids confined by impermeable and
semi-permeable membranes. The improved understanding of such systems can result
in more efficient processes for enhanced oil recovery, for water purification by
reverse osmosis, and could provide better heterogeneous catalysts. These
processes have important technological, environmental and societal
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out jointly by
research teams at the University of Illinois, Chicago and at the Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore. A key objective of this project is to expose
American students to the Indian research and academic environment. With the
important role that India is expected to play in the coming decades, this will
be an invaluable experience for students entering an increasingly global
marketplace. &lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly supported by the Office of
International Science &amp; Engineering and the Division of Chemical and
Transport Systems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;