* 0242422
* Collaborative Research: Landscape Patterns of Pollen Movement in Declining Populations of California Valley Oak, Quercus Lobata
* BIO,DEB
* 08/14/2002,03/31/2005
* Victoria Sork, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2005
* USD 303,392.00

Sork 0089445

Fragmentation and population declines jeopardize the survival of many species.
Excessive reproductive isolation can cause a loss of valuable alleles, decrease
genetic variation, induce inbreeding depression, reduce demographic fitness, and
lead to reproductive failure. When tree populations are reduced to scattered and
clustered individuals, pollen movement is critical to connectivity. This project
develops a novel approach that can cover landscape-scale areas and can be
integrated into spatially explicit simulation modeling of landscape changes.
These new tools are deployed to investigate a threatened tree species,
California Valley oak (Quercus lobata). Using allozyme and microsatellite
genotypes, the investigators examine three objectives: (1) They will
characterize reproductive isolation of individual trees in landscapes with
variable conspecific density. (2) They will examine the impact of adult genetic
structure and temporal heterogeneity of pollen pools on estimates of pollen
movement. (3) They will incorporate estimated parameters into geographic models
to simulate the impact of historical and future population decline.

This project represents an excellent case study of the evolutionary dynamics of
gene flow and its landscape scale conservation/restoration consequences. It will
be applied to a critical California tree species experiencing habitat loss and
degradation from residential and agricultural development, a situation in need
of information for future management and policy decisions. This research will
dovetail issues from evolutionary biology, conservation biology, geography, and
public policy of the threatened species.