* 0242754
* GOALI:  Generation, Characterization, and Modeling of Structure and Properties of Polymer Blend Nano- and Microparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 08/16/2002,06/30/2005
* Joshua Otaigbe, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2005
* USD 131,192.00

9982077&lt;br/&gt;Otaigbe&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GOALI award, jointly
supported by the Div. of Materials Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities of the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, is in the
area of nanoscience. New dynamic behavior emerges when polymers are confined in
a small droplet of solution the size of a molecule or in molecular aggregates.
Solvent evaporation takes place on a time scale short enough to frustrate phase
separation, producing dry pure polymer or polymer blend microparticles that are
homogeneous within molecular dimensions. This capability allows production of
spherical polymer alloy microparticles with tunable properties (such as
refractive index) simply by adjusting the relative weight fractions of the
polymers in solution. This research will develop a methodology for generating
polymer and polymer blend microparticles and for probing the structure,
morphology, and other characteristics of the polymer micro- and nanoparticles.
Using instrumentation developed for probing single fluorescent molecules in
submicrometer droplets, the proposal will demonstrate that polymer particles of
nearly arbitrary size and composition can be made with narrow size dispersion.
While the focus of this research is on polymeric systems, the microparticle
generator can be easily adapted to make small organic and inorganic particles
(and hybrid systems). A number of optical methodologies such as Fraunhofer
diffraction, fluorescence, and conventional phase-contrast microscopy will be
used to probe polymer particles immobilized on two-dimensional subrstrates or
levitated in space using a three-dimensional quadrupole (Paul) trap. The optical
diffraction method will provide a unique look (not possible now with
conventional methods such as electron-beam microscopy) inside a polymer particle
in a measurement time schale of a few milliseconds, making it attractive to in-
line production applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge gained will be
useful in addressing phase separation, the primary barrier to producing many
technologically relevant and scientifically interesting homogeneous polymer
blends from bulk-immiscible components in solution. Examples of application
areas of the polymer microparticles include polymer blends or alloys,
biomaterials for drug delivery systems, electro-optic and luminescent devices,
polymer powder spray coating, and polymer powder impregnation of inorganic
fibers in composites and in polymer-supported heterogeneous
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;