* 0242162
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Sequencing of Plasmids from the Bacillus Cereus Group-Mapping the Evolution of B. Anthracis Virulence Plasmids px01 and px02
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Timothy Read, Institute for Genomic Research
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 09/30/2005
* USD 998,715.00

The aim of this project is to make a comprehensive survey of complete sequences
of large plasmids from the Bacillus cereus group of bacteria, which are
ubiquitous constituents of natural soil environments, endosymbionts of insects,
and animal pathogens. Perhaps the most well known member of the group is the
organism, B. anthracis. In a theme common to the B. cereus group, key virulence
genes, encoding lethal toxin and poly-glutamic acid capsule, that are
responsible for the unique pathogenicity profile of B. anthracis are found on
large plasmids (pXO1 and pXO2). Because plasmids play a major role in the
biology of anthrax, a survey of large plasmids in up to 24 B. cereus group
strains is proposed to answer specific questions about plasmids with and without
known homologies to pXO1 and pXO2. These questions include: can evolutionary
events that led to the creation of pXO1 and pXO2 be reconstructed and can
sources for some of the genes on these plasmids be found in other B. cereus
group organisms? To what extent does gene exchange between replicons occur and
what are the mechanisms? Which pXO genes are unique in B. anthracis? Plasmids
will be isolated from pulsed-field gels of genomic DNA and sequenced by whole-
genome shotgun methods to produce finished, high-quality sequence. This project
will significantly add to knowledge of how extrachromsomal elements influence
key phenotypes of these important microorganisms. This is a Genome Sequencing
Award funded through a collaborative program between the National Science
Foundation and the Department of Agriculture.