* 0242561
* Electrochemical/Optical Nanoprobes for High-Resolution Chemical Analysis at Neuronal Microenvironment
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Shigeru Amemiya, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 04/30/2006
* USD 370,156.00

This award supports development of an instrument that combines near-field
scanning optical microscopy (NSOM) and scanning electrochemical microscopy
(SECM) with the goal of localizing specific chemicals at the surface of single
neurons. Signal transmission in the central nervous system is mediated by
specific chemical messengers; thus the measurement of concentration
distributions of chemical species in neuronal microenvironments is critically
important to improving understanding of neurotransmission and brain function.
Because signaling events occur at highly localized areas whose dimensions are
less than several hundred nanometers, commonly used electrochemical and optical
techniques are limited by electrode size (&gt;1 micron) and by the wavelength of
light. In addition, neuronal processes are highly complicated chemical events,
so that simultaneous monitoring of various analytes by the combination of two or
more techniques is frequently required. Synchronization of the spatial-temporal
resolution of the techniques, however, is so difficult that the observed events
usually lack one-to-one correspondence. The approach to be taken will overcome
these difficulties through development of nanoprobes that can serve as both a
light source and also an electrode. The multi-functionality allows for
electrochemical and optical measurements at the same time and same location.
This project explores the use of selectively etched optical fibers as a basis of
electrochemical/optical nanoprobes. The etching technique allows for
reproducible fabrication of optical fibers with a tip diameter of less than 10
nm. By taking advantages of the sharp fibers, electrochemical/optical nanoprobes
with an active area of 100 nm in diameter will be designed and constructed. Once
constructed, the tips will be tested for near-field optical imaging of single
neuronal vesicles using electrochemical regulation of the probe - sample
distance. The project will provide an opportunity for training of both
undergraduate and graduate students in an interdisciplinary environment and, if
successful, lead to new technology that can be exploited broadly in neuroscience
and cell biology.