* 0242418
* Addressing the Problems of Spatial Resolution and Adequate Sampling in Clustered Clouds and Rain
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Arthur Jameson, RJH Scientific Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 12/31/2006
* USD 239,967.00

The concentrations of raindrops and cloud droplets in the atmosphere may be
regarded as random variables that fluctuate with time and location. Recent work
by Jameson and Kostinski has shown that these concentrations have probability
distributions that deviate from the theoretical Poisson law that applies to
purely random distributions. The deviations are caused by the tendency of drops
to concentrate in clumps or patches. This clustering of drops complicates the
problem of distinguishing between actual time and space variability of
quantities such as the rainfall rate and the drop-size distribution, and the
variability arising naturally from samples containing small numbers of drops.
The main objective of this project is to develop new sampling criteria for
counting drops and estimating their concentration that will identify real
meteorological variability and avoid the artifacts arising from small samples.
Another objective is to devise new data analysis techniques to sample clouds
that are clumpy in structure and to characterize their structure. Attention will
also be given to developing sampling criteria for the proper description of
drop-size distributions. The approach is a combination of (1) analysis of data
from various instruments that measure drop sizes and concentrations and (2)
theoretical investigations based on Monte Carlo simulation. The work will
contribute fundamentally to cloud physics by defining accurate methods for
measuring and describing the spatial and temporal structure of rain and clouds.