* 0242632
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of Prehistoric Cultural and Natural Processes on Waterbirds in the Pacific Northwest Coast
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Donald Grayson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2005
* USD 11,200.00

Under the direction of Dr. Donald K. Grayson, Ms. Kristine M. Bovy will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. She is identifying and analyzing bird bones
from three large, previously excavated archaeological sites in the Pacific
Northwest Coast of North America: Watmough Bay (San Juan Islands, WA), Minard
(Washington Coast) and Umpqua/Eden (Oregon Coast). Previous work suggests these
sites were occupied during the past 1,000- 3,000 years. Ms. Bovy plans to obtain
additional radiocarbon dates in order to better determine the ages of the bones
recovered. Her goal is to evaluate how the kinds of birds represented at these
sites has changed through time, and why these changes occurred. Assuming that
significant change is discovered (and preliminary research suggests that such
change did occur), the research will focus on three prime factors to explain
those changes: human hunting, climate change and earthquake
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ms. Bovy's research is interdisciplinary and will
contribute to both archaeological and biological questions. For instance, her
work will provide information on the history of the interaction between people
and birds in the Pacific Northwest Coast. Early anthropologists and Euro-
American explorers in this region describe the many effective methods that
native peoples had for hunting birds. In particular, they used a number of
different kinds of nets to catch large numbers of feeding and flying waterfowl,
including submerged and large hanging nets. However, the antiquity and impact of
such practices is unknown. Were bird nets used early on or only later when other
food resources had been depleted due to increasing human populations? This
research may also contribute to the debate about how and when social inequality
developed among native Northwest Coast peoples. One hypothesis suggests that
inequalities evolved, in part, because many food resources in this region are
localized in time and space and therefore could be owned and defended by
individuals or families (e.g., salmon returning to spawn). However, no one has
considered the role that birds, which are at times hunted in localized and
defensible spots on the landscape, could have played in this setting, nor has
anyone considered the impact that such hunting may have had on the birds
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is also important because it will
provide much needed long-term data on waterbird populations in the Pacific
Northwest Coast. Systematic observations of birds are limited to the past 50-100
years, and many ornithologists and ecologists are realizing that longer-term
studies are needed to better understand and manage these populations. Knowing
how natural processes such as climatic change, earthquakes and sea-level rise
affected birds in the past, could help us predict their responses to similar
events in the future, such as global warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;