* 0242620
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Deformation of the Lower Crust Beneath Strike-Slip Faults:  Array Studies of Anistropy and Converted Phases in the Marlborough Fault Zone of New Zealand
* GEO,EAR
* 03/31/2002,06/30/2005
* Peter Molnar, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2005
* USD 101,002.00

Molnar&lt;br/&gt;EAR-9910145&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to
install ten portable arrays, each consisting of eleven 3-component, short-period
seismographs, in the Marlborough region at the northern end of the South Island
of New Zealand to measure both crustal thickness and anisotropy in the crust and
uppermost mantle. The goal is to quatify the offset of the Moho below strike-
slip faults and to determine whether shear has occurred over broad regions in
the lower crust near such faults. Such shear is a predicted consequence of
ductile deformation in the lower crust lying beneath blocks of upper crust that
move with respect to one another along strike-slip faults and mantle lithosphere
that is sheared over a laterally wide zone. Conversely, if faults passed
directly from the upper crust into the lower mantle, little or no anisotropy
would be present in the lower crust, and possible an offset of the Moho would
occur where strike-slip faults pass into the mantle. The Marlborough region of
New Zealand is an excellent location because: it is active and large
displacements have occurred on the faults; there is abundant local intermediate
depth seismicity to provide high-frequency body waves with steep angles of
incidence; and preliminary results indicate anisotropy, although not its depth
range.