* 0242971
* Sharing the Harvest? The Uncertain Fruits of Public/Private Collaboration in Plant Biotechnology
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Walter Powell, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Priscilla Regan
* 02/28/2006
* USD 167,669.00

The distinction between basic and applied science is eroding in the life
sciences, as fundamental discoveries at the molecular level prove immediately
relevant to applied problems of medicine and agriculture. This transformation,
together with increased intellectual property protection, motivates firms to
perform, collaborate, and fund more basic science. On the public side, this
transformation encourages universities and research institutes to commercialize
their discoveries. This project examines how public and private funds and public
and private values combine in support of collaborative discoveries, and
investigates whose interests - those of the general public or private companies-
are served. The research focuses on the case of plant biotechnology, mapping the
relationships among scientists and the public, private, and nonprofit
organizations involved in research on the genetic model organism Arabidopsis
thaliana. In this setting, the research specifically seeks to answer three
questions: What is the influence of company funding on 1) the focus of
scientific research; 2) the applications and the spread of scientific ideas and
techniques; and 3) the research activities and careers of scientists? In
answering these questions, the project evaluates how a basic research program
can take on an applied orientation. The project also traces the application of
Arabidopsis discoveries beyond the scientists, organizations, sectors and
countries from which they originate to new generations of basic bioscience and
applied biotechnology. The project tracks these discoveries by following the
trail of publications and patents that cite Arabidopsis research, and by
following ideas and techniques across publications and patent texts. In
addition, the research investigates how the association of firms with university
science shapes the scientific patenting and publishing activities within
universities and firms. This focus on interacting institutions and values at the
frontiers of science and commerce will inform policy makers and philanthropists
trying to assess the impact of science funding, and offer scientists insight
into the uses of their work and the potential institutional conflicts that may
constrain them. More broadly, this research will provide a map of the ways that
knowledge spills across the public, private, and nonprofit sectors in the co-
evolution of science and industry.