* 0242312
* Cryptic density dependence: the effects of spatial, ontogenetic, and individual variation in reef fish
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Craig Osenberg, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2008
* USD 697,461.00

Ecologists have long been interested in the factors that drive spatial and
temporal variability in population density and structure. In marine reef
systems, attention has focused on the role of settlement-the transition of
pelagic larvae to a benthic stage-and on density-dependent processes affecting
recently settled juveniles. Recent data suggest that co-variance in settlement
and subsequent density-dependent survival can obscure the patterns of density
dependence at larger scales, a phenomenon called cryptic density dependence.
This research will explore the mechanisms that underlie the spatial covariance
of settlement and site quality - a process that has received little attention in
the standard paradigm. These mechanistic studies of cryptic density dependence
will facilitate the development of new frameworks for fish population dynamics
that incorporate larval ecology, habitat quality, density dependence, life
history, and the patterns and implications of spatial covariance among these
factors. More generally, the work provides a specific empirical context, and a
general theoretical treatment, of cryptic heterogeneity (hidden individual
variation in demographic rates). Training in this project will involve
undergraduate and graduate students in quantitative and experimental marine
ecology. Additionally, undergraduates will be involved through supervised
research courses. Students will be trained in field and lab techniques; they
will also have the opportunity to work with collaborators from Australia and New
Zealand. This project has broader implications for the management of marine
fisheries, including harvested food fisheries (which can seldom be studied
experimentally and thus probably exhibit cryptic density dependence) and marine
ornamentals (fish and invertebrates harvested for the aquarium trade) which can
be studied well but for which there is a significant divide between science and
management and policy.

