* 0242662
* Acoustic Shear Wave Biosensor for the Analysis of Cell Adhesion and Structure (ABACAS)
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Ryszard Lec, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2006
* USD 323,207.00

This award supports construction and testing of a biosensor intended to measure
the strength of adhesion of cells to surfaces through use of acoustic shear
waves generated by a piezoelectric device. The sensor, to be called the Acoustic
Shear Wave Biosensor for the Analysis of Cell Adhesion and Structure (ABACAS),
is expected to measure mass accumulation in the nanogram range, chemical species
concentration on the order of 1 ppb, and the complex elastic modulus for a large
range of materials ranging from purely viscous to purely elastic media. Several
model systems employing polystyrene microspheres as cell mimics, polymer gels
simulating extracellular matrix proteins, and controlled spreading of cells will
be used to calibrate the ABACAS measurements. Standard tests for cell adhesion
strength, endothelial cell adhesion, spreading, and realignment in response to
flow will be used to correlate ABACAS measurements with biological function.

Currently, characterization of the dynamics of interactions between biomaterials
and cells relies on techniques that require many samples for temporal definition
of any property. The new sensor is expected to meet the need for reliable,
multipurpose and low cost miniature instrumentation for characterization of such
interactions, allowing real-time measurements using a single sample.

Developments from the ABACAS project in both sensor design and cellular
mechanics will also be incorporated into the institution's curriculum at the
undergraduate and graduate levels. An undergraduate sequence on Biosensors
taught by the PI will use ABACAS as both an example to illustrate lecture topics
and a laboratory exercise. ABACAS will also be used as part of a a graduate
course in Cellular Biomechanics to emphasize the relationship between
theoretical modeling and experimental design in characterizing the mechanics of
cell behavior. In addition, the project will be incorporated into the Biosensors
Collaboratory, a unique on-line environment that gives access to the laboratory
to collaborators and educational partners. This Collaboratory facilitates
outreach efforts to 2-year colleges and high schools in the Philadelphia area.