* 0242313
* Collaborative Research: An Experiment in Evolution: Rapid Life History Evolution in Drosophila Subobscura
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* George Gilchrist, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2004
* USD 20,935.00

9981555&lt;br/&gt;Gilchrist&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three fundamental questions for
evolutionary biologists are: 1) How rapidly does evolution occur? 2) Is the
pattern of change repeatable? 3) Are most changes historically contingent, or do
the deterministic forces of natural selection dominate? The introduction of the
European fruit fly, Drosophila subobscura, into North and South America in the
late 1970's provides a unique opportunity to address these questions. Many
traits, including genetic markers and body size, vary systematically with
latitude among the ancestral European populations. Previous studies show that
the North American flies have evolved similar latitudinal patterns in less than
20 years. The studies funded by this award will investigate the South American
populations and provide further information on the North American and European
populations. This is a unique opportunity to observe evolutionary change as it
occurs over a broad geographic range. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species
introductions are currently reshaping much of Earth's biological diversity. Many
studies assess the impact of introduced species on native populations.
Evolutionary changes in the introduced species, however, have generally been
neglected even though such changes ultimately determine the ecological impact of
the invasion. Furthermore, these natural experiments demonstrate the
evolutionary and ecological response of populations to novel habitats, which
will help predict the impact of climate change on the distribution and abundance
of agricultural pests and insect-borne diseases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;