* 0242327
* Historical Ecology of the Early Mekong Delta
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Miriam Stark, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2008
* USD 173,504.00

Funding from the National Science Foundation will support Dr. Miriam Stark and
her colleagues in their research on early state development in the Mekong delta
(southern Cambodia). The project brings together Western and Cambodian
specialists in archaeology, geoarchaeology, geography, and palynology to study
how complex societies emerged, and their political and economic foundations in
the first millennium A.D. During this transition to history, Southeast Asia's
earliest states emerged in tandem with the appearance of Indic ideologies and
the development of an international maritime trade network. Despite strong
interest in comparative research on early state formation globally, few
archaeologists have studied early complex societies in mainland Southeast Asia.
Scholars of Cambodia's Angkorian civilization (c. A.D. 802-A.D. 1432) have long
suggested that the origins of the Khmer empire lay in the Mekong delta. No
systematic archaeological research has been undertaken previously, however, to
document its origins and emergence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores
the changing organizational structure of complex polities in the Mekong delta
between c. 500 B.C. and c. A.D. 500. Project members evaluate competing models
of state formation, which differ both in causality and in structure. Assessing
these models requires an understanding of changing settlement configuration
through time, of ancient agricultural strategies, and of the potentially
changing nature of water management systems. Dynamic relationships between
geographical factors (variation in soils, availability of fresh water, and
potential transportation routes) are investigated, as are the roles that
ideology, politics and economics played in shaping the human and natural
landscape of the first millennium A.D. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's field
methodology combines three seasons of archaeological and geoarchaeological
research with concomitant analyses of remote sensing data. Project members will
collect archaeological, art historical, geographical, paleoenvironmental, and
epigraphic data to understand changes in settlement that were associated with
the emergence of one of the region's earliest states. Construction of a
geographic (GIS) database provides the foundation for field research. The GIS
database also provides a tool for interpreting changing settlement patterns
through time, and for studying evidence for changing farming strategies that may
have included flood recession and irrigation-based rice agriculture. Field
seasons combine four activities: (1) archaeological survey to document large
sites and their environs; (2) thermoluminescence dating on collapsed brick
monuments on these large sites to build a regional chronological sequence; (3)
geoarchaeological research to identify and date ancient canal segments; and (4)
paleoenvironmental research (primarily sediment coring) to reconstruct the
region's changing climatic and vegetational regimes during the last 2500 years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important in several respects. First, it
provides new data for understanding the emergence of complex societies in an
important and understudied region of the world. Second, the project merges
interdisciplinary approaches to study political, environmental, and economic
aspects of ancient state formation. Finally, the project combines research with
training for Cambodian archaeology students. Nearly 25 years of civil war
decimated the Cambodian archaeological community, and damaged its cultural
resources. This project makes significant contributions to Cambodia's
archaeological heritage, and also to training the next generation of Cambodian
archaeologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;