* 0242153
* Solid State Coordination Chemistry of Hybrid Oxide Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Jon Zubieta, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Luigi G. Marzilli
* 04/30/2007
* USD 374,000.00

Dr. Jon Zubieta, Chemistry Department, Syracuse University, is supported by the
Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the Chemistry Division
for research into the solid state coordination chemistry of hybrid oxide
materials. The project will focus on the controlled synthesis of metastable but
persistent extended oxide structures that are formed through the use of organic
components as structure-directing building blocks. The research focuses on
broadly related classes of oxide solids: (i) materials characterized by M/P/O
(M=V or Mo) inorganic skeletons and (ii) phases with V/O or Mo/O inorganic
skeletons. In both cases secondary metal-ligand complexes or subunits will be
incorporated as charge-balancing and structure-directing constituents. The
synthetic approach involves low temperature self-assembly of polyamine ligands,
"secondary" metal cations, and the inorganic oxide sources in hydrothermal
media. The structures of the resulting materials will be determined and methods
to control their structure-property relationships will be developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Presently, methods for the rational synthesis of two or
three dimensional solid state materials are nearly absent. This is a problem
because the synthesis of extended structures must be mastered in order to
realize the objectives of advanced materials science and nanotechnology, which
include creating materials for catalysis, quantum electronics, optics,
photonics, chemoselective sensing, and solar energy conversion among others. The
occurrence of complex inorganic oxides in the geosphere and the biosphere
suggests that Nature may provide useful guidelines for the preparation of
synthetic phases and for the modification of oxide microstructures. Thus, a
powerful approach to the design of novel oxide materials mimics Nature's use of
organic molecules to modify inorganic architectures. This project will use
selected "molecular building blocks," which include organic compounds known to
direct the structure of metal complexes, to develop a "Tinker Toy" methodology
for preparing new materials. In addition to the potential fundamental and
practical implications of the research, the activities will impact broadly on
the training of graduate students, postdoctoral associates and sabbatical
fellows, in the promoting of collaborative programs, and in the development of
course work, tutorials and presentations for various levels of expertise and
interest.&lt;br/&gt;