* 0242941
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Identity and Conquest: Population History of the Chachapoyas from Northern Per√∫
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Jane Buikstra, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2004
* USD 11,931.00

Under the direction of Dr. Jane E. Buikstra, Mr. Kenneth Nystrom will complete
the data collection necessary to finish his doctoral dissertation. His research
involves the generation of skeletal data from several samples from throughout
the Chachapoyas regions of northern Peru. With the growing exposure and
knowledge of the Chachapoyas region, fundamental questions concerning the
population history of the inhabitants of the area can begin to be addressed.
Sparked by the discovery of the Laguna de los Condores, this research seeks to
understand the growth and development of the people that came to be known as the
Chachapoyas. Working under the assumption that biological interactions reflect
social interactions, morphological characteristics of the skeleton can be used
to discuss changes in population structure and cultural processes. The
Relethford-Blangero model of within-group heterogeneity quantifies the presence
of gene flow from an external source, allowing discussion of cultural and
biological consequences of conquest. Further, with the inclusion of both
ethnohistorical and archaeological data, it will be possible to discuss the
development of Chachapoyas identity, both before and after their subjugation by
the Inka.

At a broader scale, one of anthropology's primary goals is the study of how
groups of people interact, not only with other groups, but also with the natural
and supernatural worlds that surround them. This research addresses fundamental
concepts concerning the expression of group identity within the archaeological
record. Previous archaeological research has concentrated upon the distribution
of material artifacts to distinguish between cultures and to characterize the
contact and articulation between groups. With the growing interest in pursuing
the issue of ethnicity from a bioarchaeological perspective, a more nuanced
discussion of the archaeological examination of ethnicity is possible.