* 0243695
* NSF-Europe:  The Mechanisms of Grain Refinement with Severe Plastic Deformation Leading to Nanoscale Microstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Marc Andre Meyers, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 02/29/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This is a grant for a collaborative research program between the University of
Ancona, Ancona, Italy and the University of California at San Diego. The
objective of the study is to produce very refined grain size to the nanoscale
through severe plastic deformation. The University of Ancona has a grant from
the Istituto Nazionale per la Fisica della Materia (INFM) for "Physical Aspects
of Ultrafine Grained Aluminum Alloys," and this NSF grant is a mechanism to
substantially enhance collaboration by permitting funding that is complementary
to the INFM study. A major goal of the INFM study is to use equal channel
angular (ECA) pressing of aluminum alloys as a means to produce nanoscale grain
size aluminum alloys. The effort by the US team is directed towards
understanding the specific mechanisms by which the severe plastic deformation
leads to a refined grain size. The study is expected to alleviate the empiricism
involved in the quest to produce very fine-grained alloys of commercial value.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UCSD group will utilize both the mechanical facilities
at UCSD and the University of Ancona. Graduate students, postdoctoral scholars
and faculty will participate in exchanges on long-term basis (three months to
one year) between these institutions. The collaborative program is very
complementary in scope, and will give an opportunity to enhance the research by
taking advantage of the international expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
project is co-funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, the Division
of Materials Research (Metals Research) and International Office (Western
Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in Materials Research between the NSF and
Europe (NSF 02-135). This project is being carried out in collaboration with
University of Ancona, Ancona, Italy.&lt;br/&gt;