* 0243682
* Travel Support for International Conference on Heterogeneous Material Mechanics (ICHMM 2003)
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2005
* David McDowell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 02/28/2005
* USD 15,000.00

ICHMM 2003 Participant Support Program Abstract D.L. McDowell, Georgia Tech, Co-
Chair of ICHMM 2003 The International Conference on Heterogeneous Material
Mechanics (ICHMM 2003), to be held June 24-29, 2003 in China
(http://www.ichmm.org), will highlight contemporary and emerging research
directions of Asian, North American and European solid mechanics communities. It
will provide both a traditional format in ChongQing (2.5 days), followed by
working workshop-format sessions aimed at emergent research issues (2.5 days) on
a cruise down the YangTze River. It is proposed that the US NSF provide $15,000
in participant support costs to foster attendance of key western participants.
Tremendous cultural and technical diversity are major themes of the ICHMM 2003;
we will encourage participation of underrepresented groups. The final report
will include the list of participants and conference schedule, summary of panel
discussions, and extended abstracts. ICHMM 2003 will have profound impact on
scientific and cultural exchange of leading international segments of the solid
mechanics community. The novel format of this meeting will illuminate issues in
emerging areas of common research emphasis (materials by design, nanomechanics,
biomaterials, etc.) through both panel discussions and informal exchanges during
the YangTze River segment.