* 0243451
* SGER: An Exploratory Study of a Test Device for Concrete Permeability
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Paul Zia, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 08/31/2005
* USD 60,000.00

Concrete is the most widely used material for the civil infrastructure.
Deterioration of concrete is a major worldwide problem. An important factor that
affects the durability of concrete structure is the permeability of concrete.
Low permeability reduces the entry of moisture and aggressive substances into
concrete, thus provides better protection for the steel reinforcement and limits
deterioration of concrete due to freezing-thawing. However, for lack of a
suitable test method and device, the permeability of concrete is not routinely
measured as a means of quality assessment and control. In a recent study, the PI
and his co-worker conceived an innovative method to measure concrete
permeability by using a simple and economical test device. The method makes use
of an axi-symmetric surface air flow model to determine the concrete
permeability index. Their work provided the proof of the concept and
demonstrated that the test device was capable of making consistent measurements
for concrete with different water-cement ratios at different ages. They also
verified that air flow within one-half inch from the concrete surface was
achievable. In addition, they found satisfactory correlations between the
permeability index with the results of rapid chloride permeability tests and
chloride penetrations from 90-day ponding tests. The objectives of this
exploratory research are to further develop and refine the test method and
device. More specifically, the research will address four critical issues: (1)
determine the effect of the moisture content of concrete on permeability, (2)
explore techniques to dry the concrete surface to a sufficient depth to
eliminate the effect of moisture content, (3) improve the test device so as to
increase the depth of air flow into the concrete, and (4) establish an
appropriate procedure for the concrete surface preparation in the field so that
the test device can be applied successfully