* 0243330
* Wisconsin Academy Staff Development Initiative -- Teacher Retention and Renewal
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2008
* Julie Stafford, Wisconsin Academy Staff Development Initiative
* Continuing Grant
* karen marrongelle
* 05/31/2008
* USD 1,600,594.00

Wisconsin Academy Staff Development Initiative -- Teacher Retention and Renewal
(WASDI-TRR), a four-year Teacher Enhancement project, is designed to increase
teacher retention in K-12 mathematics and science by providing 90 novice
teachers with teacher induction experiences, developing 90 subject-specific
mentor teachers, building school and district capacity to support teacher
induction and mentoring programs, engaging 90 school principals, and creating
relationships between teachers, schools, districts and disciplinary faculty at
universities. Preference is given to urban and rural schools with significant
staffing needs and underachievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project participants
attend summer academies available throughout the State on mathematics and
science content, pedagogy and instructional materials. On-going and sustained
support is provided through school-based mentoring sessions, online learning
communities, mentor and novice teacher follow-up sessions, electronic
conferencing with mathematicians and scientists, and sessions for school
administrators. Electronic conferencing is prominently featured as a vehicle for
professional development to reach teachers and schools in remote communities.
Over the course of the project, novice teachers will receive 268 professional
development hours with approximately 50% delivered electronically. One-hundred
forty-five professional development hours are planned for the mentor teachers
with approximately 30% representing online delivery. The school administrators'
component includes 30 professional development hours augmented by additional
electronic conferences and on-line communication
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project evaluation focuses on teacher
retention, teacher content knowledge, change in classroom practice and
examination of the project as a model for teacher induction and mentoring. The
project is housed at the Wisconsin Educational Partnership Initiative and works
collaboratively with colleges and universities, school districts, state agencies
and local businesses. An advisory committee representative of important
stakeholders including representatives from the State Department of Education
provides guidance and direction to the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With new
State teacher licensing requirements mandating teacher induction and mentoring
experiences for novice teachers, project replication is likely. As a result of
the program, mentor teachers will implement teacher induction and mentoring
programs in their home districts and schools upon program completion.
&lt;br/&gt;