* 0243342
* CAREER:  Development of a Split-Beam Method for Improved Laser Machining of Ceramics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,12/31/2006
* Albert Segall, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/2006
* USD 249,642.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research efforts
focusing on numerically modeling the relationships between the thermal
transients caused by single- and dual-laser machining and the complex stresses
that ultimately lead to premature fractures. A probabilistic fracture model will
be integrated with the stress calculations to help quantify the time and
location of fracture as the laser progresses along the cutting path. The
resulting models will then be used with laser machining experiments to develop
and optimize a process of simultaneously scoring the surface to help control the
path and quality of the final fracture. Another intriguing method that will be
studied involves the use of the dual-laser to "actively stress" the fracture
prone region into a state of thermoelastic compression to lower the probability
of premature fracture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program will also have
a strong educational component that will provide high school and undergraduate
students with hands-on research experience through focused outreach efforts. All
of the research and the evolving laser manufacturing methodology will be
integrated with the curricula at three Washington State University campuses
using the Washington Higher Education Telecommunications System (WHETS) and
video. As a result, the new methodologies will be able to reach a wide variety
of individuals by using a blend of kinesthetic and visual methods that include
numerous hands-on experiences combined with live and video demonstrations. The
overall goals of the project are to develop more efficient laser machining
techniques for ceramics while at the same time helping to create and foster a
positive image of engineering and manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;