* 0243885
* REU Site: Summer Computational Neuroscience &amp; Technology Research Experience for Undergraduates
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Vitit Kantabutra, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 02/28/2007
* USD 232,222.00

0243885 Wells&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a three-year Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of Idaho for ten
students for research opportunities in computational neuroscience and technology
research. The program is designed as an eight-week summer experience. Five
faculty members from three disciplines will serve as mentors. Students will
choose from diverse research topics including cell patterns in regenerated
retina, retinal patterning in mutant zebrafish, simulation of artificial neuron
circuits, integrated circuit layout of artificial neurons, design and testing of
adaptation algorithms, discovery of new artificial neural network topologies via
evolutionary computing, and computer analysis of neuron and glial cell models.
Students will be fully integrated into their mentor's research groups and will
develop collegial relationships by participating in scholarly and recreational
activities such as bi-weekly REU research forums, lunches with professional and
academic role models, evening dinner seminars, a workshop on ethics, and weekend
field trips led by mentors. The program will address the nations need to
increase the pool of researchers from population groups underrepresented in
science and engineering by incorporating recruitment efforts to attract women,
Native Americans, and Hispanic Students. Students majoring in biological
science, electrical/computer engineering, computer science, and mathematics that
have completed their sophomore or junior year will be eligible. Participants
will gain first-hand insights into scientific procedures while earning a
competitive edge in entering and successfully completing graduate research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;