* 0243209
* Writing for Assessment and Learning in the Natural and Mathematical Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2008
* Michael Stecher, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 11/30/2008
* USD 481,850.00

The Writing for Assessment and Learning in the Natural and Mathematical Sciences
(WALS) project adapts the Calibrated Peer Review (CPR), developed and widely
disseminated in Chemistry. The project creates and implements writing
assignments for students in Biology, Mathematics and Physics. The assignments
assess student understanding, enhances student learning, and promotes faculty
inquiry into how students learn. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WALS project involves
carefully crafted writing assignments that promote and assess student conceptual
learning and faculty-guided peer review that promote both critical thinking and
student self-assessment. Through the workshops and writing activities, faculty
participants increase their own understanding of how and what students
understand. Synthesizing multiple classroom research projects provides
significant insight into the nature of student learning in the science and
mathematics. The faculty participants engage in activities lead by a team that
represents expertise in the prescribed content areas, faculty development, the
CPR protocol, writing assignments development, and technology-mediated
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the WALS project are
realized through the collaboration between faculty and students from the Texas
Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher Preparation partner institutions. Of
these, three are Hispanic serving, one a historically black university, and
another 90% female. Diversity issues relating to the implementation of CPR are
investigated. The project impacts approximately 5000 students taking the
affected courses over the project term several of which are taken by future
science and mathematics teachers. The reach of the project therefore extends to
the students of these pre-service teachers.&lt;br/&gt;