* 0243640
* REU Site: Regional Initiative to Promote Undergraduate Participation in Experimental and Computational Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Yogesh Vohra, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Uma Venkateswaran
* 08/31/2007
* USD 298,000.00

The University of Alabama-Birmingham (UAB) continues operating a Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site. The Site is hosted by the Department
of Physics at UAB and includes participation of faculty from Samford University.
Ten undergraduate students are be recruited every year for a ten-week summer
research experience, with a student recruitment focus on women and
underrepresented minorities. Student research projects include high-pressure
materials research, diamond thin films growth and characterization,
microelectronic materials, laser materials, biomaterials and computer
simulations of electronic structure and CVD processes. In addition to
participating in individual research projects, REU students will attend seminars
on scientific communication and ethics in research, on-campus social activities,
and some will give presentations at regional and national
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site includes a Research Experiences for
Teachers (RET) component. The Site recruits two Birmingham area high school
teachers every year for a 5-week summer research experience. Teachers
participate in open-ended research projects in conjunction with REU participants
and under the direction of the faculty. RET participants also attend the
seminars on ethics in research and scientific communication. Opportunities for
incorporating curricular materials in the classroom are addressed in an internal
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;