* 0243765
* REU Site: R.I.S.E. - Research Internships in Science of the Environment at Arkansas State University
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Robyn Hannigan, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2007
* USD 242,291.00

The Program for Environmental Science at Arkansas State University (ASU)
provides a 10-week summer research experience for 10 highly motivated
traditionally under-represented minority undergraduate students interested in
environmental research. The summer research program focuses on interdisciplinary
investigation of aquatic agri-ecosystems in the Delta, Ozark, and Ouachita
regions of Arkansas. The land-use in these regions strongly influences ecosystem
processes such as runoff, nutrient cycling, and aquatic and terrestrial
habitats. In addition, the dominance of agriculture significantly impacts land-
and water-use policy, law and economics. Understanding the chemistry, ecology,
geology, policy and economics of agri-ecosystems provides a unique opportunity
for undergraduate students to investigate relations between natural and
anthropogenic disturbances on ecosystem processes. The principal objectives are
to promote the professional development of undergraduate researchers and instill
a better appreciation for interdisciplinary approaches to problem solving. The
REU scholars, individually and in small groups, work closely with faculty
mentors on research projects ranging from ecotoxicology, geochemistry,
biogeochemistry, vertebrate and invertebrate ecology, to resource management,
policy, law and economics. The program challenges scholars to expand their
disciplinary focus and develop an interdisciplinary perspective. Weekly project
meetings are used to evaluate progress, examine interdisciplinary linkages
between individual research components, and develop new and expanded research
plans. Students also participate in ethics seminars where they have an
opportunity to debate ethical, gender and minority, and environmental policy
issues with the program staff and invited professionals.