* 0243397
* Certifying Sustainable Agriculture: Certification Success, Social Impacts, and Rule-Making in Mexican Organic Coffee Producer Groups and E.U./U.S. Certified Markets
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Tad Mutersbaugh, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2004
* USD 57,527.00

Global changes in the ways that agricultural products are produced, harvested,
transported, processed, distributed, and consumed have dramatically altered
agricultural business in recent decades. One set of changes that has altered
many aspects of the production and distribution chain have been growing demands
by consumers for organically produced commodities. This research project will
examine the certification practices required to certify agricultural products
for international markets. A case study of a certified organic coffee commodity
chain will examine coffee that originates on farms in Oaxaca, Mexico, and is
transported along certifier pathways to European and U.S. markets. Agricultural
product certification provides an environmental conservation model that is of
particular relevance to spatially dispersed producers, such as smallholder
coffee farmers, who possess agricultural plots located in areas of high
conservation value. This case study will focus on certification practices used
to verify that coffee originates in certified plots, conforms to certified
product norms, and is not subsequently blended with non-certified goods.
Preliminary studies have found that some farmer organizations are more
successful in certifying their products than others. The investigator will
compare data on certification success that is spatially paired with village
census data and select eight villages for detailed household demographic
surveys. To determine the quantity and character of increased administrative
labor burdens associated with certification and to ascertain the effect of this
added labor on village economic management and human capital use, the
investigator will conduct work surveys that focus on scheduling and spatial
impacts of certification activities and determine how these affect village
economic management and human capital formation. The investigator also will
examine the particulars of certification work undertaken within villages in
order to ascertain which demands reflect set within international policy forums,
such as the International Organization for Standardization and the United
Nations, and he will compare European Union and U.S. certification pathways to
identify differences in certification rules and
regulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide new insights into
the impact of increasingly complex certification rules and regulations on the
agricultural practices and well-being of small farmers in Mexico and elsewhere.
By exploring the ways that the policies and standards established and
implemented by international organizations and foreign nations impacts on farm
and village economic management practices as well as links between producers,
intermediaries, and consumers, this project will both advance basic knowledge
and also aid in the search for cost-effective agricultural certification
mechanisms that may be extended to poorer farmers and areas of environmental
importance located in developing nations.&lt;br/&gt;