* 0243739
* REU Site:  Land Conservancy and Resource Management at Nature Preserves in the Mid-Atlantic States
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Veronique Delesalle, Gettysburg College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2006
* USD 172,028.00

The focal points of this interdisciplinary summer research experience are land
conservancy and resource management. Students will develop projects specifically
addressing the needs of two local nature preserves, located within 15 miles of
Gettysburg College, Gettysburg, PA. Under the supervision of a research mentor,
participants will work in collaborative teams of two students. During the first
two weeks of the10-week program, students will learn the basic information and
skills (e.g., introduction to the preserves, ecological and social sciences
methods, how to create a GIS database) necessary to develop their research
projects. During the following seven weeks students will collect and analyze
data as well as attend two series of seminars (one on current research in
environmental studies, one on ethical issues). The last week of the program will
be devoted to writing up and presenting the results of projects. Additional
collegial interactions will take place during weekly dinners and field trips.
Finally, students will have the opportunity to present their research to the
local community and have their work included in the environmental education
programs of the preserves. Participants will be exposed to the broader context
of this research and to the social issues involved in the management of nature
preserves. Moreover, this work will provide useful information for the local
preserves and show the general public the value of basic and applied research.
Interested students should contact: Dr. Veronique A. Delesalle, Department of
Biology, Gettysburg College, Gettysburg, PA 17325; Tel. 717-337-6153; email:
delesall@gettysburg.edu.