* 0243665
* 7th United States/Japan Workshop on Urban Earthquake Hazard Reduction (7USJW)
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Susan Tubbesing, Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2004
* USD 99,990.00

The US/Japan Workshop on Urban Earthquake Hazard Reduction will be held March 23
- 26, 2003 in Maui, Hawaii. It is being convened jointly by the Earthquake
Engineering Research Institute and the Japan Institute of Social Safety Science
(ISSS) and will focus on the complexity of urban disasters and their
manifestations for emergency response, sheltering, loss of utilities, their
economic and social impacts, and the recovery process. Reflecting the complexity
and interrelationship of factors in urban disasters, the participation is
uniquely multidisciplinary, reflecting the diversity of knowledge and skills
necessary to urban disaster preparedness, mitigation, response, relief and
recovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous workshops dealing with urban earthquake
hazard reduction have reinforced the development of a strong bond between the
research and professional communities in the United States and Japan and have
encouraged collaborative relationships between US and Japan. This collaborative
research has enriched the US science and engineering communities by introducing
new perspectives and methods into research activities, ultimately providing new
tools to professional engineers, architects, planners, and emergency managers.
It is anticipated that this workshop will further contribute to advances in
research and practice and to our ability to better prepare for and respond to
future earthquakes and other extreme events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;