* 0243772
* REU:  The HERO REU Site
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Brenton Yarnal, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Linda G. Lopez
* 03/31/2006
* USD 325,295.00

This award provides support for an REU-Site as part of the Human-Environment
Regional Observatory project (HERO). HERO is developing the infrastructure to
study and monitor the human causes and consequences of global environmental
change in local areas. Local HEROs will select three students from Pennsylvania,
from Massachusetts, from Kansas, and from Arizona to participate in the Site.
The students will start their summer research activities by taking a two-week
short courses that will introduce them to the concepts and tools needed to study
the local dimensions of global environmental change. After the short course, the
REU students will return to their home states where they will conduct parallel
research activities at the local HEROS. The three-person REU student teams will
work for six weeks with a faculty research mentor, other faculty, post-doctoral
researchers, and graduate students working at the local HEROs. Students will be
introduced to such tools as geographic information systems, aerial photographs,
remote sensing images, and geo-positioning systems. The activities will include
the mapping and field checking of: land cover and land use; natural and
technological hazards; essential facilities; potentially vulnerable
socioeconomic groups, businesses, factories, resource extraction and processing
facilities, and other commercial sites; and critical biological habitats.
Students will also engage in interviews and focus groups. They will stay linked
to their colleagues at the other local HEROs through HERO remote collaboration
tools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award contributes to the Foundation's
continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers in science through
active undergraduate research experiences. &lt;br/&gt;