* 0243489
* REU:  Cellular and Molecular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Jocelyn Spragg, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2006
* USD 195,997.00

Project title: "Cellular and Molecular Biology"&lt;br/&gt;Host institution:
Division of Medical Sciences, Harvard University&lt;br/&gt;Major field:
Biological sciences&lt;br/&gt;Subfields: Molecular biology, cellular biology,
microbiology&lt;br/&gt;No. of students: 10 students/summer&lt;br/&gt;No. of
summer weeks: 10&lt;br/&gt;Academic year activity: Informal advising and
mentoring; networking; &lt;br/&gt;long-term follow up&lt;br/&gt;Contact for
student Cristi Wakim, SHURP staff assistant&lt;br/&gt;recruitment: 617
432-4980&lt;br/&gt; SHURP@hms.harvard.edu &lt;br/&gt;Web address:
www.hms.harvard.edu/dms/diversity/shurpintro.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Division of Medical Sciences is the part of Harvard University that supervises
Ph.D. training programs of the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences for students
who are engaged in basic biological research in laboratories on the Medical
School campus. The Division also sponsors a 10-week summer basic science
research program for undergraduate students to participate in research projects
in the fields of cellular and molecular biology. Objectives of the Cellular and
Molecular Biology REU are to: (a) increase knowledge of basic biological
research (b) develop students' interest in pursuing biological science research
careers: (c) enhance related skills necessary for success; and (d) provide post-
program advising and networking. Participants are recruited from a nation-wide
pool, with particular emphasis on recruiting students who are interested in
careers in research and on recruiting women and members of under-represented
minority groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to their research projects,
program objectives are attained as students participate in weekly student-
faculty research discussions at which they teach each other about their
projects, and in a weekly career development series, which covers such topics as
choosing graduate programs, completing successful applications, and
interviewing. Special skills sessions are also provided. Students participate in
a peer advising/mentoring program with current graduate students and are
provided additional opportunities to meet other research faculty and graduate
students in both academic and social settings. Students receive a stipend,
housing on the Medical School campus, travel to and from the program, and
emergency illness and accident health insurance. Several mechanisms of formative
and summative evaluation are employed. After participation in the REU summer,
program alumni receive twice-yearly newsletters, contact information about each
other, and open access to continued advising and counseling by the program
director, their individual research advisors, and their peer mentors.
&lt;br/&gt;