* 0243584
* Feedback Control of Bifurcations in Spatially-Extended Cardiac Muscle
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Wanda Neu, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2007
* USD 303,000.00

In this multidisciplinary project, researchers from Biomedical Engineering,
Pediatric Cardiology, Physics, and Mathematics will combine theoretical and
experimental approaches to investigate the stability of cardiac response under
rapid pacing. As the pacing rate increases, cardiac muscle exhibits beat-to-beat
changes in the action potential duration (APD alternans). APD alternans and its
clinical manifestation, T-wave alternans, are associated with increased
vulnerability for arrhythmias. Thus, increased understanding of the rhythm
stability coming from the proposed research will lead to the development of new
techniques for detection of the precursors of arrhythmias and for identifying
patients at risk for fibrillation and tachycardias. Specific Aims are: (1)
Develop a new, more robust experimental protocol for determining stability of
the cardiac response pattern. (2) Investigate whether steady-state alternans
occurring in spatially extended, homogeneous tissue is always discordant (i.e.,
APD oscillations in some regions of the tissue are out of phase with the
oscillations at the pacing site). (3) Construct an optical fiber-based
transmural mapping system that allows mapping action potentials in three
dimensions. The research will start with mathematical analysis that uses
idealized models of membrane kinetics. Analytical results will be tested through
computer simulations, first involving idealized membrane models under space
clamp conditions, then progressing to physiologically accurate membrane models
in up to three spatial dimensions. Some models will also take into account
transmural APD heterogeneity. Concurrently, analytical results will be tested
experimentally. Initial tests will use in-vitro preparations of bullfrog
ventricle, which are relatively, and progress to in-vitro wedge preparations of
rabbit ventricle, which exhibit transmural APD heterogeneity and anisotropy
typical for mammalian hearts. The three-way comparisons between results from
theory, computer simulations, and experimental studies will allow us to refine
and, if needed, expand the mathematical theory and computer models, with each
iteration leading to more complete understanding of cardiac dynamics.