* 0243526
* REU Site: Fluids in the Earth from Surface to Core
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Emi Ito, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 03/31/2007
* USD 296,397.00

This is a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site for field,
analytical experimental, and theoretical study of geological fluids. Research in
this program range from surface and near-surface fluid systems to the mantle to
the core. Fourteen undergraduate students will be recruited nationally each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students will investigate topics with the common
theme of fluids in the Earth. They will be involved in various research
activities, including the impacts of human activities on groundwater quality
primarily in karst and fractured rock aquifers, limnogeolgogy research on lakes
to understand regional environmental dynamics, evaulation of the chemical and
mechanical effects of fluids in metamorphic and igneous systems, the effect of
melt on rheology of mantle rocks, and numerical hands-on experience with mantle
convection and core dynamics using scientific
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program features many attributes that
foster a cohort experience. In particular, interns participate in two symposia
in which they explain their projects and results to each other and to members of
the department. In addition, they are exposed to disciplines outside their
summer research by participating in field trips to Midwestern sites (caves,
glacial lake/river features, mid-continent rift lavas), by touring a wide range
of laboratory facilities (rock magnetism, isotope geochemistry, rock mechanics,
electron microscopy) at the University of Minnesota and vicinity. An important
goal of the internship program is to foster a sense of community among the
summer students as they interact with future Earth science colleagues and
friends, and so the program includes weekend activities such as picnics, boating
on Lake Superior, bike rides around the lakes in the Twin Cities, and visits to
museums. Program activities emphasize the connections and commonality of
research carried out in diverse research fields, in order to help develop
communication between the students and an appreciation for the broad range of
problems that can be addressed with the same experimental, analytical and
computational tools.