* 0243518
* International Research Fellowship Program:  The Ecological and Physiological Significance of Thermal Stress:  Characterization of the Heat-Shock Response in Marine Snails
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Jennifer Burnaford, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/2004
* USD 39,122.00

0107327&lt;br/&gt;Burnaford&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research
Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to
twenty-four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-four month
postdoctoral research fellowship by Dr. Jennifer Burnaford to work with Dr.
Peggy Turk-Boyer at CEDO Intercultural Center for the Study of Deserts and
Oceans in Puerto Penasco, Sonora, Mexico (twelve months) and with Dr. Gretchen
Hofmann at Arizona State University (twelve months) on the ecological and
physiological significance of thermal stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Heat-
Shock Response (HSR) is a powerful means of increasing tolerance of individual
organisms to physiological stress; but the consequences of an individual's HSR
expression for populations and communities are poorly understood. The principal
investigator will examine the interaction between HSR physiology and the
distribution, behavior and fitness of natural populations of seven species of
marine snails in the northern Gulf of California. These snails experience wildly
variable temperatures on daily and seasonal time scales and a number of "heat
hours", making them ideal for the study of HSR. By determining how frequently
snails experience HSR inducing stress in the field, how the timing of the HSR
varies during recovery, the long-term consequences of thermal stress in natural
populations, and the importance and effectiveness of behavioral strategies for
avoiding thermal stress in the field, she will significantly increase our
understanding of how sub-lethal stresses affect the distribution and abundance
of these species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CEDO has long-term data on species
abundances and sea-surface temperatures, and several established outreach and
education programs. Dr. Hofmann is a leading researcher on intertidal
animals.&lt;br/&gt;