* 0243710
* Research Expericences for Undergraduates in Water Resources Engineering - Rio Grande Restoration and Related Issues
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* John Stormont, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 04/30/2006
* USD 207,020.00

0243710 Coonrod&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a three-year Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of New Mexico for
eight students for research opportunities in water resources engineering. The
program is designed as a nine-week summer experience. Students will learn about
the historical and cultural value of water, the shifting paradigm of water in
the west, river and riparian restoration strategies, sustainability of water
resources, and the interdisciplinary nature of water resources engineering while
working on specific research projects. The research opportunities for student
participants are both timely and pertinent to issues related to changes along
the Middle Rio Grande Corridor in New Mexico. Students will be engaged in
fieldwork along the Middle Rio Grande Corridor, a site adopted by the university
for the city of Albuquerque and used as a research and education tool. Each
student will work as part of a research team to study a component of the field
site such as bank stabilization or soil evaporation. The research teams will
include REU students, graduate students, and faculty. The research teams will
serve as a collaborative environment that enables mentoring and interdependent
research. Students will be recruited from across the United States with a
special aim of increasing the participation of students from groups
underrepresented in research fields in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;