* 0243913
* Activity and Characteristics of the Dissolved Organic Carbon-Dependent Picoplankton over the Annual Cycle in a Subarctic Lake
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2005
* Don Button, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 11/30/2005
* USD 300,000.00

ABSTRACT
&lt;br/&gt;Button&lt;br/&gt;OPP-0243913&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Principal Investigator will make in situ measurements made throughout the annual
cycle in a near arctic lake where photosynthesis rates vary from zero to 500 mg
C/m2 per day due to large changes in sun angle and snow cover. The work will
focus on changes in the bacterioplankton over the winter/summer transition.
Bacterial activity will be determined by substrate uptake, usually an amino acid
mixture. Measurements will include artificial warming and cooling to determine
activation energies from which temperature preferences are evaluated.
Incubations will include an auxiliary substrate such as glucose to help
determine the energization state of organisms in the collected sample. These
activation energies are determined in conjunction with membrane potential
measurements of the individual cells by flow cytometry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Companion measurements will be cell population and mass by
flow cytometry for calculating specific affinities. The distribution of cell
mass and DNA/cell is used as a further index of organism activity over the
seasons. Cell yields from substrate consumed over the seasons will be used to
help determine productivity and endogenous requirements, particularly during
winter. These are linked to dissolved free amino acid concentrations as an
indication of labile organic substrates. Further characterization will be by DNA
fragment and sequence analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing culture
collections of isolates will be further developed with the objective of finding
and characterizing a typical low DNA, small, typical freshwater oligobacterium
for physiological study. Cultures are used to determine values for missing terms
in specific affinity theory such as the size of thresholds for substrate uptake
and the concentration of transported substrate in cytoplasmic pools. Expanded
statistical theory for testing cell-cell interactions will be applied with the
objective of improving the small (1%) culturability presently attained.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work involves the application of novel theory and
methods to the understanding of microbial processes in the Arctic with
particular reference to seasonal changes in water temperature. These will serve
to improve estimates of bacterial activity and productivity. Novel extinction
culture procedures coupled with new statistical and kinetic theory can help
solidify the sparse understanding of one of our largest forms of active living
material. Developing kinetic theory is beginning to alter paradigms, as is
quantitative flow cytometry together with nutrient flux calculations, and is
thereby altering perceptions of oligobacterial physiology. The novel technology
will be extended to a wide cross section of students through graduate and
undergraduate courses and seminars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the work include the development of novel concepts, such as ways of linking
aspects of the carbon and nutrient cycle to organism activity, physiology,
nutrient concentrations, and temperature. Developments in component
technologies, such as quantitative flow cytometry and extinction culturing, are
applicable to microbiology in general. Most importantly the work will provide a
mechanistically competent alternative to the Michaelis Menten paradigm to
improve description and comparison of microbial activity and
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;