* 0243735
* REU:  Cellular Adaptation to Environmental Challenge
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Stephen Phillips, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2006
* USD 194,589.00

This is an REU Program focused on "Cellular Adaptation to Environmental
Challenge". Cellular systems are perturbed by a wide variety of stimuli
including changes in nutrient availability, signals for cellular differentiation
as well as interactions with pathogens such as bacteria and viruses. Faculty
mentors conduct research projects in all of these areas using concepts and
techniques from the disciplines of molecular biology, biochemistry, cell
biology, microbiology, virology and immunology. Participants will be able to
address questions of great scientific interest as well as have an opportunity to
use state-of-the-art technology. The 10-week program will fund 10 students with
a $3,500 stipend as well as a travel and housing allowance. In addition to
performing research in the laboratory of a research mentor, program students
will meet regularly to share and discuss research findings. They will also
participate in seminars on a wide variety of research topics and receive career
mentoring, training in basic laboratory safety and in the ethical practice of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of the Program are:
&lt;br/&gt;1) To provide a research experience that increases the students'
understanding of the area studied and the practice of scientific
research&lt;br/&gt;2) To inform students about the ethical practice of
scientific research&lt;br/&gt;3) To prepare undergraduate students to pursue
graduate education in biological research&lt;br/&gt;4) To teach students how to
write a scientific abstract and deliver a 10-minute research
presentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information about applying to the program is
at http://www.gradbiomed.pitt.edu. Students accepted into this program will be
either rising sophomores or rising juniors in an accredited four-year college or
university. Underrepresented minorities are encouraged to apply as well as those
attending colleges and universities with limited access to research facilities.
The overall goal of the program is to increase awareness of biological research
as a serious career option and to increase the number of students pursuing
graduate education in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;