* 0243524
* US-Jordan Cooperative Research:  Archaeological Geophysics in Humayma, Jordan
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2006
* Gregory Baker, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/2006
* USD 32,000.00

0243524&lt;br/&gt;Baker &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a cooperative project between Dr. Gregory Baker, Department of
Geology, State University of New York (SUNY) at Buffalo and Dr. Fawaz Khraysheh,
Department of Antiquities, Ministry of Tourism &amp; Antiquities, Amman, Jordan.
They plan to investigate the application of geophysical research tools in
archeological research. The test site is a 4th century Roman Fort and
surrounding environs located in Humayma, Jordan. One objective of this project
is to correlate in detail the interpretations of geophysical data already
collected in 2002, and others to be collected in 2003, with the results of
archaeological excavations to be conducted in 2003 and 2004. Planned excavations
will focus on areas where geophysical interpretations clearly show subsurface
structures as well as areas where there is no indication of structures. Thus, a
quantitative calculation of both Type I and Type II errors in the application of
near-surface geophysical techniques to archaeology at the site can be
determined. The second objective of this project is to advance the process of
fusing geophysical data from different geophysical tools. Satellite remote
sensing tools will collect different bands of data to be combined in various
ways to generate better images. Preliminary research will be conducted to
transfer this approach to a new methodology of geophysical data fusion. Data
from different geophysical tools will be mathematically combined to determine if
more information can be obtained than would be available by only qualitatively
combining data from each tool separately. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: In
addition to support from NSF, support is provided from Canada for the
archeological studies and part of the geophysical work, while the Jordanian
Department of Antiquities will support their staff member for data collection.
The project represents an opportunity to leverage funds and resources from
several different sources toward basic science objectives in geophysics and in
anthropology, and to answer basic questions about the development of the
settlements in the Humayma region. The results will have applications and
benefits to scientists in Jordan. Three students at SUNY Buffalo will
participate in this international collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;