* 0243750
* REU Site in Tropical Ecology and Evolution at El Verde Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Luis Ramirez-Ulate, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 10/31/2006
* USD 186,617.00

The REU program in Tropical Ecology and Evolution, University of Puerto Rico, is
based at El Verde Field Station, in the tropical rainforest of Puerto Rico. The
program goal is to provide research experiences for undergraduates by immersing
them in an active research environment, providing guidance from established
scientists while they develop an independent research project, providing
educational activities designed to equip students with the necessary tools to
conduct scientific research, and, in many cases, providing them the opportunity
to study and conduct research in an ecosystem and culture not easily accessible
at their home institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students will
spend most of their ten-week internship developing a research project in
coordination with a faculty mentor. We have enrolled a group of active mentors
with expertise in areas of plant (e.g., plant population biology, community
dynamics, and forest ecology), arthropod (aquatic and terrestrial), and soil
ecology, as well as evolution (e.g., plant reproductive ecology, population
genetics). Every year, students will have a wide variety of potential areas of
study to choose from depending on their area of interest. Students will also
participate of seminars and workshops on scientific data analysis, data
presentation, and techniques to study different groups of tropical organisms and
ecosystems (e.g., forest, soil, streams). An ethical component will focus on
common issues likely to be encountered by students during their careers as well
as discussions on the role of scientists in modern society. We consider critical
to stress to the students the impact that scientists could have in our society
if they take active roles. This combination of activities will provide students
with the tools needed to conduct scientific research in any area of science,
with emphasis on Tropical Ecology and Evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU
site in Tropical Ecology and Evolution at the University of Puerto Rico, Rio
Piedras, will enroll eight undergraduate students every year. Students will be
selected based on their academic qualifications (e.g., GPA, letters of
recommendation) and interest in pursuing graduate studies. We will give emphasis
to students from institutions where research programs are not easily accessible
(e.g., teaching colleges) and to minorities. Students will participate in the
program for 10 weeks during summer break, spending most of their time in the
field conducting scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For additional
information contact Alonso Ramirez (aramirez@sunites.upr.clu.edu; Telephone:
787-764-0000, ext. 7781) or visit the program's web site at
http://sunites.upr.clu.edu/REU/index.htm&lt;br/&gt;