* 0243880
* REU Site:  Cellular, Molecular and Genetic Approaches to Biological Problems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2009
* John David, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2009
* USD 296,429.00

Host Institution: University of Missouri-Columbia&lt;br/&gt;Partner
Institutions: Florida A&amp;M University, Grinnell College (IA), Long Island
University-Brooklyn Campus, Medgar Evers College (NY), Prairie View A&amp;M
University (TX), Southwest Missouri State University, St. Elizabeth's College
(NJ), Truman State University (MO), University of Arkansas-Pine Bluff, Xavier
University (LA)&lt;br/&gt;Major Field: Biological Sciences&lt;br/&gt;Subfields:
Cell Biology, Molecular Biology, and Genetics&lt;br/&gt;Project Title: Cellular,
Molecular, and Genetic Approaches to Biological Problems&lt;br/&gt;Number of
Students: 10 per year&lt;br/&gt;Summer Weeks on Site: 8&lt;br/&gt;Point of
Contact: Dr. Linda Blockus; 573-882-5979; BlockusL@Missouri.edu&lt;br/&gt;Web
Site:
www.lsurop.Missouri.edu/undergrad/oncampus/NSF_REU.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
NSF-REU Site Program provides summer research opportunities for 10
undergraduates from 10 partner institutions including four Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (Florida A&amp;M University, Prairie View A&amp;M
University, University of Arkansas-Pine Bluff, Xavier University), two minority-
serving institutions (Long Island University-Brooklyn Campus, Medgar Evers
College), three primarily undergraduate institutions (Grinnell College,
Southwest Missouri State University, Truman State University), and a women's
college (St. Elizabeth's College). The University of Missouri (MU) provides a
research experience at a major comprehensive research university, while faculty
at the partner institutions are responsible for the selection of the interns.
The partners also help prepare the interns for their summer research experience
at MU and continue their training when they return to their home campus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our partnerships are designed to provide a summer research
experience for undergraduates, especially members of minority groups
underrepresented in the sciences, who would not otherwise have an opportunity to
conduct research in a state-of-the-art environment. This Program is specifically
designed to stimulate interest in graduate study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research programs of the MU faculty mentors center on "Cellular, Molecular, and
Genetic Approaches to Biological Problems." These research programs use
methodology ranging from recombinant DNA technology to molecular cytology to
sophisticated population genetics. The research experience is the heart of the
summer program. Interns also develop communication skills through brown-bag
lunches, lab group meetings, and an end-of-program Summer Undergraduate Research
Science Symposium and poster session. They are strongly encouraged to present
their research at regional and national scientific meetings, with the Program
providing financial support. Enrichment activities include seminars by research
faculty, panel discussions on preparation for graduate school and career
options, and a science ethics workshop.&lt;br/&gt;