* 0243536
* Science Education Online (SEO)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Stephen Schneider, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Michael Haney
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,200,003.00

Contributing to the national agenda to improve science education and science
literacy, this project will investigate distance learning and specifically web-
based instruction as a means to prepare and enhance middle level science
teachers. The project starts with one cohort group of 30 teachers from districts
known to have severely under-performing eighth grade students. Subsequent
cohorts are added in each year as the project courses and materials come on-
line, drawing on teachers who might not otherwise pursue science-specific
liscensure. As the significant development and implmentation work is completed
the project should be self sustaining and institutionalized, attracting
additional tuition-based cohorts to sustain the courses and degree program. A
strength of this project is its commitment to including school-based
practitioners, scientists and science educators in all phases of the development
and delivery of this program. Consequently, this project holds great potential
to also impact the partner institutions by grounding science teacher preparation
and certification programs in the real world of the practitioner, enhancing
science faculty in their instructional practices and educators in their breadth
and depth of content knowledge and fostering collaboration between K12 and
higher education. Specifically, this project builds on a unique partnership
between the University of Massachusetts - Amherst and Lowell Schools of
Education and the Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education
Institute to develop, deliver and evaluate a web-based middle level science
teacher certification program leading to a Master of Science Education degree.
Aligned with both national and state standards, this program has the potential
to reach both urban and rural middle level teachers concurrently by offering the
program at a distance so that teachers can study from their own location on
their own schedule. Incorporating both face-to-face and web-based instruction,
the project design facilitates teacher learning of both content and appropriate
pedagogy while they are in teaching positions and can implement what they are
learning and to reflect on the experiences of doing so. The project evaluation
includes formative and summative components to investigate the development and
implementation of the teacher certification program as well as to understand the
distance learning technologies used to deliver the program. This project may
serve as a model research, development and dissemination process for teacher
professional development and to meet requirements for SMT certification.

