* 0243571
* Transport Theory with Bose-Einstein Statistics for RHIC and Investigations of Novel Properties of Dense Neutron-Rich Matter
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Bao-An Li, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 07/31/2005
* USD 15,000.00

In this RUI (Research in Undergraduate Institutions) renewal proposal, the PI
proposes to undertake two new projects, i.e., (1) development and application of
a transport theory with Bose-Einstein statistics for ultra-relativistic heavy-
ion collisions at Brookhaven's Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider (RHIC) and (2)
investigations of nov- el properties of dense neutron-rich matter with energetic
radioactive beams. The large number of pions produced and thus the high value of
pion phase-space density reached in heavy-ion collisions at RHIC requires a
proper inclusion of the Bose-Einstein s- tatistics (multi-boson symmetrization)
in the reaction dynamics. The Bose-Einstein statistics is currently neglected in
essentially all dynamical models for RHIC. The focus of the PI's work on the
first project is to include the Bose-Einstein statistics in both the
hadronization and the subsequent dynamical evolution of hadrons, most
importantly pions, within a multi-phase transport model. The transport theory
with Bose-Einstein statistics will be a useful tool for predicting reliably and
interpreting critically nuclear collision data at RHIC, especially the single-
particle spectra, multi- particle correlation functions and the collective ow of
pions. It might also beuseful for solving the Hanbury Brown/Twiss (HBT) puzzle
found in experiments at RHIC. The ultimate goals of the second project are to
determine accurately the isospin dependence of the nuclear equation of state
(EOS) and to investigate novel properties of dense neutron-rich matter that was
not in reach in terrestrial laboratories before. These are important issues
identified in the most recent U.S. long-range plan (LRP) for nuclear physics and
foundamental properties that govern many aspects of neutron stars. To extract
crucial information about the isospin-dependence of the nuclear EOS, the PI
proposes to investigate several experimental observables in nuclear reac- tions
induced by energetic neutron-rich nuclei at existing radioactive beam facilities
and the future Rare Isotope Accelerator, identified as the top priority for new
con- struction in the U.S. LRP for nuclear physics. Moreover, several novel
properties of dense neutron-rich matter will be explored. These include the
isospin separation instability, the unique 0