* 0243674
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Algebra, Combinatorics, Graph Theory and Matrix Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Sivaram Narayan, Central Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 04/30/2006
* USD 163,800.00

This grant will continue a Research Experiences for Undergraduates site at
Central Michigan University (CMU). Each summer for the next three years
(2003-05), eight students recruited nationwide will engage in mathematical
research during the eight-week program. The primary objective is to stimulate
talented undergraduate students to pursue graduate work in science and
mathematics by providing accessible and challenging research problems in basic
mathematics. Typical problem areas include the Laplacian spectrum of graphs,
Schur stability of matrices, the zero-divisor graph of a semigroup, and relative
difference sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four faculty members will be active in
the three-year program; three faculty members will coordinate the effort each
summer. Students will work in groups of two with one faculty mentor. Students
will make presentations of their progress during weekly seminars. Each student
will submit a written report at the end of the program. Students will be
encouraged to publish their work and make presentations at professional
meetings. Every effort will be made during recruitment process to attract
applications from students in under represented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The faculty mentors have considerable experience in
guiding undergraduate research projects. In 2002 CMU received NSF funding as an
REU-site in mathematics and that summer program was evaluated as a highly
successful project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students will be provided $2400 in
stipend, housing costs, meal allowance, and travel support for conference
presentations. CMU will provide access to classrooms, seminar rooms, the campus
library, computer labs, laptops, printer, copying services and recreational
facilities. To complement the research experience a number of social and
enrichment activities have been planned. A day trip to Dow Chemical or Ford
Motor Company will provide some exposure to mathematics in the workplace. A day
trip to Mackinaw Island will provide a broader historical perspective on the
State of Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
is based on the challenging mathematical problems the students will attempt to
solve. The students will tackle unsolved problems whose solutions (or partial
solutions) will improve human understanding of the very structure of
mathematics. The broader impacts of the proposed project include training
undergraduates in research in basic mathematics, increasing the participation of
women and minorities in science and math activities, and involving
undergraduates as young professionals in the broader disciplinary field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Point of Contact:&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Sivaram
Narayan&lt;br/&gt;989-774-3566&lt;br/&gt;sivaram.narayan@cmich.edu&lt;br/&gt;