* 0243479
* Preparing, Inspiring and Connecting Students to College and Opportunity:  Increasing the Quality and Intensity of Professional Development for Mathematics Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2011
* James Choike, The College Board
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 03/31/2011
* USD 3,544,855.00

The College Board, in partnership with LessonLab, Inc. and several urban school
districts, seeks NSF funding for a three-year project to develop, pilot and
evaluate the effectiveness and scalability of a blended offline/online
professional development program for mathematics teachers of grades 6-12. This
intensive PD program will provide teachers with the content knowledge and
pedagogical skills necessary to deliver quality mathematics instruction to
underserved students, so that a larger percentage of low-income and minority
students may enroll and succeed in advanced-level mathematics courses, including
AP Calculus and AP Statistics.

The proposed project is the third component of a comprehensive mathematics
system under development. Support from the GE Fund has enabled the College Board
to develop the first two system components: the instructional materials for
grades 6-12 (in the pilot phase at the time of proposal submission), and the
embedded diagnostic assessments (under development at the time of proposal
submission). Increasing the percentage of underserved minority students in
upper-level classes requires a long-term commitment. But, for teachers' content
knowledge and instructional skills to improve and classroom practices to change,
intensive high-quality PD needs to be provided in a sustainable and scalable
way. That is the challenge to which this project responds directly.

