* 0243947
* NSF-Europe: Computer Simulation of Fracture and Deformation Behavior of Nanocrystalline Metallic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Diana Farkas, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2007
* USD 258,000.00

This NSF-Europe award supports international collaborative research involving
the Paul Scherrer Institute, Switzerland. The PI will study of the mechanical
behavior of nanocrystalline metallic materials using computer simulation models
at the atomic scale. The research program will build on an initial collaboration
that focussed on modeling the structure of general, randomly generated grain
boundaries in these materials and included a fracture response study of
nanocrystalline Ni. The PI will build on this past work and utilize advances in
computer technology to carry out a more realistic study of the behavior of fcc
metals with full three-dimensional treatments of the polycrystalline structure
as well as internal defect structures in a wide range of grain sizes. The
collaboration involves performing atomic level computer simulations of the
deformation and fracture behavior of realistic three-dimensional models of
various nanocrystalline fcc metals. The effects of impurity elements on the
deformation and fracture properties will be studied in detail. The PI will use a
multi-scale approach, starting with first principle calculations that are used
as input in the development of empirical interatomic force laws, continuing with
molecular dynamics simulations of the response to loading of multimillion atom
simulation blocks. The work will be closely linked with experiments related to
the development of new nanostructured materials. The research will address
fundamental questions in the area of fracture and deformation of nanocrystalline
materials and will contribute to basic understanding of the particular behavior
of these materials under loading and addressing the basic plasticity mechanisms
operating in the crack tip region. The simulation studies will be designed to
critically study the effects of various types of interfaces and interface
defects on the mechanical response of the nanostructured material containing a
large amount of interface material. Enhanced understanding in these areas will
likely impact the design of new nanostructured materials. This activity also
involves graduate level education and exposure to the broader international
scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;This NSF project is co-funded by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities, the Division of Materials Research, and the
International Office (Western Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in Materials
Research between the NSF and Europe (NSF 02-135). This project is being carried
out in collaboration with the Paul Scherrer Institute, Switzerland. The
counterpart project is funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This NSF-Europe award supports international
collaborative research involving the Paul Scherrer Institute, Switzerland. The
PI will study of the mechanical behavior of nanocrystalline metallic materials
using computer simulation models at the atomic scale. The research program will
build on an initial collaboration that focussed on modeling the structure of
general, randomly generated grain boundaries in these materials. The PI will
build on this past work and utilize advances in computer technology to carry out
a more realistic study of the behavior of fcc metals with full three-dimensional
treatments of the polycrystalline structure as well as internal defect
structures in a wide range of grain sizes. The collaboration involves performing
atomic level computer simulations of the deformation and fracture behavior of
realistic three-dimensional models of various nanocrystalline fcc metals. The
effects of impurity elements on the deformation and fracture properties will be
studied in detail. The work will be closely linked with experiments related to
the development of new nanostructured materials. The proposed research will
address fundamental questions in the area of fracture and deformation of
nanocrystalline materials. The simulation studies will be designed to critically
study the effects of various types of interfaces and interface defects on the
mechanical response of the nanomaterial containing a large amount of interface
material. Enhanced understanding or mechanical response at the atomic level will
likely impact the design of new nanostructured materials. This activity also
involves graduate level education and exposure to the broader international
scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;This NSF project is co-funded by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities, the Division of Materials Research, and the
International Office (Western Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in Materials
Research between the NSF and Europe (NSF 02-135). This project is being carried
out in collaboration with the Paul Scherrer Institute, Switzerland. The
counterpart project is funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation. The
counterpart project is funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;