* 0243242
* Scaffolding Research in Computer Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Josh Tenenberg, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 04/30/2007
* USD 164,180.00

The project is comprised of a set of integrated activities focused on specific
acts of collaborative research called "experiment kits". An experiment kit is
designed by an expert in CS Education research and details the design of a piece
of research, from methodology to analysis, and situates it in its theoretical
context (readings, case studies and further references). It will be presented at
a one-week workshop in June, 2003. Participants will leave the workshop fully
versed in their "experiment kit": a clearly defined research problem, empirical
study designs and methodological confidence. Data gathering will be carried out
collaboratively during the 2003-2004 academic year in the participants'
classrooms, maintaining contact over the intervening period for problem solving
and support, forming an electronic research network. Participants will also
attend a meeting at SIGCSE 04, for discussion of specific practical issues that
the participants may have encountered in their institutional contexts, to expose
them to the wider SIGCSE community, and to meet with those who participated in
the related project Bootstrapping Research in CS Education (DUE-0122560). This
meeting will provide opportunities for longitudinal transfer between the
Scaffolding and Bootstrapping cohorts, and extend the circle of discussants and
discourse to a group engaged in similar although not identical research work.
During the summer of 2004, there will be a capstone workshop in which
participants share results, analyze data, make plans for reporting and
disseminating those results in professional journals, and in collaborating on
follow-up research. Following the second summer workshop, there will be a final
meeting of all Scaffolding and Bootstrapping participants at SIGCSE 05 for
reflection on lessons learned, collaboration on ongoing and new research
projects, and integration into the larger CS Ed community.