* 0243254
* Designing a Peer Evaluation Instrument that is Simple, Reliable, and Valid
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Misty Loughry, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 11/30/2007
* USD 644,590.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;A simple, reliable cooperative learning group peer
evaluation method is the focus of this project. The project addresses an issue
that is significant for the effective use of and wider acceptance of cooperative
learning in engineering education. The instrument being designed and tested will
not provide the same level of feedback as more complex and difficult- to-use
instruments, but its reliability and validity should be comparable or higher
than those of the best instruments currently available, and its simplicity will
encourage widespread adoption by faculty who are not ready to make the
commitment to more ambitious approaches. This project builds from what is known
about cooperative learning. A multi-item instrument with good administration has
good potential for becoming a successful instrument. The project is working on
crucial issues in peer evaluation (inflation of scores, identical scores, and
bias) and in reliability (number of raters, number of administrations). Because
there is no true measure of the quality of teamwork, the project is using
multiple assessment methodologies and seeking concurrence among them. Instrument
validity is being established through verbal protocol analysis, behavioral
observation, and concurrence with results obtained with other validated
instruments. Both test-retest reliability and inter-rater reliability are being
assessed. The project is being conducted in a distributive fashion in five
participating institutions. There are nine faculty across these institutions,
experimenting with different methods of assessment in eleven different courses.
The breadth of courses and instructors promises to make the developed method
robust. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact &lt;br/&gt;This peer evaluation
instrument is expected to significantly improve both team-based engineering
education and assessment activities. Instructors using it are able to improve
the teaching of team skills by giving students formative peer feedback.
Engineering programs using it can document that their students have the ability
to work in teams. The successful dissemination of the prototype instrument
through publications and presentations has been promising. The simplicity,
validity, and reliability of this instrument can be expected to speed its
adoption at other institutions. The involvement of schools from multiple
Engineering Education Coalitions is also likely to accelerate its dissemination.
The assessment instrument and its associated rubric and instructions are also of
potential interest to a large number of academic programs. The instrument under
development is useful anywhere cooperative groups are employed. Extensive
testing for validation and reliability evaluation for this tool should also
minimize any unintended gender or racial bias. &lt;br/&gt;