* 0243788
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Biology: Interdependence Across Subdisciplines
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Douglas Swartzendruber, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2004
* USD 79,800.00

The aim of our summer undergraduate research program is to facilitate the
maturation of undergraduate students as young scientists in biology by immersing
them in an interactive, 11-week session of original research activities. The
primary goals are to teach students the essentials of the scientific method,
which are common to a spectrum of biological subdisciplines, and to expose
students to the benefits of interaction, collaboration and interdependence
across subdisciplines. The ultimate hope is to inspire students to pursue a life
of service in the biological sciences, whether it is in research, applied
science or education. The theme for our research activities is cellular stress
physiology. Fundamental to all biological systems is the requirement for
cellular adaptation to stress, thus enabling organismal propagation in diverse
environments. Students will have opportunity to pursue projects among a wide
range of cellular and organismal systems from yeast, mammalian cells in tissue
culture, amphibian epidermal tissue, to xylem vessel elements in higher plants.
The potential types of cellular stress responses examined will include salinity-
induced osmotic stress, drought stress, freezing stress, UV-B radiation stress,
biomechanical stress, and biochemical stress signaling. Students will play a
pivotal role in the conception and design of their personal research projects
and will participate in a 2-day retreat to formally present, evaluate and refine
their research proposals. All projects will be student-initiated and student-
generated within the framework of active, cutting-edge science. Students will be
supervised by faculty-mentors in plant physiological ecology, mammalian cell
biology, molecular biology, or developmental biology. Each summer the program
will begin with a 14-day research orientation workshop during which students
will be introduced to specific research techniques and immersed in the research
process (literature review, hypothesis formulation, and hypothesis testing).
Over the course of the summer, visiting scientists will hold special research
seminars and spend time critiquing student projects. Students will receive
professional training at special seminars or panel sessions and will participate
in community outreach by hosting an "open house" for local school children and
their parents. The program will conclude with a student research symposium,
student poster session and banquet, bringing cohesion, celebration and closure
to the summer experience. Students will receive a stipend of $3600, housing,
meal allowance and travel assistance. For more information, contact Stephen
Davis at davis@pepperdine.edu.