* 0243598
* Collaborative Research:  The Role of Canopy Structure on Variability of Water and Heat Fluxes from Forested Watersheds
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,08/31/2003
* John Albertson, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2003
* USD 65,884.00

9902957&lt;br/&gt;Albertson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study investigates the
exchange of water vapor, energy, and momentum between forested watersheds and
the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL), using a combination of emerging tools in
numerical simulation of turbulent flow and transport through and above plant
canopies and recent result from a comprehensive field campaign. The field
experiment, conducted in October of 1997, included seven research groups
measuring land surface fluxes of water vapor, heat, carbon dioxide, and momentum
on seven towers situated within a pine forest at Duke Forest near Durham, North
Carolina. The data set studied here is the first comprehensive experiment that
includes simultaneous velocity statistics and flux measurements at as many as
seven locations in the canopy sublayer of a forest along with detailed leaf area
density profile measurements in space. To explore and generalize the
relationship between forest structure and observed heat and water vapor fluxes,
an investigation using three-dimensional Large Eddy Simulations (LES) is
proposed. These simulations are the first to explicitly consider variability in
leaf area density in space and employ radiative transfer schemes to
realistically account for energy attenuation by foliage elements. The
simulations, which treat the foliage as a multiply-connected porous medium, will
permit investigating how the spatial structure of forest canopies interact with
energy/radiation and the turbulent transport dynamics to give rise to the
observed spatial patterns in land surface flux fields within and above the
canopy. An anticipated result is an understanding of what spatial variability in
fluxes could be attributed to spatial variability in canopy structure for flux
measurements within the canopy sublayer. The results from this study will guide
future field experiments that seek to estimate forest-wide average fluxes from
tower measurement and will rigorously assess the range of applicability of one-
dimensional canopy models.&lt;br/&gt;