* 0243160
* Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Laser-Nanoparticle Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Shaochen Chen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 05/31/2007
* USD 470,667.00

Nanoparticles are among the most important nanomaterials in nanoscience and
nanoengineering. Innovative applications of these nanoparticles in an
engineering system such as nanosphere-enhanced photolithography are emerging.
However, little is known about the physics of the process, especially the
optical and thermal transport issues involving extremely small length and time
scales. This project will offer comprehensive investigations on the laser-
nanosphere interaction process by a combination of experimental techniques and
theoretical simulation, including ultrafast laser interaction with the
nanospheres resting on a solid substrate, conduction and radiative heat transfer
between the nanopsheres and the substrate, as well as surface nanostructuring as
a result of the nanoscale optical interaction and heat transfer. From this
research, a practical nanolithography tool will be developed for massively
parallel nanomanufacturing of a variety of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will make a
significant impact on the interdisciplinary field of nanoscale thermal
transport, nanooptics, and nanomanufacturing. Moreover, the results of this work
will provide exciting teaching materials and interesting lab projects for
undergraduates, graduate students, and K-12 students and teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award has been funded jointly by the Thermal Transport
and Thermal Processing Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division
and by the Nanomanufacturing Program of the Division of Design, Manufacturing
and Industrial Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;