* 0243606
* Theory and Applications of Sharp Nonparametric Estimation and Learning
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Sam Efromovich, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* grace yang
* 09/30/2006
* USD 167,805.00

abstract

PI: SAM EFROMOVICH proposal number: 0243606

The primary focus of this research is to develop general methods of data-driven
statistical estimation and learning motivated by and tested on environmental,
medical and biological applications. The main intellectual objectives are
threefold: (A) In the case of settings with known sharp asymptotics (like
censored or biased datasets), develop the theory of the onset of the sharp
optimality and the equivalence between statistical models for small datasets;
(B) In the case of models with indirect observations and nuisance functions
(like error density estimation in heteroscedastic nonparametric regression or
recovery of a hidden component in time series), develop the theory of sharp
estimation and sampling with fixed accuracy; (C) In the case of inverse problems
with unknown operator, develop data-driven learning machines implying sharp
estimation. Practical problems include statistical modeling of temporal and
spatial structures of plants in Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge, modeling of
arsenic concentration in Albuquerque water basin, the study of municipal
wastewater treatment plants, statistical modeling of spreading hantavirus, and
learning machines for recovery magnetic resonance images.

The primary focus of this research is to develop, in collaboration with Sandia
National Laboratories and the UNM Medical School, algorithms and software for
adaptive statistical estimation and learning motivated by and tested on the
following environmental, medical and biological applications: Statistical
modeling of temporal and spatial structures of plants in Sevilleta National
Wildlife Refuge; Modeling of arsenic concentration in Albuquerque water basin;
Study of municipal wastewater treatment plants; Statistical modeling of
spreading hantavirus; Learning machines for recovery magnetic resonance images.
The broader impact of the research is defined by the well-understood
applications that can encourage students to study mathematics and can help a
broader audience to understand the importance of statistics. The impact is based
on the following activities: (i) Developing a new course on adaptive statistical
estimation taught via the UNM web-based program; (ii) Weekly scientific seminars
(supported in part by private grants) held for undergraduate and graduate
students, and talks during the UNM mathematical awareness weeks for high-school
students; (iii) Regular presentations at outreach seminars conducted by the UNM
Valencia campus to broaden participation of under-represented groups; (iv)
Posting the developed software, databases, and practical findings, that can be
of interest to a broader audience, on the investigator's webpage; (iv)
Publishing of medical, environmental and biological findings, benefiting the
society, in non-technical journals.

