* 0243834
* REU Site:    Undergraduate Research in Algebra, Analysis, and Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Timothy Pennings, Hope College
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 02/28/2007
* USD 145,040.00

Hope College will host an REU program for six undergraduates in mathematics.
Students will work in groups with one or two faculty members. Projects will be
chosen from topics in algebra, probability and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primary goals are to help talented and motivated
students develop as mathematical researchers, to promote mathematics research as
a career, and to have the participants achieve significant mathematical results
in partnership with a faculty mentor. In particular, students will 1) learn new
mathematics, 2) gain mathematical independence by learning to read math texts
and journals, 3) solve an original mathematical problem, 4) learn to communicate
mathematics verbally through presentation of problems and papers, and 5) write a
mathematical paper suitable for submission to a
journal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will be eight weeks. Students will
initially learn about their own projects and those of other students through
introductory lectures given by the faculty researchers. Student research begins
by reading background material either provided by the mentor or found through
library research. The student pairs will then be given their own project or
problem to solve. The mentors will be actively involved both in helping the
students obtain the requisite background understanding, and as consultants and
partners on the problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will present results at
seminars during the last portion of the program. Students will be encouraged to
present their work at professional meetings and in published form. Funds will be
provided for travel to professional meetings. In each year of the program, at
least four of the student participants will be recruited from outside Hope
College. A significant effort will be made to recruit women and members of
minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As indicated in the above description, the
intellectual merit of this program consists in discovering new mathematics and
developing viable mathematical models consistent with the constraints of
collaborating with undergraduate students. The broader impacts, which is the
main focus of this program, is to expose and engage undergraduate students to
mathematical research and a stimulating environment so as to motivate them
towards and prepare them for graduate school and a professional career in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;