* 0243474
* Multi-Object/Multidimensional Auctions
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2002
* Mordechai Perry, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 11/30/2002
* USD 4,385.00

Abstract This project deals with the study of multi-object auctions with multi-
dimensional signals. The recent spurt in interest in the study of multiple-
object auctions is largely the result of large-scale privatization of socially
held assets by governments. In light of the emerging view that many results from
the mechanism design and information economics literature fail to extend to
multiple-object multi-dimensional settings, and in consideration of the
influence economic theory has had on the recent design of a number of these
privatization auctions, it is of some importance to understand which of the
results from the one-good one-dimensional signal auction literature, on which
economists base most of their intuition, are sensitive to dimensionality. This
is especially germane since the multi-object, multi-dimensional case is by far
the more common. Milgrom and Weber (1982) provide a number of important results
on the revenue-ranking of various auction forms under incomplete information.
However, their analysis is limited to the case in which the seller has but a
single unit of an indivisible good, and the signals received by the bidders are
one-dimensional. As a first step beyond the Milgrom-Weber framework, and in
order to get a feel for the underlying economics, we derive the equilibrium of a
Vickrey auction in the simplest possible extension of the single-unit
environment. That is, we consider a homogeneous-good, two-unit setup wherein
there are but two agents. The agents receive affiliated signals regarding the
value of the good and there is a common-value component to the agents'
valuations. Remarkably, in this very simple 2x2 environment, we are able to
demonstrate the failure of the linkage principle. The significance of this
finding is highlighted by the recent design of the spectral auction. It is
widely agreed by the experts involved in the process that the choice to include
an open-auction format in the FCC auction was largely influenced by the faith
placed (now perhaps misplaced) in the linkage principle. We continue this line
of research by conducting a careful study of the equilibria and their properties
in multi-object/multi-dimensional auction environments. There are numerous
questions we focus on. Does the linkage principle hold for multi-unit first-
price auctions? Is the multi-unit ascending auction efficient? What are its
equilibrium strategies? How do its revenues compare to those in the multi-unit
Vickrey auction? What are the equilibrium strategies there?