* 0243409
* SGER:  Identifying and Characterizing Reliability Properties for a Sub 5 nm High k Dielectric Device
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Way Kuo, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 07/31/2004
* USD 97,123.00

The objectives of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) pilot study
are: 1) to identify the failure modes and the failure mechanisms of newly
designed and fabricated high k dielectric nano devices, and 2) to analyze and
characterize the early failure pattern that can be used in a Bayesian analysis.
The goal of the study is to use failure mode identification to set the
foundation for reliability analysis and validation in newly designed nano
products (being fabricated by the Co-PI). Failure mechanisms and other physical
properties have a significant bearing on high infant mortality and low yield.
Because the sample quantity available for reliability testing is small and the
products are expensive, it is inevitable that Bayesian analysis will have to be
used. This study intends to determine exactly what information to extract for
such an analysis. The end result of the work will lead to a full-scale project
for developing a theoretical model to bridge the reliability and yield
relationship for nano products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary
project will rigorously explore reliability applications in a newly invented
nano product. The project will bring to the academic community a theoretical
foundation for modeling nano reliability. This project will have major impact on
society because it is the first exploratory study to address the reliability
issue at the design stage in newly fabricated nano devices.