* 0243120
* US-India Coop Res: Structure &amp; Evolution of the South Indian Craton &amp; Mobile Belts from Deep Seismic Profiling &amp; other Geophysical &amp; Geological Investigations: A LE
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Larry Brown, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/2005
* USD 23,180.00

This award supports a US-India cooperative research project entitled Structure
and Evolution of the South Indian Craton and Mobile Belts from Deep Seismic
Profiling and other Geophysical and Geological Investigations: A LEGENDS
Initiative. US PI David Brown, Cornell University and Indian collaborator
Parvata R. Reddy, National Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI), Hyderabad will
investigate the deep crustal and lithospheric structure of the South Indian
craton in the context of its role as one of the key fragments of the
supercontinent, know as Gondwanaland. They will assess existing geophysical data
from India and prioritize the critical scientific issues represented by the
lithosphere of southern India. They will also design a strategic program of
modern geophysical and geological surveys in southern India that will ultimately
be implemented as part of the larger LEGENDS initiative, which will probe the
lithosphere of the East Gondwana continental fragments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will offer new insight into key aspects of
continental evolution such as the nature of collisional sutures in the lower
crust and upper mantle, the space-time interaction of collisional and
extensional structures on the lithospheric scale, and the definition of the
lithosphere across a range of continental dimensions. This project will promote
new collaborations not only between US and Indian scientists but with scientists
from the neighboring Gondwana countries of East Africa, Madagascar and Sri
Lanka. This research is supported by the Indian Department of Science &amp;
Technology under the NSF/DST joint program.