* 0243325
* Collaborative Research:  Field Testing RAFOS-Enabled SOLO Floats (SGER)
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2004
* Sarah Gille, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 10/31/2004
* USD 13,482.00

0243325 Gille&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will build three new RAFOS-
enabled isopycnal-following Sounding Oceanographic Lagrangian Observer (SOLO)
floats and test them within a sound source&lt;br/&gt;array that is being
deployed in the North Atlantic. The experiment is an important technology
demonstration project that brings together software and hardware that have been
developed for a number of other field programs to produce a novel float with
important new capabilities. The floats will be based on the SOLO float design so
that, at the least, they can be tracked every 10 days no matter where they go in
the world and provide temperature and salinity profiles when they rise to the
ocean surface. They will be equipped with RAFOS receivers so that when they are
within acoustic range of sound sources, they can be tracked daily to provide
higher frequency velocity trajectories that are of order 100 days in length.
They will also be programmed to follow isopycnals, so that we can observe float
displacements along isopycnal surfaces that are associated with the primary
mixing in the ocean. Finally, the floats will be designed to take advantage of
new two-way communication capabilities, so that they can be reprogrammed if
experimental requirements change after deployment or if any of their sensors
fail. Floats of this design will be particularly well-suited for eventual
deployment in the Southern Ocean. The high velocities and rough sea state of the
Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) make it a difficult region to deploy and
maintain current meters, meaning that floats are the preferred method for
estimating eddy fluxes. Because of its strong flow, the ACC is likely to advect
floats out of an ensonified basin long before the depletion of the float
batteries, meaning that pure RAFOS floats may not provide useful data for
significant portions of their missions. Isopycnal-following capabilities are
important in the Southern Ocean, because the predominant mixing is thought to
occur along the strongly tilted isopycnal surfaces of the ACC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will support development of technology that
merges current RAFOS float capabilities with existing ARGO float technology.
This development is likely to be useful in a wide range of research in physical
oceanography and climate..&lt;br/&gt;