* 0243234
* US-India Cooperative Research:   EcR and RXR Receptor Gene Function in Crustacea-Hormonal Signaling during Gonad Maturation and Early Development
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* David Durica, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/2008
* USD 30,049.00

Description: This award supports a US-India cooperative research project
entitled EcR and RXR Receptor Gene Function in Crustacea-Hormonal Signaling
during Gonad Maturation and Early Development. US PI David Durica, University of
Oklahoma and Gopinathan Anilkumar, Kannur University, Kerala will study
reproductive function in Crustacea, particularly relating to the molecular
mechanism controlling vitellogenesis and reproductive cycling. This
collaborative project will provide important information on potential
ecdysteroid target tissues during oocyte maturation and vitellogenesis, and will
be the first to examine ecdysteroid receptor distribution in the early
crustacean life cycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This study will add to
fundamental knowledge of crustacean reproductive biology as well as the
embryonic and larval development, and will provide a basis for improving shrimp
aquaculture. The collaboration will enable the Indian investigator to obtain
more experience in the U.S. laboratory where he will have access to modern
molecular technology and will be in a position to answer fundamental questions
in the regulation of shrimp reproduction. In addition to its international and
training value, this research promises to yield important basic information that
has the potential for practical use in aquaculture. The NSF Division of
Integrative Biology and Neuroscience and the Indian Department of Science &amp;
Technology jointly support this project under the NSF/DST joint program.