* 0243189
* Collaborative Research: Religious Involvement and Mortality in the U.S.
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2005
* Christopher Ellison, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2005
* USD 49,721.00

Collborative Research&lt;br/&gt; SES- 0243189 SES-0243249&lt;br/&gt; Robert
Hummer Richard Rogers&lt;br/&gt; Christopher Ellison Jason Boardman&lt;br/&gt;
University of Texas at Austin University of Colorado at
Boulder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Religion remains a vibrant cultural and
institutional presence in the US. With the strong and continuing importance of
religion to American society, it is particularly important to understand whether
religious involvement is related to mortality risks as some recent research
finds and, if so, to determine the magnitude and mechanisms that characterize
this relationship. Major new work on the topic has been widely publicized and
has made a major impact in both the social science and medical literatures.
Nevertheless, this area of research remains highly controversial, theoretically
and methodologically underdeveloped, and lacking in depth. Through completing
secondary analyses of a number of existing datasets this research will tackle a
number of other current limitations that characterize the religion-mortality
literature. Specifically, it will address the issue of whether selectivity is
responsible for the association between mortality and religion. There are a
number of factors that may influence both religious involvement and mortality
that can account for this statistical association. However, this is perhaps the
key question that needs to be addressed by the scientific community in order to
understand whether the religion-mortality relationship may be considered causal
or spurious. Second, only very limited research has considered the differential
effects of religious involvement on mortality within subgroups of the
population. This inattention to the diverse demographic landscape of the
contemporary US can lead to empirical findings that, while potentially true
among the whole population, mask substantial heterogeneity within the
population. Third, only scant attention has been given to the specific causes of
death that are influenced by religious involvement. Fourth, only recently have
several population-based data sources become available that allow inquiry into
the association between religious involvement and mortality at the national
level. Thus, compared to other social and demographic factors that are central
in the sociological mortality literature (e.g., SES, race/ethnicity, gender,
age, marital status) and critical to the understanding of health and longevity
in the United States, knowledge regarding religious influences on health and
mortality is clearly limited. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a major debate in
the medical literature about whether medical schools should teach courses on
religion and health and about whether physicians should or should not use the
religion health-mortality literature as one of the guides toward informing their
relationships with patients. However, the evidence to date is far too tentative
to conclude that religious involvement promotes health, although it is clear
that the recent seems to be leaning that way. But until the issues of
selectivity are fully addressed, questions regarding the spuriousness of the
overall relationship will remain. Beyond the overall relationship, the specific
social and demographic groups that are influenced, and the specific mechanisms
by which religion may influence health and mortality, are just now beginning to
be tapped. Thus, this project has the potential to shed light on sociological
issues that have captured substantial public attention, as well as the attention
of both the social scientific and medical communities. Further, within
sociology, there is substantial interest in this subject matter ranging from
medical sociology to demography to the sociology of religion, with faculty
members and students from each of these areas involved in the research and
interested in the findings. Second, the project will further contribute to the
long-standing and very productive partnership between the Universities of Texas
and Colorado. &lt;br/&gt;