* 0243338
* Assessing the Performance of Surface and Subsurface Engineered Barriers
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Anne Linn, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2006
* USD 75,000.00

This action provides partial support for the study by the National Research
Council "Assessing the Performance of Surface and Subsurface Engineered
Barriers." These systems are relied upon to retain fluids in heap leach
treatment in mining, to ensure safe disposal of a variety of waste, to
complement remediation programs for contaminated sites, and for other
applications. Recent advances in technology and understanding, as well as
assessment of past barrier performance, provide an opportunity to improve upon
current design, evaluation, and monitoring methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surface
and subsurface containment systems include caps, bottom liners, and vertical
barriers constructed with a variety of materials, e.g., concrete, geomembranes,
compacted clays. This study will develop and describe an improved framework for
assessing surface and subsurface engineered barriers. In 1997, the National
Research Council completed a workshop report, "Barrier Technologies for
Environmental Management" (NRC, 1997). The workshop discussions focused on
several themes. The current study will build on some of these themes and will
provide an improved components-based framework for assessing engineered
barriers. It will be conducted by an ad hoc committee under the aegis of the
Committee on Geological and Geotechnical Engineering, a standing committee under
the Board on Earth Sciences and Resources. The ad hoc committee will consist of
approximately 10 professionals with expertise in areas such as
municipal/hazardous/radioactive waste containment; hydrogeology; environmental
engineering; mining; geochemistry; geotechnical/geological engineering;
instrumentation/sensor technology; geology; risk assessment; and environmental
regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ad hoc panel will consider the performance
and effective lifetimes of current and emerging types of engineered barriers and
will summarize the state of science and engineering for risk assessment
methodology, system installation, performance monitoring, and sustainability. In
addition, the study will identify data gaps and research needs. This study will
benefit operators and regulators by defining the key components of design and
implementation that define barrier performance effective lifetimes, thereby
helping to ensure protection of public health, reduce potential risks for
barrier failure, maximize reliability of systems, and minimize overall costs. In
addition, the study's assessment of data gaps will help to focus research
programs on efforts that will most directly result in improved performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study report will be available for public distribution
in accordance with NRC policy, and will also be posted on the NAS World Wide Web
site.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;