* 0243471
* Experimental Studies of the Liquid-Glass Transition
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Herman Cummins, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2008
* USD 172,000.00

This condensed matter physics project entails light-scattering techniques to
investigate the molecular glassforming material Salol. The experiments will
determine the effects of coupling between molecular translational and
orientational dynamics. The results will test theoretical analysis of Pick,
Franosch and their coworkers that predicts how the coupling should modify both
the transverse and longitudinal dynamics. This investigation will also explore
some predictions of the recently developed molecular "mode coupling" theory. A
new study of the glass transition in sugars will be pursued, beginning with
galactose and trehalose. Such sugars are of considerable interest in food
science where the glass transition occurs frequently, but very few studies of
dynamics have been reported. These studies will be carried out in collaboration
with co-workers at Pusan National University in Korea, whose dielectric and
calorimetric studies will complement the Raman, Brillouin, and Photon
Correlation spectroscopy performed in the PI's laboratory. The broader
importance of this research lies in the widespread application of glassy
materials and the importance of understanding the microscopic processes driving
the glass transition in order to develop improved material processing
procedures. Graduate students are being trained in the use of state-of-the-art
light-scattering techniques that are applicable to a wide range of materials and
properties.

In this condensed matter physics project, the properties of liquids approaching
the liquid-glass transition will be studied with a combination of laser light-
scattering techniques. Because glassy materials are used in a wide range of
applications including fiber optics and plastics, it is important to increase
our understanding of the microscopic processes driving the glass transition in
order to develop improved material processing procedures. These studies will
explore several new effects and will provide detailed tests of new theoretical
predictions. A related study will be carried out on the glass transition in
sugars, which are of considerable interest in food science. There the glass
transition occurs frequently, but very few studies of the dynamics have ever
been carried out. The project will train graduate students in the use of state-
of-the-art light-scattering techniques that are applicable to a wide range of
materials and their properties. These students will be prepared for careers in
the academic world, government or industrial laboratories.