* 0243258
* Formative Assessment Materials for Large-Enrollment Physics Lecture Classes
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* David Meltzer, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2006
* USD 104,914.00

This project is developing new formative assessment materials for large
introductory lecture-based general physics courses. Among the project goals are
to (1) analyze the reliability and validity of these materials, (2) evaluate
their effectiveness in the process of instruction, and (3) acquire baseline data
regarding student performance that will be of value to other instructors who
make use of the materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The assessment materials
themselves consist of carefully sequenced sets of multiple-choice questions,
each focused on a specific topic. The individual items are primarily conceptual
questions that downplay algebraic manipulations, and instead make heavy use of
diagrammatic, graphical, and pictorial elements. The materials are intended for
use in large lecture classes, and they are specifically designed to allow for
rapid and reliable assessment of student learning during the course of a single
class. The structure and sequencing of the questions are formulated to maximize
intense student-instructor interaction on a minute-by-minute basis even in
large-enrollment classes. The materials will be used in classes organized along
active-learning lines in which a classroom communication system is available.
This type of system, either electronic or one based on flash cards, allows
students to rapidly signal multiple-choice responses to questions posed by the
instructor. The instantaneous feedback they provide will allow instructors to
make immediate alterations, as needed, in their presentations and in planned
instructional activities. The materials and baseline data gathered from these
materials will be made available via websites, CD-ROMs and through other
dissemination methods to reach the education community and other interested
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;