* 0243412
* Collaborative Research:  An Informational Rationale for Political Parties
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Michael Ting, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/2003
* USD 17,686.00

What role do parties play in electoral competition? Why would parties exert
discipline on their members? This investigation links these issues theoretically
and empirically by modeling parties as informative brands to voters. As
conventional wisdom suggests, most party labels carry fairly precise meanings.
Democrats are generally liberal, Republicans are generally conservative, and
Libertarians are basically conserva- tive but often socially liberal. The
theoretical question is, how is this sustained as an equilibrium phenomenon? In
the basic model, the researchers assume there are a large number of
constituencies, voters are risk averse and incompletely informed about candidate
ideal policies, and candidates are unable to commit to a declared policy
platform. In this environment, parties can play a critical role by ag- gregating
ideologically similar candidates. Importantly, party membership is endogenous.
Certain types of candidates thereby have an incentive to affiliate themselves
with a party to reduce voter uncertainty about their preferences. The results of
a pilot by the investigators are the following. (1) Parties can be effective
screening devices for candidate preferences. Intuitively, this screening works
because party membership imposes differential costs across candidate ideological
types, so that only candidates whose preferences are sufficiently close to a
party 's platform are willing to affiliate. Even in a single party system, voter
welfare is increased by the information party candidates are able to convey
relative to unaffiliated candi- dates. (2) In a two party system there is a
direct link between the effectiveness of screening and platform choices. When
the costs of joining parties is high-e.g., parties can effectively discipline
their members or screen out certain type of candidates -party labels are very
informative, and the parties' platforms converge in Downsian fashion. When party
labels are less informative, however, the platforms diverge.This happens because
taking an extreme position reduces a party's ideolog- ical heterogeneity, thus
making its label more meaningful to voters. (3) Candidates do not always
affiliate with the nearest party, since they also take the electoral benefits of
party membership into account. These benefits may vary depending on constituency
preferences. Thus even candidates with the same ideal policy may affiliate with
different parties, depending on the preferences of their district's median
voter. Extensions of the basic model provide additional predictions. Of
particular interest is the possibility of hot races in which voters learn much
more about candidates than we assume in our basic model. This extension can
account for the fact that party labels sometimes mean different things in
different places. Another extension is to model parties as democratic
institutions that must choose platforms and screening mechanisms collectively,
perhaps through a primary system. Others include endogenizing the number of
parties, exploring alternate electoral systems, and determining the optimal
level of screening or discipline. Both the initial results and the proposed
extensions are amenable to empirical analysis. Among the topics we will pursue
are the effectiveness of party branding, the relationship between party
screening and platform choices, retirement and defection patterns, and the
evolution of platforms over time.