* 0243867
* Ecosystem Function in Heterogeneous Landscapes:  The Tenth Cary Conference, April 28-May 2, 2003
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Monica Turner, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mark R.  Walbridge
* 02/28/2005
* USD 50,000.00

This award will provide partial support for a conference entitled "Ecosystem
Function in Heterogeneous Landscapes." The conference will be the tenth in the
Cary Conference series, which provides a forum for discussion of leading-edge
issues in the field of ecology and ecosystem science. This conference will
explore spatial heterogeneity within landscapes and its consequences for
ecosystem function. This topic is important and timely because ecologists are
now asked to address environmental issues on landscape, regional and global
scales, even though most ecological research is performed on much smaller
scales. Scaling up requires assumptions about the interactions among different
ecosystems in the landscape or region, but ecosystem ecologists have never
systematically explored the fundamental nature of those interactions. The
conference will bring together a diverse group of about 90 scientists to
consider this issue in three days of focused discussion on topics such as the
treatment of spatial heterogeneity in other disciplines, comparison of the
importance of spatial heterogeneity in various ecosystem types, environmental
issues in which the consideration of heterogeneity is important, and defining a
common research agenda for the future. The format of the conference will promote
broad thinking and in-depth discussion in plenary sessions, discussion groups
and one-on-one interactions among individuals. The conference is intended to
have a broad impact in ecology by making progress on a difficult conceptual
issue, including a diverse group of speakers and invitees, and producing a book
that can be used to train the next generation of ecologists.