* 0243752
* US-South Africa Cooperative Research:  Virginia Commonwealth University and the University of the Witwatersrand: A Partnership for the Future
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2003,09/30/2009
* Rosalyn Hargraves, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/2009
* USD 196,119.00

0243752&lt;br/&gt;Hobson&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a summer research
experience exchange program between Virginia Commonwealth University's School of
Engineering and the Faculty of Engineering at the University of the
Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, South Africa. By facilitating the international
exchange of students, ideas, and cooperative research opportunities among
faculty, this project embodies the objective of the National Science Foundation
to ensure "that future generations of U.S. scientists and engineers gain
professional experience beyond the United States' borders early in their
careers." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will work on research projects in
mechanical, industrial, aeronautical, electrical, and information engineering
and will have access to state-of-the-art instrumentation. The projects will be
carefully chosen to address issues that the students would not normally see in
the U.S. or at their home institution. The summer research experience will
foster and strengthen collaborations between the partner universities, thus
enhancing the research and educational opportunities for current and future
students. This experience will provide students with top-notch research
experiences, raise their awareness of global science and engineering challenges,
and provide them with a greater appreciation for diverse cultures and
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Office of
International Science and Engineering and the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;