* 0244974
* Collaborative Research:  The Women Engineering Faculty Leadership Network
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Britt Holmen, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Leda Lunardi
* 07/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

While the number of women engineering faculty in entry-level positions continues
to grow, the demographics of the engineering academy clearly show a scarcity of
women in mid-career and senior-level faculty positions. Although individual
institutions can progress in their efforts to increase the participation of
women engineering faculty in leadership positions, the scarcity and isolation of
women engineering faculty make change slow and difficult without the support of
faculty from other institutions. Therefore, it is imperative that steps be taken
to connect women engineering faculty members from around the country to discuss
and explore the challenges and opportunities of academic
leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to catalyze widespread institutional
change through the development of the "Women Engineering Faculty Leadership
Network," a central training and mentoring program/community for 1)
transformative leadership skills development; 2) mentoring support for women
engineering faculty, and 3) making critical connections between existing
organizations that provide services supporting women engineers both in education
and industry. Transformative leadership is founded on the concept of
collaborative leadership, i.e., leadership that is shared among members of an
organization. This form of leadership emphasizes the importance of trust, open
communication, shared vision, and shared power. The core of collaborative
leadership is a commitment to enhancing the human capital of another for the
advancement of a common cause; it is a model of stewardship that can affect
change at all levels, from eliminating the micro-climate inequities found in
departments to reshaping the broader aspects of institutional culture. We
propose to bring these future women faculty leaders together in a supportive
environment to learn transformative leadership techniques, which are not
commonly practiced by the male-dominated faculty in their own institution, and
to partner them with successful women academic leaders who can help prepare them
for the challenges of academic leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
seeks to bring women engineering faculty together to effect institutional change
through a grassroots effort to increase the number and rank of women engineers
in academic leadership positions nationwide. To accomplish this goal we propose
sponsoring Leadership Development Conferences, Advanced Leadership Conferences,
SWE conference workshop, an Institutional Transformation/Advance Leadership
Workshop and a Leadership Summit, as well as creating a unique women faculty
mentoring e-community. We believe these activities will have a major impact on
transforming the academic environment across the nation by including gender-
equity issues in leadership training material and transforming the paradigm of
academic roles and rewards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is being
submitted as a collaborative proposal between Iowa State University, Louisiana
State University, University of Central Florida, University of Connecticut,
Syracuse University, and the University of Utah with collaborators from the
University of Texas, El Paso, University of Maryland, University of
Pennsylvania, University of Connecticut, University of California, Davis,
University of Guelph, Canada, and Kettering University. Other faculty from
Howard University, Texas Christian University, and Northeastern University have
agreed to serve on the Executive Board of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Broaden Participation of
Underrepresented Groups: The networking, training, and web-centered mentoring
will support the professional development of women engineering faculty and,
specifically, leadership development. The importance of diversity is central to
this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;Enhance Infrastructure for Research and Education: This
program will enhance the organizational and human infrastructure of academic
institutions. The partnering in the proposed activities crosses geographical,
disciplinary, and institutional boundaries. The broader impact of this program
will include a cadre of leaders who will help to motivate and sustain a new
paradigm of academic roles and rewards.&lt;br/&gt;Broad Dissemination: The
program will result in a new network of mentors. The program will build new
connections among organizations, which will serve to both broaden and strengthen
diversity efforts.&lt;br/&gt;Benefits to Society: Leadership is essential to
institutional change, and the leadership model in this program is founded on
values that will improve the institution and its ability to serve
society.&lt;br/&gt;