* 0244708
* Development and Assessment of Quantum Mechanics Tutorials for Advanced Undergraduate Courses
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Chandralekha Singh, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2006
* USD 79,360.00

To better prepare future scientists and engineers for the demands of a high-tech
workplace, development and assessment of guided tutorials for advanced
undergraduate quantum mechanics courses will be undertaken. Although tutorials
at the level of modern physics have been developed and have proved effective,
there are presently no similar tools available for advanced undergraduate
quantum mechanics courses. The tutorials will actively engage students in the
learning of quantum physics. They will attempt to bridge the gap between the
abstract quantitative formalism of quantum mechanics and the qualitative
understanding necessary to explain and predict new phenomena. Based upon
research in physics education, their development will be guided by a careful
attention to cognitive issues. The tutorials will supplement lectures and
standard homework assignments. Some tutorials will include design and adaptation
of computer-based visualization tools to help students build physical intuition
about quantum processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to promote widespread
use of these tutorials, information about the project will be disseminated
through presentations at the American Association of Physics Teachers meetings,
dedicated workshops and seminars in physics departments. After the modules have
been thoroughly evaluated at several institutions and refined, the ultimate goal
is to publish the tutorials as a quantum mechanics workbook. &lt;br/&gt;