* 0244807
* Representation Theory and Invariant Means on C*-algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Nathanial Brown, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2006
* USD 118,226.00

The investigator will study a number of problems which, roughly speaking, belong
to representation theory. The questions, however, differ from the classical
theory (e.g. classification of irreducible representations). The goal is to a)
better understand finite factor representations of certain quasidiagonal
C*-algebras, b) study approximation properties of traces and c) work on
applications of the previous two topics to various open questions in operator
algebras. At this point, our hope is that this work will shed light on Elliott's
classification program and Connes' embedding problem. However, there may be more
as we have recently noticed that these ideas have K-homological implications,
can be used to prove a general existence result for the finite section method
(from numerical analysis) and we would not be surprised if connections with
geometric group theory were soon worked out. Though these ideas are certainly in
their infancy, they have solid historical foundations (e.g. Connes' uniqueness
theorem for finite injective factors) and we believe the theory shows promise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One very successful idea in mathematics is that problems
about complicated objects can sometimes be solved using approximations by
simpler objects. For example, in calculus we teach students that to compute the
area under a curve one should first approximate by rectangles since the area of
a rectangle is easy to compute. Operator algebras are (usually) infinite
dimensional objects which provide the natural framework for many questions in
quantum physics. Moreover, deep and unexpected connections with other areas of
mathematics such as geometry, topology and probability were discovered over the
years. As such, a solid understanding of the structure of operator algebras is
important. The general philosophy of using approximations by simpler objects
becomes especially relevant here since the objects of interest are infinite
dimensional. The investigator will continue an established tradition of trying
to use finite dimensional approximations to better understand some fundamental
infinite dimensional objects.