* 0244502
* Spectroscopy of Pressure- and Field-Induced Insulator-Metal Transitions:  Exploring Charge- and Spin-Organization in Complex Oxides and Magnetic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* S. Lance Cooper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

There is now strong evidence that some of the most scientifically interesting
and technologically promising phenomena exhibited by correlated systems occur
near low temperature phase boundaries. These phenomena include the spontaneous
organization of mesoscale charge, spin, and orbital structures, and "colossal"
sensitivities of physical properties to applied pressure and magnetic field. A
better understanding of these exotic phenomena demands greater insight into how
the low energy dynamical properties evolve across the low temperature phase
transitions of these materials. This individual investigator award supports
research that utilizes a unique method for using inelastic light scattering to
spectroscopically explore - in a way not previously possible - the important
evolution of the spin, charge, and lattice dynamics of correlated systems while
pressure- and/or field-tuning through low temperature phase transitions. The
principle focus of this study will be on two classes of phenomena: (A) Quantum
phase transitions in complex oxides, to study the evolution and effects of
spontaneous charge-, spin-, and orbital-organization near low temperature phase
transitions. (B) Spin electronics in magnetic semiconductors, to explore the
evolution and impact of magnetic cluster formation near phase transitions. Not
only will this research afford critical information about the dynamics near
various low temperature phase transitions of technologically important
materials, but it will provide the scientific community a greater understanding
of the limitations and benefits of applying low-temperature/high-pressure light
scattering for studying phase transitions and extreme phase regimes in a variety
of systems. Further, this project will train graduate student and postdoctoral
researchers in cutting-edge pressure and spectroscopic techniques, eventually
adding to the technical base of the country.

Intensive recent research has uncovered a variety of functional materials
exhibiting scientifically important phenomena with technologically promising
properties, e.g., in magnetic storage devices, magnetic sensors, switches, etc.
These exotic properties include extremely large sensitivities of the electrical
properties to the application of magnetic fields ("colossal" magnetoresistance),
and abrupt magnetic field- and pressure-sensitive transitions between
electrically-conducting and -non-conducting phases. It is now believed that
these exotic properties are likely caused by the spontaneous formation of
nanometer-scale structures when these materials transition between conducting
and non-conducting phases; however, the nature of this causal connection needs
to be significantly elucidated before scientists can understand how best to
design these materials for technological advantage. This individual investigator
research project will utilize a unique method in which laser light is used to
study how the magnetic-field- and pressure-dependent evolution of nanometer-
scale structures give rise to the dramatic and technologically-useful properties
in complex oxides and spin-electronic materials. The information that will be
obtained with this project is an essential prerequisite to the effective design
and utilization of these materials as devices. Further, this project will train
graduate student and postdoctoral researchers in cutting-edge pressure and
spectroscopic techniques, eventually adding to the important technical base of
the country.