* 0244647
* CAREER: Research and Education in Video Coding and Wireless Communications
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Maja Bystrom, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Venugopal V. Veeravalli
* 07/31/2004
* USD 107,929.00

The objective of this project is to enable low bitrate transmission of highly
compressed video streams over wireless channels which are subject to fading. One
of the most important challenges in wireless video transmission is that
terrestrial wireless channels are typically bandlimited so that significant
compression is required; however, this compression results in low quality
reconstructed video as well as bitstreams which are extremely sensitive to
channel errors. Traditionally, in order to protect against channel errors,
powerful forward error control codes were carefully selected and employed at the
expense of a portion of the limited bandwidth. This research addresses the
problem of bandwidth expenditure on channel error protection by exploiting the
redundancy in a source-coded video stream to perform iterative, soft source
decoding. With these improvements in source decoding less of the overall
bandwidth must be expended on channel coding. This recovered bandwidth can then
be devoted to reducing the compression rate, thereby increasing the quality of
the transmitted video.

The iterative video decoder consists of two stages. The first stage is a
traditional video decoder with error detection capabilities which employs hard
channel values, while the second stage is an adaptive Viterbi-like source
decoder employing soft channel values or reliability information from a channel
decoder. The project focuses on developing efficient and reliable error
detection techniques and on determining appropriate decision metrics for the
Viterbi-like decoder which incorporate the soft channel values with knowledge of
errors from the error detection process.

The objectives of this project are closely related to the teaching objectives.
One primary goal of the teaching plan is to integrate this research in wireless
communication into undergraduate courses in order to encourage interest in
research and graduate study. The second goal is to develop a hands-on technology
camp for middle-school girls to actively promote the study of engineering and,
in particular, telecommunications. In order to demystify the field of
engineering, projects will involve illustrating the relationship between
engineering and everyday life, exposing the students to the applicability and
prevalence of engineering.