* 0244412
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Topological Invariants and Matrix Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2010
* Sheldon Katz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 349,995.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 0244412 Principal Investigator: Sheldon Katz

String theory has had a spectacular impact on many areas of modern mathematics,
including algebraic geometry, differential geometry, topology, representation
theory, analysis and combinatorial geometry. In particular, string dualities
suggest unexpected relations between these diverse areas, many of which have
been proven mathematically. Recent advances in matrix model techniques suggest
further relations in mathematics. It can now be expected that number theory will
become related as well. It is proposed to investigate unifying themes in duality
symmetries in search of a deeper understanding of these symmetries. It is also
proposed to work on a range of mathematical problems which these dualities
inspire. Particular dualities include mirror symmetry, originally elucidated in
the context of Gromov-Witten theory, and S-dualities, which are duality
symmetries of supersymmetric gauge theories and string theories. More recently
both have been related to Matrix integrals. In the case of supersymmetric gauge
theories this gives a relation between perturbative Feynman diagrams on the one
hand and certain computations on moduli spaces of instantons on the other, which
the PIs propose to elucidate further. In the particular case of Gromov-Witten
theory, connections have been found with knot theory. This leads to a complete
computation of the corresponding invariants for non-compact toric Calabi-Yau
threefolds. The PIs propose to extend these ideas to the compact case.

The PIs will be exploiting existing connections and forging new ones between
physics and mathematics to address a wide range of cutting-edge open problems in
both fields. These ideas are expected to create new links between diverse areas
of mathematics, as certain ideas in physics are equivalent to important unsolved
problems in mathematics. The techniques introduced into mathematics are expected
to have a revolutionary influence on core areas of mathematics as related
techniques have in the past. This project occurs at the same time as an ongoing
effort by the string theory community and will help set future directions in
that field. String theory seeks to unify the force of gravity with the
electromagnetic and nuclear forces; this is the problem that eluded Einstein. It
is anticipated that numerous diverse areas of mathematics will become related to
each other in unexpected ways and that this will have profound consequences for
mathematics and physics. Due to the broad scope of the project, a multi-
disciplinary and multi-institutional approach is indicated. The PIs will be
bringing together their networks of collaborators, postdocs, and graduate
students and directing an intense collaborative effort in these areas. An
interdisciplinary math/physics curriculum will be created to train future
leaders in areas at the interface of mathematics and physics. The PIs will
expand their use of existing internet videoconferencing technologies for
collaborative purposes, and will organize workshops on the topics of this
project. This is a joint award of the Division of Mathematical Sciences programs
in Geometric Analysis and Algebra, Number Theory, & Combinatorics, and the
Physics Division program in Mathematical Physics.