* 0244408
* Collaborative Research: FRG:  Geometric Function Theory:  From Complex Functions to Quasiconformal Geometry and Nonlinear Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Steffen Rohde, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 188,395.00

FRG&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric Function Theory is a broad area of
mathematics that has its roots in the classical theory of analytic functions of
one complex variable. From the very beginning this field has had connections to
potential theory, partial differential equations, the calculus of variations,
and geometric topology. The second half of the twentieth century brought about
new areas like quasiconformal and quasiregular mappings, with links to nonlinear
PDEs and harmonic analysis. The research group is planning to tackle some of the
most important open problems in this broadly construed field by using our
diverse strengths. Examples of the problems include understanding the
integrability properties of derivatives of conformal mappings, finding criteria
for recognizing metric spaces up to bi-Lipschitz or quasiconformal equivalence,
further developing the theory of holomorphic curves and its quasiregular
generalizations, and investigating algebraic conditions related to
quasiconvexity of energy functionals. The intellectual merit of our activity
will be found in a deepened understanding of fundamental questions in Geometric
Function Theory, in an increase of the links to other fields of mathematics, and
in a broader scope of possible applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Core
mathematics keeps reappearing outside its own realm with dramatic success and
consequences. Recent examples range from cosmology (where deep topological
issues arise regarding the proposed new dimensions for the universe) to material
science (where deformation of elastic bodies are studied by methods of the
Calculus of Variations) to engineering (where function theoretic methods have
led to advances in control theory). The latter two examples are directly
connected with the work of our research group, as are topological issues
pertaining to the geometry of three dimensional spaces. Another new feature with
possible far reaching reverberations is to use function theoretic methods in
studying spaces that are not smooth in the classical sense; such spaces
naturally occur when Riemannian structures degenerate and form singularities.
The main strength of our group is that its members have common roots, but
multifarious interests, so as to make advancement in and connections between
separate fields. The broader impact of our activity will be the education of new
scholars who understand the methods and techniques in the field, and who know
how to find applications of their knowledge to other parts of mathematics and
sciences. We will put great weight on passing on the important questions to the
younger generation and on enabling them to perform independent research.