* 0244714
* Quantum Field Theory and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2007
* Richard Woodard, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 11/30/2007
* USD 90,000.00

The project involves a number of areas of collaborative research with N. Tsamis
(U. of Crete), T. Prokopec (U. of Heidelberg), and the PI's graduate students in
the general area of quantum field theoretic effects in cosmology . These
include: (1) Comparing standard cosmological perturbation approximations with
the exact solution recently obtained by the PI and Tsamis; (2) A method to
calculate the effect of quantum gravity on inflation; (3) Developing a model in
which the observed excess of matter over anti-matter is generated during
inflation. (4) Computing what happens to the vacuum polarization induced by
charged, massless scalar particles after the end of inflation; (5) Investigating
whether a very slightly unstable, alternate theory of gravitation can be
constructed which explains the motions of cosmological objects without the need
for dark matter. (6) Expressing the vacuum polarization of charged massless
scalar particles in terms of the natural geometrical objects during inflation;
(7) Developing an improved formalism for computing quantum gravitational effects
in a locally de Sitter-cosmology background.

Problem (1) is relevant to the precision measurements of the cosmic microwave
anisotropy by the WMAP satellite and the various missions planned for the
future. Standard approximation techniques are almost certainly sufficient to
compute the primordial spectrum from simple models of inflation but the exact
result obtained by the PI and Tsamis may be very useful if an exotic model
pertains. A successful outcome for problem (2) would completely change the
paradigm of inflationary cosmology, resolving two of its major problems (why was
the initial state homogeneous enough to begin inflating? and why is the observed
cosmological constant so small?) and transforming it into a predictive theory. A
successful outcome for problem (3) would resolve the long-standing conundrum
that inflation tends to wipe out the excess of matter over anti-matter. Problem
(4) should settle the issue of whether or not inflation provided the small but
cosmological scale magnetic fields that served as the seeds of the fields we
observe in present-day galaxies and galactic clusters. Problem (5) represents
the last realistic hope for explaining cosmological motions using an alternate
theory of gravitation rather than dark matter. Problems (6-7)represent
incremental advances in formalism and good exercises for beginning graduate
students.