* 0244050
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site in Environmental Health Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Melinda Lalor, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 03/31/2008
* USD 399,296.00

0244050 Lalor

This award funds a five-year Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site
at the University of Alabama Birmingham (UAB) for interdisciplinary research in
the field of Environmental Health Engineering. Students will gain a basic
understanding of the mechanisms involved in altering environmental, human, and
ecosystem health; and the research skills needed to analyze and understand
environmental issues in the context of engineering and public health. Eight
students will participate in the first project year, and twelve students
thereafter each year. The site will provide research opportunities to
outstanding students from colleges and universities that do not routinely
provide research opportunities to undergraduate students. Students will be
recruited from engineering, pre-engineering, and science undergraduate programs.
In particular UAB will work together with Tuskeegee University, Clark Atlanta
University, Alabama A&M University, and Birmingham-Southern College to recruit
students. The research in which students will be involved will be in the
following general topic areas, based on the on-going research of faculty
mentors: (1) Air Pollution and Interactions in the Human Body; (2) Engineering
and Public Health in Disaster Management; (3) Environmental Impacts of Coal
Combustion Byproducts; and (4) Pollution Prevention.