* 0244170
* REU Site:  Summer Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Mechanical Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2003,10/31/2009
* Susan Mantell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 10/31/2009
* USD 950,151.00

0244170 Mantell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a five-year Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of Minnesota-Twin
Cities. The program will provide research opportunities in mechanical
engineering for thirteen undergraduate students for ten weeks during the summer
each year. The program is open to undergraduate engineering or science majors
who have completed their sophomore or junior year. The recruiting efforts will
focus on attracting students from population groups underrepresented in the
United States in research fields in engineering and science. The program will
include: (1) research projects under the direct supervision of a faculty member,
(2) access to state-of-the-art laboratory and computing facilities, (3) a weekly
seminar series with special topics in mechanical engineering research and
engineering communication, (4) a three part seminar series on ethical practices
in engineering, and (5) interdisciplinary collaboration with other engineering
departments at the university. In addition, the program will provide
opportunities for two teachers to participate in a research experience for five
weeks during the summer. The teacher participants will receive graduate credit
for their participation. The undergraduate participants will present their
results in a university-wide event and have the opportunity to attend the
National Conference on Undergraduate Research. It is anticipated that the
teacher participants will update their technical knowledge and integrate the
experience into their curriculum and thus improve science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics education in their school district.&lt;br/&gt;