* 0244191
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Theoretical Studies of Intermetallic Nanostructures
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Talat Rahman, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/2007
* USD 40,000.00

0244191&lt;br/&gt;Rahman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports
a collaborative research project between Dr. Talat S. Rahman, Professor of
Physics, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas and Dr. Sondan Durukanoglu,
Department of Physics, Istanbul Technical University in Istanbul, Turkey. These
scientists plan to conduct a systematic study of the electronic structure,
dynamics and thermodynamics of the surfaces of a prototype intermettalic, NiAl,
using a hierarchy of computational techniques of varying sophistication and
feasibility. They plan to develop a multiscale approach for NiAl alloys, and
conduct a complementary study of atomistic, TB, and DFT simulations. The first
goal is to study the structure and dynamics of flat and stepped surfaces of
NiAl, using first principles electronic structures calculations. These will be
extended to study the chemically important processes of nitration and oxidation
of NiAl surfaces. The second goal is to develop the framework for linking these
initial methods to those feasible for systems with longer length and time
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This project enables the two scientists and
their students to participate in research in an area in which they have
complementary skills. The project will provide useful research results on metal
interactions, an area that is relevant for applications research. Although the
work is theoretical, it is grounded in specific materials with specific
verifiable predictions of properties. NiAl is a good choice for the study
because it is structurally simple, making the theoretical calculations simpler
and the results, with certain modifications, may be used for other more
complicated system. The results may be applied to the study of metal nano-
particles and their catalytic activities. Both investigators are well acquainted
with the problem. The project involves training of graduate students from both
countries, and reciprocal visits. The project is supported jointly by the Office
of International Science and Engineering and by the Division of Chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;