* 0244562
* NSF-Europe:  Collaborative Modeling and Experiemental Research Program to Understand the Dynamics of Dislocation--Particle Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Ian Robertson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 05/31/2008
* USD 498,000.00

This research focuses on the atomic to the microscopic scale with a particular
emphasis on identifying the controlling mechanisms of dislocation - particle
interactions through a combination of atomistic modeling and dynamic in-situ and
static ex-situ transmission electron microscopy experiments in Al-alloys.
Molecular statics simulations will be used to characterize the atomic structure
of precipitates and the interface and dislocation core structures, and molecular
dynamics will be used to determine time evolution dynamics. The static ex-situ
electron microscopy will use predeformed material to characterize the
precipitate structure and chemistry, and dislocation-precipitate interactions. A
major objective is to determine the nature of the interaction between glide
dislocations and different precipitates in Al-alloys as a function of
temperature and strain, and to use this information to model mechanical
properties in precipitate hardened alloys. Predeformed material will be further
deformed in situ in the electron microscope at different temperatures to
determine reaction pathways and kinetics. Correlation of the simulation and
experimental results will provide information over a range of spatial and
temporal scales that are inaccessible to the other approach but dominates the
observed response. This combined approach will determine the dynamics of
dislocation precipitate interactions as a function of stress, temperature,
precipitate form and coherency, including identifying possible crystallographic
structural transformations following dislocation
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The material systems investigated will be
drawn from Al-alloys, although the findings are likely to be applicable to a
range of systems. Ultimately, the dislocation-precipitate interaction rules
developed will be incorporated in higher length scale models to predict the
mechanical response of materials. The foreign collaborators have been working
with the principal investigators on the structure and evolution of copper-rich
precipitates in ferritic materials, and their role in hardening by using a
combination of in-situ and ex-situ electron microscopy, and atomic-scale
computer modeling. It is also proposed to create age-appropriate educational
modules to relate structure to mechanical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
NSF project is co-funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, the
Division of Materials Research (Metals Research) and International Office
(Western Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in Materials Research between the NSF
and Europe (NSF 02-135). This project is being carried out in collaboration with
Oxford and Liverpool Universities in UK.&lt;br/&gt;