* 0244762
* Non-Newtonian Forces
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Paul Boynton, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2007
* USD 735,000.00

A primary goal of modern physics is to understand at the most fundamental level
possible the nature and behavior of matter and energy, the basic components of
our universe. Empirical tests of Einstein's weak-field (Newtonian) gravity play
an important role in judging possible extensions of this understanding, embodied
in the so-called Standard Model of fundamental interactions. Even small
deviations from Newtonian behavior could constitute evidence for violation of
the Standard Model as currently formulated. Deviations have not yet been found,
but the possibilities for expecting such anomalies at a low level abound in the
theoretical literature over the past decade. The goal of this project is to
bring to operation an experiment that will substantially restrict the viability
of these speculations by setting at least an order-of-magnitude more stringent
upper limit on the strength of putative non-Newtonian interactions than now
established. Alternatively, these more precise measurements could uncover
previously undetected deviations. Either outcome would advance fundamental
understanding of matter and energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with a
group at UC Irvine, new advances in measurement precision using cryogenic
techniques have been exploited, methods to dramatically reduce systematic
effects have been developed, and a new laboratory facility that provides an
ultra-low vibration environment that allows exploitation of these substantial
improvements has been established. The instrumentation has only a single moving
part, a precisely configured quartz mass suspended by a thin filament. State-of-
the-art electro-optic technology is used to monitor the rotation of this mass
about the filament axis with extreme sensitivity. It is the absence of such a
rotation, under carefully controlled conditions, that constitutes the
experimental manifestation of Newtonian behavior -- violation (and possible
evidence for new physics) is indicated by even the smallest movement. Hence, the
sensitivity of this test depends on how small a rotation angle can reliably be
detected. To provide an illustration of the project's measurement capability,
this minimum detectable rotation is comparable to the angle subtended by the
width of a human hair located at the top of the Washington Monument as viewed
from the center of the State of Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All these
activities involve young scientists -- post-docs, graduate and undergraduate
students -- as well as corporate partners Battelle Laboratories, Boeing Airplane
Co. and institutional sponsor Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, all
involved in efforts to extend the quality of the research and educational
outreach as broadly as possible.