* 0244007
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Physiology, Cell and Molecular Biology of Marine Organisms
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Louis Burnett, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2007
* USD 203,887.00

The Fort Johnson Undergraduate Summer Research Program is a ten-week program
combining formal classroom work with independent research in areas of crucial
concern for marine biologists today. The program is designed to provide
undergraduate students with a modern research experience employing
physiological, cellular and molecular techniques to address questions in areas
such as species diversity, mechanisms of adaptation to environmental change,
environmental bioindicators and microbial ecology. The College of Charleston
serves as primary host institution for the program, but research mentors and
course instructors are drawn from among more than 100 Ph.D. scientists whose
primary appointments lie in the Medical University of South Carolina, the
National Institute of Standards and Technology, the National Ocean Service and
the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources. Working side-by-side with
graduate students, technicians, and mentors at Fort Johnson, South Carolina,
student participants are exposed to a broad range of career opportunities in
science, making them better prepared to enter the workforce in industry and
government. In addition to providing students with an opportunity to conduct
independent studies guided by a faculty mentor, the objectives of the program
are (1) to engage students directly in discussing graduate school and career
options in basic and applied sciences, (2) to show students the
interdisciplinary nature of science and (3) to teach students to think
critically.

Undergraduate students are selected to participate in this program based on
outstanding academic and personal achievement, evidence of advanced course work
in physiology and cell or molecular biology and on the potential benefits of
this research experience to the student. Recruitment efforts cast a broad net,
with particular emphasis on attracting women and minority students. Participants
are required to live on-site in dormitories at the Grice Marine Laboratory. For
the first four weeks of the program, students participate in a seminar course
entitled "Special Topics in the Physiology, Cell and Molecular Biology of Marine
Organisms." NSF covers the costs of registration and tuition, and students who
successfully complete the course receive three transferable college credits
through the College of Charleston. Also, during the first four weeks,
participants begin to work on independent research projects under the guidance
of individual faculty mentors. Projects are selected for their interdisciplinary
and inter-institutional nature, and their relationship to current biological,
biomedical or environmental concerns. During the last six weeks of the summer,
participants focus primarily on completing their research projects while
learning skills for analyzing data and communicating the results of their work
in oral and written presentations. The program also provides a structured format
for discussing issues related to graduate school and pursuit of a career in the
sciences. The program takes pride in maintaining particularly strong ties with
former REU participants in order to evaluate the impact of the research
experience on career choices. Up-do-date information regarding the program,
participants in prior years and their research projects, as well as an
application form are available on the Web at www.cofc.edu/~grice/summer.htm or
by contacting the Program Director, Dr. Louis E. Burnett, at (843) 953-9200 or
burnettl@cofc.edu.

The Fort Johnson Undergraduate Summer Research Program provides a strong and
unique undergraduate research experience that is generated from the direct
involvement of scientists from five institutions using interdisciplinary
approaches to address problems of mutual concern. Student participants are
exposed to the most recent and exciting questions and to the latest
methodologies in marine biology. Although primarily designed to encourage
talented students to pursue careers in science, the program has broader impacts
as well. Participants learn to think critically, to take interdisciplinary
approaches to problems and to communicate their ideas to others. These are
skills that benefit all citizens in a world that is made ever smaller and more
complex by science and technology.