* 0244984
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award:  Institutional Transformation at Kansas State University
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2010
* John English, Kansas State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Beth Mitchneck
* 09/30/2010
* USD 3,500,000.00

The Kansas State University (K-State) ADVANCE project team has a vision of an
academic world in which women's concerns, interests, and contributions are
recognized and valued, and where women and men work together in equal
partnerships for the benefit of society. The intent is to create a transformed
institution that purposefully attracts, retains, supports, and advances women in
the disciplines of science, engineering, and mathematics (SEM). Six SEM
departments have agreed to engage in the transformation initiatives described
below. The project goals are: &lt;br/&gt;* Institute changes in existing
departmental policies, procedures, and practices, and develop new ones as
needed, to foster a gender-equitable climate within partner
departments;&lt;br/&gt;* Expand and enhance departmental recruitment practices
to attract more women applicants and ensure that candidates are not subject to
subtle bias in the search and hiring process; &lt;br/&gt;* Implement effective
programs that foster the careers of faculty and encourage their retention
through tenure and promotion; and&lt;br/&gt;* Propagate the successes achieved
in partner departments to all SEM departments.&lt;br/&gt;Achievement of these
goals will move reality closer to the vision and will be accomplished through a
set of integrated initiatives that address three primary barriers to the
advancement of women faculty in SEM: lack of effective recruitment; exclusion
from networks; and subtle biases. The project's initiatives are (1) Equity
action workshops; (2) Departmental policy development and review; (3) Recruiting
strategies; and (4) Mentoring and networking activities. These initiatives
include university-wide, college-wide, and department-specific elements. They
address every stage of an academic career, with programs for students and for
tenure-track and tenured faculty members. Faculty members will examine and make
changes in departmental policies, procedures, and practices to create a gender-
equitable environment. Successes and lessons learned in partner departments will
then be disseminated within K-State and to other universities. Together, these
components form an integrated program of institutional transformation of SEM at
K-State.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;The new tools, policies, and
procedures resulting from this project will foster retention and success of both
women and men faculty in SEM at K-State and can be used as models for
institutional transformation elsewhere. The proposed project includes a balance
of top-down and bottom-up approaches. The project team includes the K-State
Assistant Provost, the Director of the Women in Engineering and Science Program,
an associate director of Biology, and the deans of the four colleges that
include most of the SEM departments. Six SEM department heads have made a
commitment to engage in this project. Innovative aspects of this project
include: a seminar series connecting new faculty members with disciplinary
leaders; formal group mentoring; an academic career exploration program for
undergraduate students; creation of inclusive departmental web sites that appeal
to faculty candidates of both sexes and all ethnic backgrounds; and career
mapping that spans faculty life from "hire to retire." &lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;The direct emphasis of the proposed project is on fostering a
gender-equitable climate and enhancing the participation of women, who are an
underrepresented group in SEM. While the primary focus of the project is on
faculty members, we have included aspects that deal explicitly with
undergraduate students. This is part of K-State's responsibility to prepare the
next generation of faculty members in SEM. A network of partnerships within and
among departments at K-State, and among SEM faculty at K-State and elsewhere,
will be created. The partnerships will function to connect new faculty members
with disciplinary colleagues and promote efforts toward gender
equity.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will disseminate information about the project
internally through college-wide retreats, at the University's department head
workshop series, on K-State's ADVANCE project website, in presentations at
national conferences, and through publication in refereed
journals.&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance the recruitment, retention, and
advancement of women, resulting in an increase in the SEM talent pool and the
creation of an intellectual workforce that is more representative of
society.&lt;br/&gt;