* 0244453
* Nuclear Structure and Nuclear Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Mihai Horoi, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 08/31/2006
* USD 809,999.00

Michigan State University proposes a three-year grant supporting the
research&lt;br/&gt;of a faculty group in nuclear theory, Professors B. A. Brown
and V. Zelevinsky,&lt;br/&gt;together with M. Horoi (Central Michigan
University). The research proposed&lt;br/&gt;encompasses a broad range of topics
in nuclear structure and nuclear astrophysics&lt;br/&gt;important for the
ongoing program at the National Superconducting Cyclotron&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory.
The main components are structural properties of nuclei,
including&lt;br/&gt;those far from stability, and their manifestation in nuclear
reactions and astrophysical&lt;br/&gt;phenomena. The rich experience of the
group and the support from MSU&lt;br/&gt;and NSCL provides the .rm basis for a
diverse and topical research program.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is in the
mainstream of modern nuclear physics that is&lt;br/&gt;directed to answering
principal questions what are the limits of stability of nuclei,&lt;br/&gt;how
did the chemical evolution of the Universe proceed, what are the&lt;br/&gt;ways
of self-organization in interacting many-body systems - how does order
coexist&lt;br/&gt;with chaos and complexity. Concrete directions of the proposed
research&lt;br/&gt;logically follow from the previous experience of the group.
Suggested main topics&lt;br/&gt;are (i) development of new analytical and
computational tools for the description&lt;br/&gt;of nuclear structure and
nuclear reactions, especially for the nuclei far from&lt;br/&gt;stability; (ii)
detailed consideration of speci.c nuclear phenomena and
nuclear&lt;br/&gt;processes that shed light on the new features encountered with
the advances into&lt;br/&gt;virgin territory of unstable nuclei; (iii)
calculations and modeling of structural&lt;br/&gt;and dynamical aspects of
nuclear processes of astrophysical interest; (iv) studies&lt;br/&gt;of many-body
quantum chaos and its coexistence with collective and regular&lt;br/&gt;features
in nuclear structure and reactions.&lt;br/&gt;The suggested program is expected
to have appreciable impact on the development&lt;br/&gt;in the .eld of nuclear
theory and nuclear astrophysics. It will also in.uence&lt;br/&gt;the direction
of the experimental e.orts. In a broader context, successful
progress&lt;br/&gt;in the program is important for our understanding of the
basic constituents of&lt;br/&gt;matter and nucleosynthesis in the Universe. The
studies of many-body properties,&lt;br/&gt;chaos and collectivity in nuclear
structure, have a strong interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;aspect since the nucleus is
an exemplary case of a self-sustaining .nite Fermisystem&lt;br/&gt;with strong
interactions. Historically, many ideas .rst formulated in the&lt;br/&gt;context
of nuclear theory fertilized other branches of physics. The proposed
research&lt;br/&gt;is expected to help studies in physics of Bose- and Fermi-
condensates,&lt;br/&gt;complex molecules, solid state microdevices and quantum
computing. The proposal&lt;br/&gt;has a considerable educational component being
part of the highly ranked&lt;br/&gt;nuclear physics program at NSCL/MSU.