* 0244632
* Summer Research Institute in Experimental Psychology
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Gordon Baylis, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Lopez
* 03/31/2007
* USD 187,556.00

The University of South Carolina Summer Research Institute in Experimental
Psychology has provided and will continue to provide a mechanism for educating
undergraduate students about the field of experimental psychology. Many
students, including students from underrepresented minorities, are drawn to
applied psychology programs. The intent of the Institute, in contrast, is to
focus student interest and enthusiasm on the basic science areas of psychology.
The eight-week USC Summer Research Institute will permit well-qualified minority
and non-minority undergraduate students majoring in a behavioral science an
experience in graduate-level research, including an opportunity to formulate and
conduct an experiment with individual guidance from an energetic and supportive
research faculty mentor. The student will participate in major phases of
experimental research, including literature review, hypothesis generation, data
collection, data organization, statistical analysis and report writing in the
style of American Psychological Association journals. Student experiences will
be enriched by weekly research seminars, in which assigned readings will be
discussed, and by weekly sessions on problems of research design and statistics
in experimental psychology. Students will receive gratis course credit for their
work. This program emphasis is much needed, as the U.S. is perceived to be the
leader in the field of experimental psychology, and our universities must be
able to motivate and train the best students for future careers in vital areas
of behavioral science. This Summer Institute will continue to provide one
vehicle to enhance these goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award contributes to
the Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers in
science through active undergraduate research experiences. &lt;br/&gt;