* 0244724
* NSF-Europe:    Distribution, Segregation & Dose-Loss of Dopants in Deca-Nanometer SOI Structures using Ab inito Interface Dopant Analysis by Transmission Electron Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Gerd Duscher, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 02/28/2007
* USD 630,000.00

This is a collaborative project between participating groups in Germany, Sweden,
and the US. The project addresses fundamental materials science issues in
silicon-on-insulator (SOI) structures of particular technological relevance to
realization of advanced device performance. The approach involves determination
of the distribution and segregation of dopants within deca-nanometer SOI
structures utilizing theoretical and experimental tools to gain greater
understanding of processes leading to dose-loss and segregation to both oxide
interfaces in nanoscale-device structures. Experimental methods will include
atomic resolution TEM-based Z-contrast and electron energy-loss spectroscopy.
Modeling will consist of atomistic ab initio calculations and process modeling.
The core issue of segregation studies is that the atomic structure of
silicon/oxide interfaces remains elusive in spite of intensive research. The
model dependence of segregation energy in ab initio materials simulations is
commonly considered to be a disadvantage. It is planned to exploit this model
dependence by combining it with analytical TEM to transform a disadvantage into
a powerful characterization tool, called AIDA-TEM (Ab initio Interface Dopant
Analysis by Transmission Electron Microscopy). Since the predicted segregation
sites of many impurities and dopants are heavily dependent on the atomic
structure model of the interface, segregation sites of a number of impurities
will first be determined experimentally. Then, which atomic interface model is
in agreement with these experimental findings will be determined. In this way,
AIDA-TEM helps to determine interface structure, dopant segregation behavior,
and (from the ab initio calculations) electronic properties, which can then be
used to predict device characteristics. Process modeling, based on experiments
and ab initio calculations, is expected to lead to an understanding of dopant
redistribution and dose loss mechanisms. And knowledge of structure-property
relationships, dependent on dopants and annealing conditions, will allow
determination of more optimum device processing parameters. %%% The project
addresses fundamental research issues associated with materials having
technological relevance in nanoelectronics. An important feature of the project
is the strong emphasis on education, with emphasis on integration of research
and education, and an international collaboration providing both scientific and
educational benefits. Staff and student exchanges will supplement electronic
communications between the participating groups. Undergraduate and graduate
students involved in the project will be exposed to international and world-
class science and technology. Young scientists and students greatly benefit from
these kinds of projects, to learn the basics of nanoscience and to become
motivated to pursue new ideas of their own. This NSF project is co-funded by the
Division of Materials Research (Electronic Materials and Ceramics Programs), and
the International Office (Western Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in Materials
Research between the NSF and Europe (NSF 02-135). The project is being carried
out in collaboration with participating groups in Germany (Heiner Ryssel
Professor at the Electrical and Electronic Engineering Department, University of
Erlangen-Nurnberg, Germany and Director of the Fraunhofer Institute of
Integrated Circuits, Erlangen, Germany), and Sweden (Mikael Ostling Professor,
Head of Department, Department of Microelectronics and Information Technology,
Laboratory of Solid State Devices, KTH, Royal Institute of Technology).