* 0244773
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Habitat Effects on Positional Behavior and Fine Branch Use in Arboreal Cercopithecid Monkeys
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2003,08/31/2004
* David Watts, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 08/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

Biologists and anthropologists interested in anatomy, evolution, and behavior
rely on the interrelationship of these elements to interpret both living and
extinct primate morphological and behavioral adaptations. However, the complex
interaction of phylogenetic history, current behavioral specializations, and
habitat characteristics makes this exercise difficult. More specifically, debate
exists on whether primate positional behavior and support use are canalized and
fixed based on phylogenetic constraints, or are highly flexible and context
specific. The lack of studies investigating variation in positional behavior and
support use across habitats and seasons leads to assumptions concerning primate
adaptations and the use of a given habitat. These issues challenge morphologists
and ecologists engaged in constructing "typical" profiles of positional behavior
for primate species, which are ultimately used to reconstruct evolutionary
history. These questions have become particularly relevant in the study of
African arboreal cercopithecid monkeys. Results of comparative studies of
multiple taxa between two sites (Tai Forest, Ivory Coast, and Kibale Forest,
Uganda) vary in certain aspects of positional behavior and support use,
especially for the red colobus monkey (Piliocolobus badius), which was studied
at both sites. This suggests that the influence of habitat on positional
behavior and support use requires further study.&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Aronsen's
research would contribute to this debate by comparing positional behavior,
support use, and habitat preferences in three arboreal monkeys (red colobus,
Piliocolobus badius; redtailed monkeys, Cercopithecus ascanius; and grey-cheeked
mangabeys, Lophocebus albigena) at Ngogo, located within the Kibale National
Park of Uganda. Mr. Aronsen will record data on positional behavior and support
use using continuous focal sampling and group scans of highly habituated groups
in each species. Habitat structure and patterns of use will be measured using
daily follows, transects, and phenological surveys. Primary focus will be placed
on fine branch use in all taxa, as these smallest available supports represent a
key area for foraging; they are also the most difficult to navigate, thus
indicating varying positional and support preferences across taxa and body
sizes. These data will then be compared to similar data available from
neighboring Kanyawara (for all three species) and the Tai forest (for P.
badius).&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Aronsen's research has broad implications beyond the
study of Kibale monkeys. While his study will examine a significant problem in
primate evolutionary biology, it will also inform decisions regarding
conservation of primates and their habitats. By examining how flexible or static
their behavior is given forest disturbance or logging, one can evaluate the
potential impact humans may have on a primate population's overall health and
survival. He will also collaborate with Ugandan researchers and field
assistants, and share his results and methods to increase knowledge of these
issues. This research will also allow him to train and educate students to
further study nonhuman primates in their native habitat. Finally, his
conclusions will be made available for other researchers to compare other
primate species and habitats beyond Africa, thus developing a more comprehensive
portrait of primate biology, behavior, and evolution.&lt;br/&gt;