* 0244354
* Investigation of Clays Undergoing Large Strains or Possible Shear Banding
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Victor Kaliakin, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2004
* USD 198,996.00

This project concerns the investigation of the behavior of clays at very large
strains, utilizing both experimental and analytical techniques. Many problems in
geotechnical engineering relate to this phenomenon. Some relate to post-failure
or instability issues such as: slope stability failures (sands and clays);
bearing capacity failures (sands and clays); liquefaction and lateral spreading
(sands); and all types of geotechnical failure and post-failure events. Examples
involving laboratory experiments include soil inside a shear band in a test
specimen (sands and clays) and calibration chamber testing of the CPT (sands and
clays). In all of these problems the soil inside the shear zone may be subjected
to shear strains in excess of one hundred percent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first fundamental question related to such problems is: What is the soil
behavior at these high strain levels? Presently, the PI's are aware of no
available experimental data in the literature that has tested soils to large
strains under well-controlled conditions with resulting uniform stresses and
strains. This is especially true with respect to three-dimensional stress path
tests sheared to large strains. Typical laboratory tests on unit soil specimens
can only be reliably sheared to a maximum of 20 or 30 percent strain without
significant specimen nonuniformities that call into question the actual stress
and strain magnitudes, along with the void ratio. An experimental program is
included to investigate the behavior of clays at very large
strains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second fundamental question is: How do existing
theories of soil behavior compare with the experimental data? Are existing
simple, but widely used constitutive models, such as the Modified Cam-Clay and
bounding surface models, consistent with this new data set? An analytical
research program will carefully analyze and utilize the experimental data to
evaluate traditional soil behavior frameworks and simple constitutive models
that have been extended to finite strains. However, the research program is
weighted towards experimental work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based upon the PIs
current unpublished experimental work on clays, a third fundamental question
must also be raised. Can all specimens loaded onto different 3-d stress paths
and all OCRs be sheared to very large strains without persistent shear banding?
If not, it may not be possible to execute the proposed experimental program
outlined below in its entirety. However, in the event that persistent shear
bands form, a supplementary experimental and analytical research program has
been formulated to address that particular issue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Experimental Program will consist of the following tasks: 1) Perform very large
strain drained axisymmetric triaxial compression tests on clay specimens using
repetitive staged shearing techniques to achieve engineering strains well beyond
100 percent; 2) Using the aforementioned repetitive staged shearing techniques,
perform large strain drained true triaxial tests on cuboidal clay specimens.
Three-dimensional stress paths will be varied from triaxial compression to
triaxial extension; 3) Analyze void ratio distributions in specimens at
different points during shearing to ensure uniform strains and void ratio
distribution; 4) If persistent shear banding occurs, supplement experimental
tasks with experiments directed toward a study of this
phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Analytic Program will consist of the
following tasks: 1) Analyze experimental data within the framework of Critical
State soil mechanics; 2) Based on the experimental results, evaluate the
consequences to and propose possible changes to constitutive formulations, such
as the Modified Cam-Clay and the bounding surface models for cohesive soils to
account for variations in the behavior at large strains and for general stress
paths; 3) If persistent shear banding occurs, supplement analytic tasks with
work related to shear banding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study incorporates
significant original intellectual concepts. It integrates fundamental
experimental work on clays, application of existing elasto-plastic constitutive
model formulations, and numerical analysis of frictional materials that can
represent large-scale field applications. Moreover, the basic proposed
experimental and analytical work will provide a benchmark for the verification
of models used to simulate large deformation problems. The mechanics of shear
banding in clays is a largely uninvestigated topic. The experimental and
analytical plans significantly increase the fundamental knowledge in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will have a broad impact on
society. Further knowledge about the general condition of failure in clays will
be developed. Uniform strain and strain localization failure mechanisms are two
widely different phenomena and both have a great impact on the design of geo-
structures. Understanding them will help develop better codes to ensure a safe
and cost efficient civil infrastructure. Special efforts will be made to recruit
underrepresented minorities as graduate students and REUs.&lt;br/&gt;