* 0244405
* Homological Methods and Ideal Closures in Commutative Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2009
* Craig Huneke, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2009
* USD 344,839.00

&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0244405&lt;br/&gt;Huneke, Craig
L.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in the
field of commutative algebra, especially in the&lt;br/&gt;homological theory of
Noetherian rings. The lever being used to study this&lt;br/&gt;area is in
developing the understanding of maximal Cohen-Macaulay modules&lt;br/&gt;and
extensions of modules. In addition, the project also studies &lt;br/&gt;several
areas central to commutative algebra, including the tight closure
of&lt;br/&gt;ideals, integral closures of ideals, the core of an ideal,
evolutions,&lt;br/&gt;symbolic powers, and rational singularities. The focus of
this proposal&lt;br/&gt;is on several open conjectures, especially regarding
rings of finite and&lt;br/&gt;countable Cohen-Macaulay type, conjectures of
Auslander on the vanishing&lt;br/&gt;of extension modules, and questions of
Schreyer, among others. Among&lt;br/&gt;the methods being used is the study of
maximal Cohen-Macaulay&lt;br/&gt;modules not only through study of infinite
resolutions, but with techniques&lt;br/&gt;coming from tight closure and
reduction to characteristic p. The methods are&lt;br/&gt;in part classical
methods as well as those being developed by the
proposer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commutative algebra arose from the 19th century
study of polynomial equations in&lt;br/&gt;many variables, and their solutions.
The relationship between polynomial equations and&lt;br/&gt;geometry goes back
at least to Descartes and the idea of coordinatizing the
plane.&lt;br/&gt;Commutative algebra studies the solutions of such polynomial or
power series equations&lt;br/&gt;by forming an algebraic object, called a ring,
which consists of the 'generic' solutions.&lt;br/&gt;The algebraic properties of
these generic solutions then give insight into the&lt;br/&gt;geometric and
algebraic nature of the equations. An important technique in
this&lt;br/&gt;field has been to study such equations by reducing the
coefficients modulo prime numbers&lt;br/&gt;for all large primes. A particular
example of this has been the explosive development&lt;br/&gt;of the theory of
tight closure over the last fifteen years. Commutative algebra
combines&lt;br/&gt;techniques from a number of other areas including
combinatorics, topology, and analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;