* 0244258
* NSF-Europe: SiC-Based Ceramics via Naturally Derived Scaffolds
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Katherine Faber, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 09/30/2007
* USD 512,000.00

Silicon carbide, one of the hardest and most refractory materials known, does
not occur in nature. Both silicon carbide (SiC) powder synthesis and bulk
production are energy intensive processes, often conducted in excess of 2000
degrees C due to low diffusivities characteristic of silicon carbide. A limited
number of processes are available at moderate temperatures through melt
infiltration techniques, and they offer little microstructural control. An
alternative, under study here, relies on naturally derived scaffolds for SiC
production. These so-called "biomorphic" silicon carbides are produced by
pyrolyzing wood to create the carbon scaffold. The scaffold or template is then
used for silicon infiltration and reaction to create versatile SiC-based
cellular materials. The objectives of this work are three-fold: (a) to
understand the ambient temperature mechanical properties of cellular SiC
fabricated from naturally derived scaffolds, and to compare these materials with
SiC foam synthesized from pitch, (b) to examine the thermal stress resistance of
these materials in large thermal transients, and (c) to use the SiC cellular
materials as templates for hybrid materials, through multiple liquid metal
(aluminum and titanium) infiltrations. These methodologies may offer a new
family of SiC-based composites with unique architectures, and hence, properties.
This program will be conducted in conjunction with two universities in Spain.
Production of the materials used for study will be accomplished at the
University of Seville, and complementary numerical modeling will take place at
the Polytechnic University of Madrid. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These cellular SiC-
based materials proposed for study show particular import for their economical
means of production, their unique cellular microstructure and hence, properties,
and their templating capability for SiC-based composites. It is anticipated that
the cellular microstructure, coupled with the refractory nature of SiC, will
provide potential uses as heat exchangers, high temperature filters, catalyst
supports, and thermal and acoustic insulation in extreme temperatures. Likewise,
the SiC-based hybrids offer strategies for economical means of composite
production compared to continuous fiber-reinforced materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF project is co-funded by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities, Division of Materials Research (Ceramics) and the
International Office (Western Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in Materials
Research between the NSF and Europe (NSF 02-135). This project is being carried
out in collaboration with two groups in Spain, one at the University of Seville,
and other at the Polytechnic University of Madrid.&lt;br/&gt;