* 0244260
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: New Stereoregular Polymers from 4-Membered Carbocyclic Monomers
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Michael Barfield, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 06/30/2006
* USD 22,428.00

0244260&lt;br/&gt;Hall&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a two-year
international collaborative research project. The principal investigator for the
project is Henry Hall at the University of Arizona and the Japanese collaborator
is Tatsuki Kitayama at Osaka University in Japan. They will be undertaking
research on new stereoregular polymers from 4-membered carbocyclic monomers.
These polymers readily undergo polymerization with radical or anionic
initiators. They also copolymerize with vinyl monomers. New polymerization
techniques such as ATRP and Lewis acid assisted anionic polymerization will be
applied to these strained monomers. The polymers will be evaluated as high
temperature polymer optical fibers, unzipper-jamming components, lenses, chiral
resolving columns, etc. Polymers with more controlled structures will lead to
enhanced properties, and therefore more sophisticated uses. In addition, they
possess highly desirable physical properties including optical clarity, high
glass transition temperatures and should be useful for high-tech applications.
Detailed NMR studies of these polymers will provide information about the effect
of specific polymerization conditions on the molecular polymer structure.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the efforts of two
laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The U.
S. researchers have expertise in controlled radical polymerization and the
Japanese are experts at controlled anionic polymerization and they also have
high expertise in the field of structure analysis of polymers using NMR
spectroscopy. These joint efforts should lead to a variety of novel polymers
processing properties and to increased understanding of both free radical and
anionic polymerization. The project advances international human resources
through the participation of a postdoc and an undergraduate student. Through the
exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic
knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. Results of
the research will be disseminated at scientific meetings and in scientific
journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;