* 0244196
* SGER: Identification of Spores of Bacillus Anthracis and Other Species With Optical Sizing and Fluorescence
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* P. Buford Price, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This award supports careful investigation of some physical properties of spores
and lyophilized cells of bacteria in the genus bacillus. Relationships between
the size and shape of spores, including the effects of species identity,
humidity and method of preparation, will be determined. The planned work builds
on preliminary results indicating that these properties may provide the basis
for rapid and accurate determination of the presence of spores in the
environment and of their species identity. In this new project, an automated
microscope system and associated image analysis software will be used to compare
spores and lyophilized cells of different species of bacillus, and to study
response of spores and cells to step-function changes in relative humidity
(R.H.). Powders of talc, kaolinite, salt, and other nonbacterial particles will
be measured for comparison. Spores to be examined, including those of an
avirulent strain of B.anthracis, will be obtained from a larger number of
bacillus species than examined previously. To compare the response time to
changes in R.H., a computer-controlled micromanipulator will be used to transfer
spores and cells to a microscope slide inside a micro-chamber. Past work with
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques has shown that much of the water in
spores is layered, due to orientation of water dipoles in proximity to charged
protein molecules. The microscopic method can detect particle size changes
within a few seconds of a change in R.H.; the results should provide new insight
into how and where the water inside spores is structured. The results may also
provide insight into the restricted effectiveness of gas decontaminants such as
chlorine dioxide at R.H. below 70 to 80%. In addition to the investigation of
spore size, the intensity and emission spectrum of autofluorescence by bacillus
spores will be examined. These properties also appear to vary by species and may
complement sizing and response to humidity changes as a diagnostic tool for the
presence of spores. The autofluorescence of spores is thought to be influenced
by the makeup of the spore exosporium, which includes a cross-linked, collagen-
like protein called BclA absent in vegetative cells.

