* 0244327
* High Risk Exploratory Research: Confirming an Upper Paleolithic Occupation of the Central Tibetan Plateau
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Mark Aldenderfer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2006
* USD 24,961.00

Despite more than 40 years of research, very little is known of the antiquity of
the human presence on the Tibetan plateau, one of the world's highest and most
complex environments. Although some archaeologists have argued for an early
occupation, one that perhaps began 50,000 years ago, the only securely dated
sites are 5,000 years old. The recent discovery of the Chusang site in central
Tibet near Lhasa may bring new insights to this problem. First discovered in
1995, but only recently published, the site is said to have human hand and
footprints in a calcified mud deposit that dates to approximately 21,000 years
ago. Should this date be accurate, this site would radically change our thinking
about the occupation of the plateau. However, the site has never been examined
in detail by archaeologists, and consequently, the scientific community is
awaiting a more comprehensive study of the site before accepting these findings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the invitation of Chinese scholars, Dr. Mark
Aldenderfer and a multidisciplinary team of American, Chinese, and Tibetan
archaeologists, geologists, geomorphologists, and dating specialists will study
Chusang and attempt to verify this early human presence. Their work will involve
a complete mapping of the site, a thorough review of its geological context with
the goal of recovering new samples of datable materials in direct association
with the hand and footprints, the examination of the region around the site to
see if other traces of an early human presence can be located, and the
preservation of the prints by making casts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation
of the Chusang site and the confirmation of its antiquity will be of importance
to more than just archaeology. For much of the 20th century, geologists thought
that the entire Tibetan plateau was covered with a thick sheet of ice throughout
much of the glacial epoch. Should Chusang date to 21,000 years ago, this finding
would be of value to the growing body of scholars that believe the plateau was
not covered with this ice sheet. Another question that this project may help to
provide insight into is the nature of human adaptations to high-elevation
environments. Physical anthropologists have remarked on the striking differences
between Tibetans and Andean highlanders in the ways in which they have developed
physiological responses to the rigors of life at high elevations. Why this is
the case is unknown, with some arguing that the difference is simply that
indigenous Andean peoples have not lived at high elevation as long as have
Tibetans, while others suggest that these differences are not time dependent,
but instead reflect two distinct evolutionary pathways that solve the same
problem. Confirming the age of Chusang will help to evaluate these
arguments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One major benefit of the project is that it will
provide an ideal multi-national, multi-disciplinary learning environment for
American, Chinese, and Tibetan graduate students. As the first western
archaeologist permitted to work on the central plateau, Dr. Aldenderfer believes
that the project will encourage similar collaborative projects in
Tibet.&lt;br/&gt;