* 0244082
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Biodiversity and Ecological Processes in Fluctuating Environments
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* James Bonner, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 08/31/2006
* USD 268,397.00

0244082 Honeycutt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a three-year Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site hosted by Texas A&amp;M University
(TAMU) and Texas A&amp;M Corpus Christi (TAMUCC) for 10 students each year. The
REU site is designed as a ten-week summer experience and will provide research
opportunities to integrate engineering and life science technologies as they
pertain to the study of ecological processes associated with biodiversity and
environmental quality. The program will focus on environmental research
benefiting from interaction between engineers and life scientists. Faculty
mentors will include 3 engineers and 3 life scientists and students will be
selected and assigned to these mentors to optimize interaction between different
disciplines. The research experience will include activities at the Texas
A&amp;M University campus in College Station; the Texas A&amp;M University
Corpus Christi; oil spill bioremediation research sites; and other sites related
to specific student projects. Students will participate in group activities
involving working together on a data collection and analysis project;
environmental case studies; and a roundtable discussion and presentation on the
scientific method and modeling complex systems. At the end of the summer
experience, each student will present their research results and write an in-
depth paper on their project. Students will be recruited from within the TAMU
system and other institutions across the state and nation with a special effort
to attract students from population groups underrepresented in research fields
in engineering and science in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;