* 0244764
* Research in Classical and Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Gary Horowitz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 05/31/2007
* USD 754,364.00

Gravitational aspects of string theory, a promising candidate for a quantum
theory of gravity, will be investigated by Horowitz. Einstein's general theory
of relativity predicts that singularities are inevitably formed in gravitational
collapse. When this occurs, general relativity breaks down. String theory will
be used to search for the quantum description of the singularities inside black
holes and at the big bang using string theory. Related questions that will also
be investigated include properties of black holes in higher dimensions, and
cosmic censorship -- the possibility of forming singularities not hidden inside
event horizons.

The principles which determine the quantum state of the universe and the
generalizations of quantum mechanics needed to understand it with special
emphasis on Hawking's no-boundary quantum state will be investigated by Hartle.
The origin of the predictable quasiclassical realm of every day experience in a
universe governed generally by quantum uncertainty will also be investigated.

The proposed activities will integrate research and teaching by hands on
training of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in the knowledge and
techniques that are central to understanding and discovery in gravitational
physics. Questions such as the nature of space and time, the origin of the
universe, and the nature of matter are of great interest to a wide audience.
Through a range of forums from public lectures, to participation in programs for
high school science teachers, to informing media reporters, the authors have
disseminated the directions and results of current research to this broader
audience. By being alert to appropriate opportunities we expect to continue this
effort in the future. Society at large will benefit by increasing awareness of
central problems in science.