* 0244822
* A Theoretical Study of Hadronic Interactions and the Structure of the Nucleon
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* John Londergan, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 06/30/2007
* USD 243,000.00

This renewal proposal requests continued NSF funding of a research program
currently sup-&lt;br/&gt;ported by the grant NSF-PHY-0070368. The major proposed
topics lie in the area of \quark{&lt;br/&gt;nuclear physics," to study the quark
sub{structure of strongly interacting particles. Particular&lt;br/&gt;attention
is on approximate symmetries of QCD, particularly favor and charge
symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;Symmetry violation provides a \mirror" to identify and
quantify non-perturbative physics.&lt;br/&gt;This research should shed light on
the detailed properties of the fundamental constituents of&lt;br/&gt;matter,
with emphasis on the validity of favor and charge symmetry, the spin
dependence&lt;br/&gt;of parton distributions, and nuclear modification of parton
properties. One product of this&lt;br/&gt;grant would be a comprehensive review
of charge symmetry at both low and high energies,&lt;br/&gt;emphasizing our
current understanding of the role of the up-down quark mass difference
in&lt;br/&gt;generating charge symmetry violation over a wide variety of
energies and physical processes.&lt;br/&gt;Models developed by the PI will be
employed to investigate recent neutrino results, which are&lt;br/&gt;suggested
to show physics beyond the Standard Model. The structure of baryon
resonances&lt;br/&gt;will be investigated through a relativistic code developed
explicitly to study these systems.&lt;br/&gt;New features of these calculations
should allow a more realistic description of the structure
of&lt;br/&gt;resonances in the .25N system. It is also proposed to study binding
and scattering of particles&lt;br/&gt;in constrained 2-D systems, relevant to
quantum wires and photonic crystals. Prior research in&lt;br/&gt;this area
culminated in a monograph published by Springer-Verlag. Continuing studies
involve&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with an experimental colleague combining
theoretical studies of novel geometries&lt;br/&gt;with experiments on these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;In all proposed areas, there is close linkage between theory
and experiment. Some recent&lt;br/&gt;predictions by the PI are being studied at
facilities such as LEP, HERA and the Tevatron.&lt;br/&gt;The baryon resonance
work proposed here is relevant to data taken at the CLAS detector&lt;br/&gt;at
Jefferson Lab. The PI is involved in studies for a possible new facility, an
Electron-Ion&lt;br/&gt;Collider (EIC), which was favorably assessed in the
recent NSAC Long-Range Plan for nuclear&lt;br/&gt;physics. The PI is a co-author
on recent EIC planning efforts that include a Web site and CD-&lt;br/&gt;ROM
containing a Whitepaper on EIC physics. The PI is Director of the Indiana
University&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Theory Center (NTC). Currently the NTC has four
postdocs and visitors, three of&lt;br/&gt;whom are women. In several instances,
women working at NTC have received joint support&lt;br/&gt;from two or more
sources, combining federal, university or foreign contributions. The PI
has&lt;br/&gt;set up international collaborations between the NTC and physics
institutes in Australia, Japan&lt;br/&gt;and Germany. The PI has mentored 9
undergraduate researchers in summer REU programs&lt;br/&gt;during the past 8
years. They have given talks on their research at subsequent
workshops&lt;br/&gt;and professional meetings, and have collaborated on
publications with the PI. The research&lt;br/&gt;proposed here will provide
training and mentoring for both postdoctoral research associates,&lt;br/&gt;and
undergraduate physics majors.