* 0244290
* NSF-Europe: Electronic Correlations in Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Jose Menendez, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2008
* USD 607,695.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;A systematic study of the excitonic properties of
carbon nanotubes is proposed. Optical Absorption, Photoluminescence and
Photoluminescence Excitation Spectroscopy will be carried out by researchers at
Arizona State University (ASU), the Universidad Autonoma de Madrid (Spain) and
Clemson University. The special materials needed for these studies will be
synthesized at Clemson University, and theoretical support will be provided by
researchers at the University of Modena (Italy).&lt;br/&gt;The project is
expected to have a broad societal impact. The recent fabrication of nanotube
heterojunctions and the discovery of doping mechanisms suggest that carbon
nanotubes may play an important role in future generations of optoelectronic
devices. The understanding of excitons in these materials is a fundamental
scientific prerequisite for any such application.&lt;br/&gt;A special emphasis
will be placed on fostering scientific education. Existing programs at ASU will
help attract minority and high-school students. Interdisciplinary graduate
courses on Raman spectroscopy and Excitons will be taught at Arizona State
University by the European partners. Course notes will be disseminated via the
Internet. The program will also support experimental research in Europe by US
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Technological advances that improve the standard of living of
our citizens depend, to a great extent, on the development of new materials.
These advances are invariably preceded by intense fundamental research. In this
project it is proposed to study the basic properties of carbon nanotubes, a new
class of materials with an intriguing technological potential.&lt;br/&gt;The
specific purpose of this project is to study "excitonic effects" in the
absorption and emission of light by carbon nanotubes. Excitonic effects result
from the attractive force between an electron that is excited by the light and
the positive charge it leaves behind. These effects are of fundamental
importance in conventional semiconductors, but in the case of carbon nanotubes
they have not been studied in any detail.&lt;br/&gt;The required nanotube
samples will be prepared at Clemson University. Optical measurements will be
performed at Clemson, Arizona State University, and at the Autonomous University
in Madrid, Spain. Theoretical support will be provided by collaborators at the
University of Modena, Italy. These international collaborations will make it
possible for US graduate students to do research work
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF project is co-funded by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities, and the Divisions of Material Research (Condensed
Matter Physics), International Office (Western Europe) and a Cooperative
Activity in Materials Research between the NSF and Europe (NSF 02-135). This
project is being carried out in collaboration with the Autonomous University in
Madrid, Spain and University of Modena, Italy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;