* 0244569
* Role of Protein Phosphorylation for Osmotic Stress Adaptation of a Euryhaline Teleost
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Dietmar Kueltz, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 02/28/2005
* USD 216,447.00

The overall objective of this project is to test the hypothesis that the
phospho-protein adaptor 14-3-3.a controls the reorganization of the gill
epithelium during salinity acclimation of euryhaline teleosts. Specifically,
this project will investigate the mechanisms of osmotic regulation of 14-3-3.a
at multiple levels (expression, posttranslational regulation, and
compartmentalization) and its interaction with mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPKs) in the adapting gill epithelium of the euryhaline fish Fundulus
heteroclitus. The focus of this project is a detailed investigation of the
osmotic regulation of 14-3-3.a. This is a critical issue because 14-3-3 proteins
are of general and extraordinary importance for signal transduction pathways
that are based on phosphorylation. These proteins are a novel type of molecular
adaptor that modulates interactions among virtually all important components
involved in environmentally regulated signaling pathways, cell differentiation,
and cell cycle control (Fu et al., 2000). 14-3-3 proteins regulate cellular
activity and function by binding and sequestering proteins phosphorylated on
serine or threonine. These molecules likely control the reorganization of gill
epithelium during salinity adaptation of euryhaline teleosts because 1) protein
phosphorylation is a major mechanism of osmosensory signal transduction and 2)
14-3-3 proteins are involved in the regulation of many mitogenic, ion transport,
and cell differentiation pathways. Substantial preliminary data provide a strong
foundation for the proposed project and represent a comprehensive basis for
addressing all aims of this project in depth. A cloned and sequenced novel cDNA
from the euryhaline fish F. heteroclitus (GB AF302039) contains an open reading
frame encoding the first known 14-3-3 protein from fish that is named 14-3-3.a.
Recent data provide clear evidence that the 14-3-3.a gene is strongly induced in
gill epithelium of F. heteroclitus transferred from seawater (SW) to fresh water
(FW). The abundance and activities of the MAPKs ERK, JNK, and p38 in gill
epithelium of F. heteroclitus transferred from SW to FW and vice versa show that
the activity of all MAPKs is strongly modulated during salinity acclimation of
euryhaline fish. The aims focus on a detailed analysis of the osmotic regulation
of 14-3-3.a in gill epithelium of the euryhaline fish F. heteroclitus: 1) To
know the profile of osmotic regulation of 14-3-3.a mRNA and protein expression.
2) To investigate how osmolality changes affect posttranslational modification
of 14-3-3.a. 3) To know the cellular and subcellular localization of 14-3-3.a
and how it is osmotically regulated. 4) To determine whether 14-3-3.a interacts
with MAPKs in the osmotically adapting gill epithelium. The approach for
addressing these aims will be based on recombinant DNA methodology; western
blotting, northern blotting, two-dimensional electrophoresis followed by MALDI-
TOF mass spectrometry, immunocytochemistry, immunoprecipitation, pull-down
assays, and kinase assays. It is anticipated that this project will
significantly advance the knowledge of cellular osmosensory signal transduction.
It will introduce a novel euryhaline fish model to osmosensory signal
transduction research. Euryhaline fishes have an extrarenal transport epithelium
the gill epithelium that is directly exposed to the external milieu and can be
studied in intact animals in vivo. Unlike for mammalian renal cells, the
osmolality of the medium surrounding fish gill epithelial cells can be
accurately and instantaneously manipulated in vivo. This research should provide
comprehensive insight into the osmotic regulation of 14-3-3.a, an excellent
candidate molecule for governing many aspects of osmosensory signal transduction
and cell differentiation in adapting gill epithelial cells of euryhaline
teleosts exposed to salinity changes.