* 0244957
* Dynamics of Boolean Networks and Gene Expression
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Joshua Socolar, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* C.  Caldwell
* 04/30/2005
* USD 55,000.00

The physical structure of a cell is largely determined by the expression level
of each of its&lt;br/&gt;genes. These levels are governed by complicated
transcriptional and translational processes&lt;br/&gt;that form proteins, whose
presence can then alter those processes and hence influence
the&lt;br/&gt;expression levels of the very genes that produced them. At its
deepest level, this complex&lt;br/&gt;physical structure can be represented as a
network of interactions among genes - a network that governs the progression of
the cell through an abstract space of gene expression patterns. Socolar and
Kauffman request funding for research addressing the dynamical properties of
such complex networks. The mathematical networks to be studied are selected
specifically for their relevance to the biology of gene expression. The proposed
research aims to develop useful models of the complex regulatory
networks&lt;br/&gt;that determine the activities of all of the genes in a
eukaryotic cell. Recent advances in experimental technique have prompted an
explosion of activity in functional genomics, dominated at present by efforts to
deduce particular substructures of a network by analyzing correlations in gene
expression patterns. The proposed research addresses a complementary set of
questions, focusing on the generic properties of complex Boolean networks with
the goal of elucidating the functional implications of different types of
network architecture.&lt;br/&gt;The working hypothesis is that certain classes
of Boolean networks illustrate principles of&lt;br/&gt;organization that
underlie the structure of biological organisms. Specifically, the proposed
research will provide analytic calculations of the numbers of nodes that
actually determine the long-time dynamics in large random Boolean networks
constructed under various constraints, and determine the statistics of the sub-
networks linking these relevant nodes with each other. After the completion of
current work on random networks with a fixed number of inputs per node, scale-
free networks will be studied, both&lt;br/&gt;with random structures and with
correlations corresponding to modular architectures. The dynamical behavior
supported by the sub-networks of relevant nodes will be characterized, both for
deterministic and stochastic dynamical rules.&lt;br/&gt;Choices of
mathematical/physical problems will be strongly influenced by their
potential&lt;br/&gt;for biological relevance. Intermediate results will be
compared to statistical information&lt;br/&gt;gathered from gene chip
experiments to determine whether those experiments contain
signatures&lt;br/&gt;of any particular global network architecture.
Understanding the global features of genetic regulatory networks is expected to
lead to new insights into evolutionary and ontogenic processes, as well as
provide useful information for the design of functional genomics experiments
involving selected portions of the genome.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
highly cross-disciplinary, requiring a collaboration between experts in
dynamical systems theory and cell and developmental biology. It provides
opportunities for interdisciplinary training for students at all levels in the
burgeoning fields of functional genomics and bio-informatics, where analytical
skills traditionally taught in physics contexts and principles of cell and
molecular biology are equally important.&lt;br/&gt;