* 0244605
* Quantum Gravity and Relativistic Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Richard Price, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 02/28/2005
* USD 356,263.00

This project contains two components: (1) The astrophysical research focuses on
a program to produce approximate gravitational waveforms to provide useful
information to ongoing gravitational wave detection experiments on a faster time
scale than that likely to be needed for an accurate numerical simulation. In
their last few orbits of inspiral, and in their final plunge&lt;br/&gt;and
merger, these binaries strongly curve spacetime and strongly emit gravitational
waves. A complete understanding of this process, and of the gravitational
waveforms produced, will require much further development of supercomputer
evolution codes. The approach here is to use an approximation scheme for the
gradual late-stage binary inspiral followed by supercomputer evolution for the
final inward plunge and merger of the holes. The method exploits the fact that
the spacetime of the gradual inspiral differs very little from that of a
perfectly periodic binary. This gradual inspiral is therefore approximated by an
exactly periodic orbit. These periodic orbits can be used to construct a
quasiequilibrium sequence representing the gradual pre-plunge decrease in radius
of the binary, and to give a good approximation to the corresponding
gravitational waveform. (2) An outstanding problem in theoretical physics is how
to reconcile the principles of quantum theory with those of general relativity.
In general relativity, spacetime does not have any fixed structure which is not
dynamical but governs dynamics from outside as an unmoved mover. On the other
hand, quantum theory depends on such structures. This project views Einstein's
theory as a model on which one can clarify how to quantize a system with no
external structure without introducing an external structure. The first main
theme here is that foliations can be viewed not as fixed elements but as free
variables which help us to build phase space from spacetime foliation. The
second main theme is more specific. A black hole is formed by a spherical
collapse of quantum matter that produces quantum geometry without its own
degrees of freedom will be studied. A mean geometry and its fluctuations will be
determined, and a study will be made of how the radiation produced on this
background differs from the thermal radiation fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At
present, relativistic gravitation is of crucial interest both at the frontier of
astrophysics&lt;br/&gt;and at the frontier of theoretical physics. This project
contains research of both types. In addition to its broad impacts on the two
frontiers of gravitational physics, this project will also provide broad
theoretical training to postdoctoral researchers and students. &lt;br/&gt;