* 0244061
* Research Experience for Undergraduates Site: Engineering Forensics Research Institute (EFRI)
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Kevin Sutterer, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Esther Bolding
* 04/30/2007
* USD 164,096.00

0244061 Sutterer

This award funds a three-year Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site
at the Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology's Engineering Forensic Research
Institute (EFRI) for 8 students each year for research in engineering as it
relates to the forensic sciences. Research topics will include research about
engineering properties of recycled materials in earth work; hydraulics and
mitigation of low-head dams to reduce drowning; thermal resistance of fiber-
reinforced polymer (FRP) reinforced beams; and means to reduce life-threatening
failure of large highway culverts. Student teams will work as principal
investigators with outside clients to define the problem and define a work scope
that will then be completed by that team. Deliverables include preparation of a
publishable work. A short course, "Engineering Forensic Research", will be
taught to student participants and will include topics such as ethics,
conducting research, and forensic studies. The program will work on crucial
research to reduce failures and loss of life with the focus on work that is
generally under funded or underrepresented in the current university research
setting. The research undertaken by student participants has the potential for
immediate impact on the engineering of real systems, and students will gain a
unique opportunity to see the role of engineering research as it relates to
issues of concern for U.S. homeland security. Students will learn fundamental
research and engineering ethics while discovering and experiencing engineering
research. Recruitment will be nationwide with a focus on attracting students
from population groups underrepresented in research fields in engineering.