* 0244713
* Electron Transport in Nanostructures and Single Molecules
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Daniel Ralph, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 01/31/2007
* USD 450,000.00

This research project focuses on the electronic properties of two classes of
nanostructures, metal nanoparticles and single molecules, which are related in
that they are small enough that electrons can be manipulated to flow via
individual quantum-mechanical states, rather than through a continuum of energy
levels as is the case in larger devices. The proposed work is aimed both at
developing new fabrication techniques for incorporating nanoparticles and single
molecules into electrical devices, and also at exploiting these techniques to
gain new insights into the physics governing electron transport in these
systems. The ultimate goal is to understand electrical conduction at the level
of single quantum states and individual chemical bonds. The work will address a
number of fundamental questions: How do the different forces, which act on
electrons in nanostructures, affect the spectrum of quantum levels? What
physical processes affect spin-dependent transport through nanostructures and
molecules? In what ways is electron transport in single molecules similar to
nanoparticles, and in what way is it different, due to vibrations, charge
reconfiguration, solvent effects, and differences in screening? The graduate and
undergraduate students working on the project will gain broad expertise in
nanotechnology, as well as skills in presenting their work verbally and in
writing. This training will prepare them for a variety of possible careers in
education, research, and/or business.

By shrinking electronic devices to the nanometer scale, it has become possible
to explore a new regime, where electrons are manipulated to flow through
individual energy levels rather than through an effectively continuous spectrum
of states. This research project will develop new fabrication methods to make
nanoscale devices, it will investigate techniques for controlling the flow of
electrons through single energy levels, and it will determine whether this
capability can lead to device functions not possible in larger devices. The work
will incorporate two types of nanoscale building blocks, metal particles less
than 10 nm in diameter and individual molecules designed and synthesized to act
as electrical transistors. The ultimate goal will be to understand electrical
conduction at the level of individual chemical bonds. The work will focus on
fundamental physical questions having to do with the rates at which electrons
move between energy levels, the effects of different of forces acting on the
electrons, the role of the electron's spin in affecting its motion, and how
molecular devices may differ from solid-state structures due to the fact that
molecules may twist and vibrate. The graduate and undergraduate students working
on the project will gain broad expertise in nanotechnology, as well as skills in
presenting their work verbally and in writing. This training will prepare them
for a variety of possible careers in education, research, and/or business.