* 0244213
* Marine Biology Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Alaska
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Brendan Kelly, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sally E. O'Connor
* 04/30/2006
* USD 212,850.00

The Biology Program at the University of Alaska Southeast (UAS) offers research
experience to undergraduate students interested in the physiology, ecology, and
behavior of marine organisms. The UAS Juneau Campus, located on Auke Bay,
provides opportunities for 10 weeks of hands-on research experience with marine
algae, invertebrates, birds and mammals. In addition to the Juneau area, field
research projects take place in Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve, the Gulf
of Alaska, and the Arctic Ocean.

Student participants will conduct research under the guidance of UAS Biology
faculty and collaborating research scientists. The program is supported with
funds from the National Science Foundation and the University of Alaska
Southeast. Each student participant will receive a stipend $350 per week and
housing while in Juneau. Travel and subsistence costs to the site and within
Alaska will also be provided. Living arrangements during the REU program may
involve sharing an apartment with male and female students, and you may also
share a room with another (same-sex) student. Juneau is located in southeastern
Alaska and accessible only by ferry (Alaska Marine Highway) or air (Alaska
Airlines).

A workshop on the UAS campus will include training in the conduct of science,
selected field methods, and field and laboratory safety. Students will work
intensively with their mentors on individual projects and present their results
in a seminar at the completion of the program. Opportunities also exist to
present at national meetings.

Applicants must be U.S. citizens or permanent residents and enrolled as
undergraduate students at accredited institutions. Graduating seniors are not
eligible. The program seeks academically strong students interested in marine
biological research. Minority applicants are especially encouraged.

All applications received by 28 February 2003 will be considered in a review
during the first week in March. Applications received after 28 February will be
considered only if all positions are not filled during review of the original
pool.

For more info, please contact Elizabeth Mathews at (907) 465-1827 or
beth.mathews@uas.alaska.edu. You may also visit
http://www.jun.alaska.edu/uas/biology/REU.html.