* 0244799
* Sixth North American Meeting of New Researchers in Statistics and Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Richard Levine, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Xuming He
* 12/31/2003
* USD 20,000.00

Abstract

PI: Richard Levine DMS-0244799

Sixth North American Meeting of New Researchers in Statistics and Probability

This proposal describes plans for the Sixth North American Meeting of New
Researchers in Statistics and Probability, a conference sponsored by the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics, to be organized by and held for junior
researchers. The primary objective is to provide a much needed venue for
interaction among new researchers. In contrast with large meetings, this
conference will be restricted to 90 participants. Sessions will be followed by
discussions and breaks to facilitate interactions.

The proposed conference will take place July 29-August 1, 2003, on the
University of California campus at Davis, CA. Housing, meals, and conference
facilities will be provided on campus. The Joint Statistical Meetings will be
held in San Francisco providing an easy opportunity for conference participants
to attend both events. Participants will be statisticians and probabilists whom
have received their PhD since 1998 or are expecting to receive their PhD degree
by 2004. Each participant will present a talk or poster. Topics will include the
gamut of statistical research from theory and methods to applications. There
will be four senior speaker sessions in which topics of particular interest to
new researchers will be presented. Professor Charles McCulloch from the
University of California at San Francisco, Professor Xiao-Li Meng from Harvard
University, Professor Jessica Utts from the University of California, Davis, and
IMS president Raghu Varadhan from the Courant Institute, have all accepted
invitations to speak. Three panel discussions during the conference will cover
the topics of journal publications, opportunities in statistics laboratories,
and funding.