* 0244902
* Detection of Gravitational Waves: Interferometry, Devices, Materials, and Analysis for LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* David Tanner, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 05/31/2006
* USD 1,467,120.00

Research and development for LIGO will be carried out in three main areas.
First, the detailed design for the input optics of advanced LIGO will be
developed, including extensive high-power testing of critical optical components
such as modulators, Faraday isolators, and other transmissive optics. Some of
this work will take place at the LIGO Livingston Laboratory. Methods for passive
compensation of thermal lensing in these devices will be exploited, and devices
constructed. Second, interferometer configurations will be studied. In
collaboration with the University of Glasgow, a suspended, signal-recycled
interferometer will be used as a testbed for the advanced LIGO interferometer.
In addition the use of gratings as dispersive elements in optical cavities will
be investigated. Third, data analysis and detector characterization algorithms
will continue to be developed, in particular cross-correlation techniques for
stochastic gravitational wave searches, wavelet-based algorithms for ``burst-
like'' signal searches, continuing development of line-removal algorithms, and
correlated noise studies.

Students associated with LIGO may become involved with sophisticated methods for
extraction of signals from noise, computational schemes for manipulation of huge
data sets, sophisticated techniques for control and stabilization of laser
wavelength and beam quality, complex mechanical engineering, advanced ultra high
vacuum techniques, and many more, depending on individual interests. Moreover,
the nature of the project makes these experiences available to undergraduate
students as well as to graduate and postdoctoral students. Graduate students and
postdoctoral students in the UF LIGO group are working in areas of high demand
in the outside technical community. Finally, the research in high performance
modulators, isolators, and interferometric techniques, and the advanced
computational techniques being developed for LIGO have the potential to impact
other areas of technology in a favorable way.