* 0244317
* Information Infrastructure for the Ocean Research Community
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2004
* Thomas Powell, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 10/31/2004
* USD 102,188.00

Abstract

Information Infrastructure for the Ocean Research Community M. R. Abbott OSU T.
M. Powell

The Information Technology Infrastructure (ITI) Plan to Advance Ocean Sciences
report was completed in January 2002 as the result of a community planning
process sponsored by NSF and the Office of Naval Research (ONR). The report
focused primarily on the needs for computing to support the modeling, data
analysis and visualization needs of ocean researchers. The report also noted the
long-term needs for access to local ITI at ocean research institutions. Recent
community meetings have emphasized the continuing needs for high performance
computing services that can be delivered through local, distributed sources in
addition to centralized systems such as supercomputer centers. Several
activities are proposed to complete the ITI planning for ocean sciences. The
first activity will be a 25-35-person workshop to focus on the local,
distributed facilities needs and to suggest innovative solutions. These findings
are a compliment and extension to the existing report. The second activity will
institute a Scientific Steering Committee (SSC) to initiate further planning for
implementation of the recommendations in the report. The SSC will work in
conjunction with federal agency initiatives, especially at NSF, to insure that
infrastructure recommendations are science-driven. To facilitate the above
activities, a small planning group will be formed to organize the workshop and
to select the initial members of the SSC; once the SSC is functional the
planning groups duties will be assumed by the SSC.

