* 0244894
* US-India Cooperative Research:  A Multibeam Survey of the Equatorial Carlsberg and Central Indian Ridges and Their Fracture Zones, 3N-10S
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Dennis DeMets, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 03/31/2008
* USD 26,222.00

0244894 DeMets

Description: This award supports the US-India Cooperative Research: A Multibeam
Survey of the Equatorial Carlsberg and Central Indian Ridges and their Fracture
Zones, 3N-10S. Drs. D. DeMets, University of Wisconsin, Madison, R. K. Drolia,
Indian National Geophysical Research Institute, and R. Mukhopadhyay, Indian
National Institute of Oceanography will conduct a 3-year multibeam and kinematic
study of the Carlsberg(CR) and Central Indian Ridges(CIR). They will examine
multibeam data already collected by the Indian research ship (R/V Sagar Kanya),
study new data generated by Indian domestic research cruises, and work on new
proposals using the Sagar Kanya to map the CR and CIR. The proposed work is a
wide-ranging and long-awaited study that will shed light on the axial and
transform morphology of a 2000-km long unmapped section of the mid-ocean ridge
system in the Central Indian Ocean.

Scope: The proposed research is important for grasping the behavior of plates at
the fundamental level and for building a plate kinematic framework that will
lead to better understanding of Himalayan geology. Study of the central Indian
Ocean is essential for the global characterization of the ridge system and will
have favorable impacts on many allied fields. The merging of US and Indian
databases will benefit both groups of scientists and eventually lead to future
shipboard collaborative programs. The scientists are leaders in the field and
this study of the Indian Ocean ridge system will contribute to resolving some
major unanswered questions at the forefront of geophysical research.
Additionally, this research has implications bearing on climate change and the
geodynamics of both oceanic and continental regions. This project is jointly
funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division
of Ocean Sciences.