* 0244566
* U.S.-Australia Joint Workshop on Artificial Photosynthesis; Sydney, Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2003,02/29/2004
* Thomas Moore, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/29/2004
* USD 10,500.00

0244566&lt;br/&gt;Blankenship&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides partial
support for nine U.S. scientists to participate in a workshop with Australian
scientists on the topic of artificial photosynthesis. The meeting has been co-
organized by Prof. Christa Critchley of the University of Queensland and
Professor Robert Blankenship of Arizona State University, among others. It will
be held January 13-14, 2003 in Sydney, Australia. In addition to reviewing the
participants' ongoing relevant research, the workshop is specifically intended
to encourage and expedite planning of U.S.-Australia cooperation in this area.
The workshop will immediately follow an international Boden Research Conference
that is designed to review the state of the art in this interdisciplinary field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificial Photosynthesis comprises the design and
assembly systems that mimic various aspects of the natural photosynthetic
process. Research in artificial photosynthesis is motivated by the objectives of
improving a wide variety of technologies and production systems including energy
conversion and storage, catalysis, biotechnology, photomedicine, optoelectronics
and sensors. Approaches vary from making small modifications to the natural
process in order to enhance solar energy conversion or storage to much larger
synthetic efforts based on specific components of the process that can enable
the production of new materials. This workshop is a timely and worthwhile effort
involving leading researchers in the field from the US and Australia who will
identify promising areas for future research that can benefit from combining the
varied and complementary expertise of the participants. &lt;br/&gt;