* 0244390
* Terahertz Electro-Optics in Semiconductor Nanostructures
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Mark Sherwin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2006
* USD 397,000.00

The research project explores the basic physics, fabrication, and materials
science of semiconductor devices that can modulate light at TeraHertz (10^12Hz)
frequencies. Of interest is response of these devices to simultaneous
illumination with intense electric fields at a THz frequency plus weak near-
infrared (NIR) radiation. Previous work has shown the presence of sharp and
narrow sidebands of the NIR radiation at the NIR frequency plus multiples of the
THz frequency. The proposed experiments will determine the efficiency of the
side-band generation process. Side-band generation will be studied in devices
that contain single semiconductor quantum wells embedded in an electromagnetic
environment engineered to maximize their coupling to NIR radiation. Other
research will attempt to fabricate semiconductor devices that modulate NIR
radiation in the fiber-optic communications band near 1.5 microns wavelength,
rather than in the 0.8 micron band that has been previously studied. Finally,
the THz electro-optic properties of quantum wells doped with electrons will be
studied. Previous experiments have used undoped samples. The work will test
predictions that a doped quantum well driven by strong THz radiation can exhibit
nonlinear phenomena like bifurcations and chaos. Sideband generation in doped
quantum wells will be studied for the first time, to search for new quantum
nonlinear phenomena. Students participating in this research program emerge with
a very broad training, which includes semiconductor device fabrication, optics
at near infrared and THz frequencies, cryogenics and electronics. This provides
a strong background for careers in academia, government or industry.

The Terahertz (10^12 Hz) is emerging as a natural frequency scale for
information technology. A single optical fiber has the capacity to carry 40
Terabits (TBit) per second on light with wavelengths near 1.5 microns. The 40
Terahertz (THz) bandwidth of fiber optic communications has been divided into
optical amplifier bands roughly 5 THz wide, and into channels whose spacing is
currently 0.1 THz. However, for electronics, the natural frequency scale is
still the GHz (10^9 Hz), the clock speed of a typical modern personal computer.
The mismatch between the speed of electronics and photonics is a major
bottleneck in information technology. The development of technology to allow
telecommunications companies to economically utilize the enormous bandwidth of
optical fibers already in the ground would benefit businesses and individuals
throughout the economy. The research conducted under this grant explores the
basic physics, fabrication, and materials science of semiconductor devices that
are able to modulate light at THz frequencies. In addition to their desirability
in the field of optical communications, semiconducting THz electro-optic devices
operate in a regime where the effects of quantum mechanics, strong driving,
many-body physics, and dissipation are all important. This regime is one of the
frontiers of condensed matter physics. Students participating in this research
program emerge with a very broad training which includes semiconductor device
fabrication, optics at near-infrared and THz frequencies, cryogenics and
electronics. This provides a strong background for careers in academia,
government or industry.