* 0244254
* New Ruthenium Oxides:  Compounds Poised between Magnetic and Non-magnetic Ground States
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Robert Cava, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 02/28/2007
* USD 527,195.00

This project addresses novel complex solids such as transition metal oxides, and
in particular understanding the relationships between chemistry, crystal
structures, and physical properties. The challenges arise due to strong
interactions between d electrons, not currently successfully treated by
theoretical models, and also due to the delicate balance between nearly
energetically equivalent ground states that often arises from coupling between
electronic, magnetic, and structural degrees of freedom. This project will
directly address the critical factors that cause some chemical compounds to be
magnetic, while others are not, through the discovery and characterization of
ruthenium-based oxides, compounds that are expected to straddle the border
between magnetism and non-magnetism. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained through this project to become future researchers in the critical area
of materials for technological applications. A course in freshman chemistry,
designed by the PI to develop future engineers' understanding of the chemical
compounds used in technology, will be given. The PI will be involved in training
high school and middle school science teachers and will make presentations at
local primary and secondary schools to address the science "pipeline", and will
actively encourage the participation of women and minorities in the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although not apparent to society as a whole, today's
technologies, ranging from electronic to medical systems, are based on chemical
compounds that critically enable their function. These compounds have been
discovered and developed over decades of basic and applied research in solid
state and materials chemistry. Much of our current and potentially future
technology is based on complex compounds of the transition elements. In spite of
that importance, revolutionary discoveries in the recent past have shown that
our understanding of such compounds is surprisingly poor. This project will
directly address one of the great deficiencies in our understanding - What are
the critical factors that cause some chemical compounds to be magnetic, while
others, quite similar, are not? - through the study of a class of compounds,
ruthenium-based oxides, that straddle the border between magnetism and non-
magnetism. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained to become future
researchers in the critical area of materials for technological applications. A
course in freshman chemistry, designed by the PI to develop future engineers'
understanding of the chemical compounds used in technology, will be given. The
PI will be involved in training high school and middle school science teachers
and will make presentations at local primary and secondary schools to address
the science "pipeline", and will actively encourage the participation of women
and minorities in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;