* 0244130
* REU Site: Biogeochemical Educational Experiences-South Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2005
* Susan Pfiffner, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 04/30/2005
* USD 200,000.00

This is a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site, a summer program
with an international venue of South Africa. The purpose of this project is to
recruit and encourage the retention of underrepresented undergraduates within
the United States (and, concomitantly, South Africa) in the fields of Earth and
Biological Sciences, Environmental Sciences, and Engineering. The project will
address the critical need to engage underrepresented minority students in
science in the U.S. It involves immersion of undergraduate students in a
cultural, scientific, and interdisciplinary atmosphere that relies on teamwork.
The students will expand their knowledge base and their field and laboratory
skills. They will gain an appreciation for interdisciplinary research in
biogeochemistry of the subsurface, develop international networks among
themselves and with established scientists, give presentations at local and
national scientific meetings, and possibly choose to continue their careers in
science.

Seven underrepresented undergraduate students with previous formal education in
geoscience, chemistry, microbiology, and/or engineering will spend seven weeks
during the summer doing hands-on, hypothesis-driven research projects with
several international multidisciplinary mentors. The students will experience
interdisciplinary research and learn first-hand how that research is
accomplished in the field: at South African mines, tailing ponds, and
hotsprings. Facilities include the existing NSF-field laboratory near several
mines at Glenharvie, South Africa, and the laboratories at UOFS. The student
education and research program will include brief general lecture/laboratory
sessions followed by mini-group tutorial/laboratory sessions covering a range of
topics within the interdisciplinary LExEn research program. During this research
experience, the students will perform experiments to test their research
hypotheses. Mentors will provide guidance and instruction as they work side by
side with the students.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Earth Sciences and the Office
of International Sciences and Engineering.