* 0244256
* SGER:  Exploration of a Tracer Patch in the Tropical Atlantic and Caribbean Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2003
* James Ledwell, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 10/31/2003
* USD 98,982.00

Exploration of a Tracer Patch in the Tropical Atlantic and Caribbean
Sea&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;J. Ledwell&lt;br/&gt;WHOI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sampling
of a tracer patch released in 2001 in the tropical Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean
Sea is proposed. The main goals of the sampling are to quantify the surprisingly
large zonal dispersion of the tracer in the tropical Atlantic, and to measure
the diapycnal diffusivity of the tracer in the pycnocline of the Caribbean,
where susceptibility to salt fingering is nearly as great as east of Barbados,
but where thermohaline staircases are rare. Other important goals are to
determine the nature of the apparent sinking of the tracer distribution in the
staircase region east of Barbados, to obtain a 2-year measurement of the
diapycnal diffusivity there, and to determine the westward extent of the tracer
patch at 2 years. Exploration of zonal dispersion in both the Atlantic and
Caribbean will provide unique data with which to compare models of ocean
circulation, and may help to improve knowledge of shear across the subtropical
front. Measurement of diapycnal diffusivity in the Caribbean will improve
parameterizations of mixing as a function of density ratio, i.e., as a function
of temperature and salinity gradients, in salt-finger favorable regions with
high shear. The nature of the survey is exploratory in all of its goals, and
furthermore, the request for support is temporally urgent because of the speed
with which the tracer patch will spread and be swept through the region of the
study. Sampling should be done in 2003.&lt;br/&gt;