* 0244030
* Electrical Engineering Research Experience for Undergraduates at Penn State University (NSF REU-Site, EE, PSU)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2008
* W. Kenneth Jenkins, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 03/31/2008
* USD 653,138.00

0244030 Guo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a five-year Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the Pennsylvania State University's
University Park Campus for 14 students each year for research in electrical
engineering. The REU site is designed as a nine-week summer experience. Students
will have an opportunity to participate in a broad range of research projects
that include both traditional and emergent interdisciplinary fields of
electrical and electronics engineering. The program will introduce participants
to hands-on, cutting-edge research experiences especially designed for
undergraduate students. Each student participant will be paired with a faculty
mentor to work on a specific research topic. In addition students will
participate in a number of group activities such as weekly research seminars and
biweekly field trips to world-renown research centers. At the end of the summer
program a mini research symposium will be held to give students an opportunity
to share their experiences. Students will be selected nationwide with an
emphasis on junior-level students outside of the University Park Campus that
desire research opportunities. Current research collaborations with other
universities will be used to assist in attracting students from population
groups underrepresented in research fields in engineering. This program seeks to
broaden opportunities and enable participation of domestic undergraduate
students in research careers in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;