* 0244809
* High Energy Astrophysics with STACEE
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Reshmi Mukherjee, Barnard College
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2007
* USD 302,613.00

This proposal requests funds to support the Barnard College group in expanding
their efforts in the STACEE project. STACEE (Solar Tower Atmospheric Cherenkov
Effect Experiment) is a ground-based detector sensitive to gamma-rays in the
energy range between 50 and 1000 GeV. Gamma-ray observations provide one of the
most direct ways to learn about the highest energy astrophysical accelerators in
the Universe. By studying sources of very high-energy (VHE) radiation, one may
glimpse astrophysical situations in which physics operates under extreme
conditions of gravitational or magnetic fields. A unique feature of STACEE is
that it operates at energies below 250 GeV, a regime that is out of the scope of
current atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes (ACTs). Due to its low energy
threshold, STACEE will be able to observe AGN and GRBs out to redshifts of Z ~
1. The construction of STACEE started in 1997 and is now complete. Results
obtained during the construction phase have been very encouraging. The Crab
nebula was detected in 1998 with a significance of greater than six standard
deviations and the active galaxy Markarian 421 was detected in 2001 during an
outburst. During the 2001 campaign, STACEE was the only instrument to detect the
source at energies below 250 GeV, an important region in the spectral energy
distribution of the source. Prior NSF funding was used to support the PI's
participation in STACEE, particularly in the calibration system and analysis
efforts. Funding is now requested, at a time when STACEE is functioning as an
observatory, to support a graduate student and to enable the PI to make a major
contribution to the project, including: 1) participating in the observing
program, 2) playing a leading role in the development of the data analysis, 3)
obtaining scientific results using new observational data, and 4) maintaining
the laser calibration system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This research
has broader impact on several areas outside of particle astrophysics. Areas of
broader impact include (1) the use of heliostats to support remote sensing for
earth-viewing satellites, (2) design and implementation of new types of non-
imaging optical systems, (3) the development of mirror measurement techniques
for solar energy applications, and (4) software development for high-speed data
acquisition. Finally, the PI has been involved in outreach efforts to K-12
students and the broader public. Activities have included public lectures, week-
long activities for K-12 students (summer schools) and individual student
mentorships.&lt;br/&gt;