* 0244457
* Lasing Phenomena in Mixed Random &amp; Ordered Media
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Hui Cao, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 04/30/2007
* USD 270,000.00

0244457&lt;br/&gt;Cao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid state lasers, due to their
large capacity to transmit information, have revolutionized the way we
communicate, greatly enhancing the quality of our lives. One of the major
challenges in the development of these lasers has been the growth of perfect and
precise thin film crystal layers. Thus, the time between invention of the solid
state lasers and their commercialization has taken several decades. A basic,
lingering science question has been whether or not lasing can take place in a
completely disordered (or random) medium. And, if so, would the laser operate
efficient enough for applications? Recently, the investigators have discovered
that they can achieve coherent lasing in random media. They found that disorder-
induced light scattering not only provides coherent feedback for lasing, but
also leads to spatial confinement of laser light in micrometer-sized random
media. They fabricated a new type of microlaser with disordered medium. However,
the threshold for lasing is still too high for practical use. This high lasing
threshold results from incomplete trapping of light in the random medium. For
the proposed project the investigators plan to introduce order into a random
medium to achieve better localization of light, thus lowering the lasing
threshold. The research program will focus on both experimental and theoretical
studies of lasing phenomena in two-dimensional and three-dimensional partially
ordered random media. Such lasing media consist of uniform arrays of ZnO
nanorods or nanospheres with variable degrees of disorder. The proposed
activities will start with theoretical analysis and numerical simulation to
predict structures that meet the optimal conditions for lasing. Using the best
design criteria, nanofabrication of lasers will take place followed by structure
characterization, and optical measurements of these random
lasers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers envision that the success of their
proposed program will enrich the research and education environment of students,
teachers, and their colleagues. In particular, they foresee the following areas
in which their work will deliver the most impact: (1) Application to research-
Since a low-threshold random laser is much cheaper to manufacture than a single-
defect photonic crystal laser, it may be a low-cost alternative in many
applications. (2) Integrating research with education-The investigators have
extensive experience in the integration of education with research involving
pre-college students, undergraduates, and graduate students. They will continue
to have joint group meetings where recent research results are discussed among
the students and the investigators. (3) Science content and curriculum
development-Based on the success of the NSF-funded Materials World Modules, the
investigators will be involved with the development of a dynamic, customized,
web-based course for pre-college and first year undergraduate students in the
area of "light wave phenomena in materials". Basic concepts of light reflection,
refraction, and scattering from surfaces and nanostructured materials will be
discussed. They will develop these concepts by giving a series of examples from
industrial applications and our environment. In addition, students will learn
the many applications of how light can be generated, manipulated and detected in
materials. This course will be web-based, with different levels of difficulty.
They will collaborate with their colleagues around the world to up-date and
revise the content any time. In the end this will be a global course with many
exciting contributions. (4) Outreach and global dissemination-The investigators
will post their research results in the Global Research Gallery of the
Northwestern International Virtual Institute (IVI) for public viewing. Lectures
and seminars relating to the proposed research will be video taped and stored in
the Lecture Hall of the IVI for others to view. (5) Summer Research Program for
science teachers and underrepresented students-The investigators will continue
to host in their laboratories science teachers and underrepresented students to
perform summer research programs that are sponsored by the NSF-funded Materials
Research Science and Engineering Center at Northwestern University.&lt;br/&gt;