* 0244357
* RUI: Data Analysis, Statistical Strategies, and Detector Characterization for LIGO
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Nelson Christensen, Carleton College
* Continuing grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 12/31/2006
* USD 113,000.00

Novel statistical strategies are being developed and implemented for the
analysis of data from the Laser Interferometric Gravitational-Wave Observatory
(LIGO). Interesting astrophysical phenomena should be observed: coalescing
binary systems, black hole formation, supernovae, pulsars and perhaps even the
Big Bang itself. New computing techniques will be used for estimating parameters
and generating statistics. These methods have been successfully demonstrated in
complex problems in economics and other sciences. These novel techniques will be
brought to LIGO and its data. Gravity wave astronomy is entering the exciting
phase of discovery and raising many statistical methodological issues. This
project will contribute to significant research at the frontiers of physics and
statistics.

This work will have many broader impacts. Carleton College is a leader in
producing future scientists. This project will provide research opportunities to
motivated students with interests in physics and statistics. This project will
provide important educational opportunities for the training of the next
generation of scientists. The computational statistical methods developed by the
PI and collaborators have had significant influence in other fields. The initial
gravity wave results have found applications with cosmic microwave background
analysis, and noisy chaotic systems. Carleton faculty, including the PI, are
also active in scientific outreach. High school students and teachers are
regularly exposed to the wonder and significance of LIGO's research, and this
outreach creates much excitement for science and physics.