* 0244928
* STACEE: Gamma-Ray Astrophysics Between 50 and 1000 GeV
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2007
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 12/31/2007
* USD 1,095,468.00

This proposal from a UCLA group requests funds to support the operation of the
recently completed STACEE ground-based atmospheric air-Cherenkov telescope
array. STACEE uses an array of 64 large heliostats in the National Solar Thermal
Test Facility (NSTTF) solar power station at Sandia National Laboratory; these
heliostats focus Cherenkov light from air-showers onto secondary optics and
camera systems deployed in the central tower of the solar array. The goals of
STACEE are to make high-resolution observations of astrophysical gamma-rays of
energies between 50 and 1000 GeV region, a part of the spectrum previously
unexplored. High-energy gamma-rays can be produced in neutron stars, supernovae,
active galaxies and gamma-ray bursts. They could also be signatures for new
physics beyond the Standard Model of particle physics and cosmology. With the
addition of new Flash ADC's, the construction of STACEE is now essentially
complete and the experiment has been taking data for a couple of years. The
collaboration has observed two sources, the Crab Nebula and the active galaxy
Markarian 421, and has set limits on other sources. The UCLA group negotiates
and maintains the user facility agreement with Sandia Labs and is responsible
for all STACEE operations at the NSTTF site.

In the education/outreach area, this particle astrophysics experiment may impact
society through various technological innovations and is also involved in
outreach efforts to K-12 students and summer REU students.