* 0244113
* REU:Conservation Biology in the Southeastern US
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Giselle Thibaudeau, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2007
* USD 209,874.00

This REU Site program (Conservation Biology in the Southeastern United States)
will introduce students from undergraduate institutions and historically black
colleges and universities to natural sciences research opportunities. The
program will involve eight undergraduate students each summer for a ten-week
program which will begin with a four-day orientation session at the Crow's Neck
Environmental Center, located on the Tennessee-Tombigbee waterway in northeast
Mississippi. During the orientation, participants will gain general knowledge of
ecology, conservation, and ecosystems specific to the southeastern United
States. Activities will also orient students to faculty mentors' research
projects and emphasize cooperation and team building among the REU participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although students will be actively recruited from
undergraduate institutions and historically black colleges and universities in
Mississippi and neighboring states, informational materials will be distributed
nationally in an effort to increase the regional diversity of participants.
Student researchers will be selected based on a combination of a submitted
statement of interest, letters of recommendation, and educational background.
Each student will work with one or two faculty mentors, based on student-faculty
interests, on a conservation-based research project in ecology or evolution.
Specific areas of faculty research interests include: Aquatic &amp; Wetlands
Ecology, Plant Systematics and Evolution, and Vertebrate Ecology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interaction between students, mentors, and other
scientists will be provided and encouraged through organized formal and informal
seminars, poster sessions, and social activities. A number of these meetings
will consist of a student-oriented journal club/seminar series in which the
integration of areas of ecology, conservation and evolution is stressed. A more
formal set of meetings will also be held to discuss topics such as ethics in
science, grant writing, scientific publication and presentation, career options,
and strategies for choosing a graduate school. The ten-week session will
conclude with a mini-symposium of student research projects that will be open to
faculty and students from Mississippi State University and neighboring colleges
and universities. For more information, contact Giselle Thibaudeau, at 662-325-
7572 or giselle@biology.msstate.edu. Application materials will be accessible
through the MSU Department of Biological Sciences web site
(http://www.msstate.edu/dept/biosciences/bio.html).&lt;br/&gt;