* 0244171
* Collaborative Research: Imaging Auroral Radio Emissions: Multi-technique Investigations Employing Optical, Radar, and Satellite Instruments
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Vikas Sonwalkar, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* kile baker
* 05/31/2006
* USD 60,022.00

The auroras are characterized not only be a variety of active optical emissions,
but by a wide variety of radio emissions as well. The relationship between
different optical features and different radio features, however, is poorly
understood. Wave phenomena in the auroral regions play an important role in the
energy flow between the magnetosphere and the ionosphere. In order to understand
the relationships between optical and radio phenomena in the auroral region it
is necessary to monitor the region with a variety of instruments. This project
will utilize data from optical imaging instruments, radar backscatter from
auroral features, and plasma wave, electric field, magnetic field and particle
measurements from satellites crossing the auroral regions. Satellites which will
be used in the study include the defense department DMSP satellites, NASA's
FAST, WIND, POLAR, SAMPEX, and IMAGE satellites, and the European CLUSTER
mission. A ground-based radio imaging system will be used to locate the regions
producing auroral Medium Frequency (MF) radio emissions. The investigation will
also contribute to studies of the timing and location of magnetic substorm
onsets. The radio imaging instruments will be deployed at existing facilities in
Alaska and Greenland. The data will be made available to all researchers,
including those using the Alaska and Greenland facilities. The research project
will also be integrated with educational activities being carried out by the
three collaborating institutions (Dartmouth College, Siena College, and the
Univ. of Alaska). In particular the educational effort at Dartmouth will include
a focus toward the Dartmouth Women-in Science-Program (WISP). Students will be
involved with both the engineering aspects of the new instrumentation as well as
the analysis of the resulting scientific data.