* 0244651
* Groups and Representations Conference; March 25-27, 2004; Eugene, OR
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Alexander Kleshchev, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2004
* USD 12,800.00

Principal Investigator: Alexander Kleshchev&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: DMS-
0244651&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Oregon, Eugene&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Groups and Representations conference&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subject of this meeting will be
recent developments in the structure theory of simple algebraic and finite
groups, their representation theory, and the interplay between these theories.
The meeting will cover three main, inter-related areas. The first is the
representation theory of simple algebraic groups in defining characteristic.
There is no known character formula for the irreducible modules, but some years
ago, Lusztig&lt;br/&gt;proposed a conjectural formula, which has become the main
focus of attention. While Lusztig's conjecture remains far from proved, attempts
to prove it have led to spectacular progress in the area in recent years. The
second area is modular representation theory in non-defining characteristic.
Here one considers the finite groups of Lie type over a field of characteristic
p, and studies representations over fields of characteristic different from p.
One should also include in this area the representation theory of Coxeter groups
(such as the symmetric groups), which is intimately related to that of groups of
Lie type. Again there have been spectacular developments in recent years.
Fundamental conjectures have been formulated by Alperin, Dade and Broue, and
while these are again nowhere near proved, many special cases have been solved,
leading to a much deeper general understanding of this field. The third area is
the structure theory of simple algebraic and finite groups, particularly the
subgroup structure, and its relationship with the representation theory
discussed above. Powerful parallel theories for subgroups of both the finite and
the algebraic simple groups have been developed, using representation theory as
one of the main tools, via the actions of classical groups on their natural
modules, and of exceptional groups on their adjoint
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symmetry of any system, physical or
mathematical, abstract or concrete, is encapsulated in its symmetry group. Thus,
the theory of groups finds many applications, both in mathematics and in the
physical sciences. Much of group theory is concerned with the study of the
actions of groups on spaces of various kinds. The study of group actions on
vector spaces is known as representation theory, and that of group actions on
sets as permutation group theory, and the focus for this meeting will be on
these two areas and their applications. The building blocks of all finite groups
are the so-called simple groups, and most of these arise in a natural way from
simple algebraic groups (such as SL(n,K), the group of n x n determinant 1
matrices over an algebraically closed field K). Consequently, most attention is
devoted to the representation and permutation group theory of these simple
groups. These areas are alive with basic conjectures, such as those of Lusztig,
Alperin, Broue and Dade. While these are all far from proved, attempts to prove
them have led to spectacular progress in the subject in recent years. The
meeting will focus on this progress and its applications. There is a healthy
number of graduate students working in these areas, and one of the goals is to
stimulate interaction between graduate students, young researchers and some of
the established leaders in the field.&lt;br/&gt;