* 0244087
* Research Experience for Undergraduates Site in Molecular Biology and Genetics
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Miriam Zolan, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2006
* USD 155,084.00

In the last 3 years, with funding from NSF, the members of the our Program have
introduced 30 undergraduate students, mostly from small colleges, to the
fascinating world of scientific research by allowing them to participate in
research at the frontiers of molecular biology and genetics. We are able to
continue this successful Undergraduate Research Program to benefit students
mainly from groups traditionally under-represented in research and students from
regional undergraduate institutions. Ten students will conduct research in
laboratories that use molecular biology and genetic techniques to study problems
including the regulation of gene expression, the mechanisms of cell
differentiation and development, host-parasite interaction and disease
resistance in plants, gene evolution, signal transduction, DNA repair, and virus
infection and replication. This program is designed to develop both the
technical and the intellectual abilities of the participants. Our philosophy is
that one learns how to do research by doing it but that this only occurs under
the appropriate guidance. We will emphasize the "doing it" aspect of research by
involving the students in a research project under close supervision. Students
will learn about the different stages and aspects of scientific investigation by
interaction with their mentors and in sessions on scientific writing and
research ethics. Students will also be exposed to the research conducted in the
other host laboratories during weekly lunchtime seminars given by faculty
mentors.