* 0244795
* The Nature of Molecular Association and Solvation of Aliphatic and Perfluorinated Aliphatic Carboxylic Acids
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Ram Gupta, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2006
* USD 229,984.00

Yoonkook Park&lt;br/&gt;Tuskegee University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Nature of
Molecular Association and Solvation of Aliphatic and Perfluorinated Aliphatic
Carboxylic Acids &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carboxylic acids are of significant
importance in industry due to numerous uses as raw materials for other
chemicals, as solvents, and in the drug, dye, textile and foodstuffs industries.
In addition, carboxylic acids play an important role in biological applications.
For example, short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) such as acetic, propionic, iso- and
n-butyric and iso- and n-valeric acids, serve as an indicator of bacterial
activity. Hence, analysis of SCFAs is of importance in studies of health and
disease in the intestinal tract. Fundamental molecular understanding of these
acids can help in rational design of processes and products with desired
properties. In light of the need to improve the green engineering of processes
involving these species, this proposal will focus on understanding the molecular
behavior of carboxylic acids in supercritical
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formic acid and SCFAs represent an interesting
series of molecules that provide the opportunity to study and correlate
molecular structure with the tendency for these molecules to self-associate.
However, solvation can have a tremendous impact on carboxylic acid self-
association even in the case of carboxylic acids with modestly different alkyl
groups. The influence of solvents on dimerization of some carboxylic acids has
been investigated by several research groups. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In earlier
work, the PI and co-PIs used Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and
a modified lattice-fluid hydrogen-bonding (MLFHB) model to examine the effect of
solvent density and solvation in formic acid association in both supercritical
(SC) CO2 and C2H6. The results obtained indicated that in the presence of SC CO2
solvent, the association of formic acid decreased linearly with increases in
solvent density. The interaction of CO2 (solvent) with formic acid monomer
(solute) has a marked effect on the dimer formation compared to that when ethane
was employed as the solvent. As a result of weaker solvent-solute interactions
in ethane, the association constant of formic acid in C2H6 is thus an order of
magnitude larger than that in CO2. The strong interactions of CO2 and carboxylic
acid monomers has a tremendous effect on the equilibrium behavior. In addition,
this behavior has been successfully modeled by using the MLFHB model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific Aims: SC CO2 can interact strongly with certain
molecules, particularly, those with electron donating functional groups. In this
study, the PIs will investigate the nature of molecular association and
solvation of carboxylic acids. This study is comprised of three main areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) The association equilibrium constant (KA) of carboxylic
acids at various densities in a variety of solvents (e.g. SCF CO2 and C2H6) will
be determined using FTIR spectroscopy. Dr. Park and his Tuskegee University
undergraduate students will work with Dr. Roberts and his full-time Auburn Ph.D.
student to collect the experimental data in the Roberts' lab.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) The specific interaction between CO2 and aliphatic (and
fluorinated aliphatic)&lt;br/&gt;carboxylic acids in an "inert" solvent, such as
pentane, will also be investigated in the Roberts' lab as well as the Tuskegee
laboratories. Dr. Park and his students will identify the most probable
interaction site between CO2 and aliphatic (and fluorinated aliphatic)
carboxylic acids theoretically. The experimentally obtained binding energies
will be compared to those obtained &lt;br/&gt;from model potentials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Molecular modeling of these systems will be carried out
in Dr. Gupta's lab to improve &lt;br/&gt;our fundamental understanding of the
experimental results and to guide the experimental studies. &lt;br/&gt;Both ab
initio and equation of state approaches will be utilized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: These studies will be important in
improving our understanding of solvent effects on carboxylic acid interactions
in SCFs. Understanding the fundamental molecular &lt;br/&gt;attributes of CO2
plays a role in rational design of inexpensive and green CO2-based processes.
&lt;br/&gt;Information about the specific interaction between CO2 and aliphatic
(and fluorinated aliphatic) &lt;br/&gt;carboxylic acids will provide a guideline
as to which factors should be considered to improve overall CO2-philicity. The
proposed research program presents multiple opportunities to develop students in
the areas of molecular thermodynamics and green chemistry and engineering. The
mechanisms for this development include Ph.D. student and undergraduate student
training, as well as incorporation of our findings and aspects of this ever
important field of green chemistry within our molecular thermodynamics courses
at both Tuskegee University and Auburn University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;