* 0245072
* Precision Measurement of Electromagnetic Properties of Light Pseudoscalar Mesons via the Primakoff Effect
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Liping Gan, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 04/30/2008
* USD 171,510.00

This project is designed to integrate important contributions to the ongoing
research at Jefferson lab with an educational experience for promising
undergraduate students. A team of undergraduate students and one full time
faculty member will carry out this work both at Jefferson Lab and in the
University of North Carolina at Wilmington (UNCW) detector development
laboratory. The primary goal of this project is to optimize the undergraduate
experience while making important contribution to our understanding of low
energy QCD by carrying out the high precision measurements of two-photon decay
widths and the transition form factors of three neutral light pseudoscalar
mesons pion-zero, eta and eta' (eta-prime) via the Primakoff effect. Two basic
phenomena in QCD, namely the spontaneous break of chiral symmetry and the chiral
anomalies, are manifested in their most unambiguous form in the sector of light
pseudoscalar mesons. The anomalies particularly drive the two-photon decays of
the pion-zero, eta and eta' and also provide a large fraction of the eta' mass.
The UNCW group will work on current development of a high precision measurement
of neutral pion lifetime experiment, while the advent of a 12 GeV electron beam
at Jefferson Laboratory will make it possible to extend this program to eta and
eta'. These measurements would have a significant impact on the current
knowledge of the ratios of quark masses, the mixing angle of eta and eta', and
provide model independent extractions of the size of the electromagnetic
interaction radii of mesons. In addition, more precise knowledge of the
transition form factors of the pseudoscalar mesons will allow a better
determination of the light-by-light scattering contributions to the anomalous
magnetic moment of the muon, which is one of the most sensitive quantities to
new physics beyond the Standard Model. The UNCW group will play a leading role
in developing a multi-channel scintillating beam profile detector, optimizing
the experimental setup for future eta and eta' measurements by Monte Carlo
simulation, while continuing to make significant contributions to develop a
multi-channel crystal calorimeter and pair-spectrometer projects for the neutral
pion lifetime measurement experiment. This research will engage undergraduate
science majors as key contributors. The involvement of undergraduates has become
one of the trademarks of the UNCW research group and matches the university's
commitment to provide a high quality undergraduate learning experience