* 0245291
* Robust Learning Control for Building Energy Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Douglas Hittle, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 04/30/2007
* USD 399,999.00

This project will develop of new control strategies for heating, ventilating,
and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems that combine artificial intelligence and
robust control theory. A primary objective of the work is to develop learning
controllers, which provide (a-priori) guaranteed closed-loop stability even
while the controller trains online. It is a follow-on project to NSF project
9804757, i8Robust Learning Control for Heating, Ventilating and Air-Conditioning
Systems, it where several significant advancements in the state of the art were
achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of the proposed research
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New analysis tools and algorithms, which allow for new
theoretical approaches for learning including: Continuous learning algorithms;
recurrent dynamic networks; and learned dynamic models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New
theoretical tools, including enhanced Integral Quadratic Constraints (IQCs) for
improved speed and accuracy the more general classes of networks, and advanced
systematic algorithms for tunneling, to facilitate navigation of the learning
around regions of instability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design and test of more
advanced robust reinforcement learning
algorithms;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extensive experimental study of the new tools
being developed here for multi-input, multi-output (MIMO) robust reinforcement
learning control, utilizing a recently developed experimental platform for
heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning (HVAC) system
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disseminate in through conference and journal
publications and by assisting colleagues at Korea Institute for Energy Research
in conducting their own tests of these methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accomplish these objectives, an interdisciplinary team has been formed
consisting of a specialist in robust control from the Electrical &amp; Computer
Engineering Department, a specialist in reinforcement learning for neural
networks from the Department of Computer Science, and a specialist in design,
modeling and control of HVAC systems from the Mechanical Engineering
Department.&lt;br/&gt;