* 0245383
* Biologically Inspired Intelligent Fault Diagnosis for Power Distribution Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2003,12/31/2007
* Mo-Yuen Chow, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2007
* USD 156,000.00

This project will investigate and develop a Biologically Inspired Intelligent
Fault Management System using Artificial Immune System (AIS) technologies on top
of a Neural Network - Fuzzy Logic (NN-FZ) structure to actively manage power
distribution system faults, including diagnosis, prognosis, and data mining. The
proposed approach can answer the challenges of discovering new fault diagnosis
knowledge based on the dynamic operating environments, in addition to providing
accurate fault diagnosis and prognosis. The NN-FZ technology will be used to
aggregate information collected from sources such as SCADA system, circuit
database, fault database, etc., to perform fault diagnosis and prognosis. Then
an AIS algorithm will be used to guide the NN-FZ to learn, absorb, adapt, evolve
and improve the fault diagnosis performance based on existing information such
as the distribution system's network topology, operating conditions and weather
conditions, and depending upon newly acquired information, such as new faults
and operating conditions. This proposed system can data mine the existing outage
database and explain heuristics about the fault diagnosis and prognosis process
as preferred by operators and engineers. It can disseminate learned information
to other power distribution centers, thereby preventing the reoccurrence of
"learned" problems. This system would revolutionize the Fault Diagnosis process
for power distribution systems, to significantly increase system reliability and
reduce operation costs. The proposed activities and architectures are not only
limited to power distribution system, but are also applicable to other
industries such as communication networks and transportation system that are
large scale nonlinear system with uncertain operating environments.