* 0245350
* Ergodic Ramsey Theory, Polynomials, and Actions of Nilpotent Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Vitaly Bergelson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 237,041.00

ABSTRACT

V. Bergelson and A. Leibman will study multiple recurrence and convergence in
ergodic theory with emphasis on the polynomial aspects of behavior. The
proposers earlier showed that sampling along polynomial times was suffient to
reveal deep ergodic phenomina. The problems considered may be viewed as far
reaching extensions of classical results. In addition to demonstrating new
properties of dynamical systems, these problems lead naturally to strong
applications of ergodic theory to combinatorics, number theory and algebra which
until now have been inaccessible conventional methods. The polynomial Szemeredi
theorem and the polynomial Hales-Jewett theorem, obtained by the proposers in
recent years, already serve as an impetus for further developments in the theory
of multiple recurrence. This provides better understanding of multiple
recurrence along polynomials and bring to light new vistas of research. An
important feature of the research opened by the proposers's earlier work is the
appearance of nilpotent nilpotent groups into the picture.

Not only does this lead to strong applications in combinatorics and number
theory, but the computational flexibility stemming from this theory may be of
significance in applications.

