* 0245716
* GOALI:  Dielectric Microwave Spectroscopy of Macromolecular Recognition Events in Differential Transmission Lines
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Daniel Roitman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 04/30/2007
* USD 287,995.00

0245716 Knoesen

The development of methods to detect and characterize interactions between
biomolecules in their physiological environments, in real time, and without the
use of extrinsic tags or markers such as fluorescent dyes or conjugated enzymes
is of great interest to map biochemical pathways that lead to disease states,
monitor patients for clinically relevant analytes, detect infectious agents and
environmental toxins, and the development of drugs. It is also desirable to
measure these interactions in heterogeneous media such as biocompatible
nanoporous or microporous structured materials (e.g. silica, titania, alumina)
since such media could, in principle, provide an exquisite level of sensor
sensitivity as they provide high surface areas for increased attachment density
of receptors, and the surface energy and pore sizes can be manipulated to
provide selective adsorption. Current optical-based sensors (SPR and protein
chips), however, require a planar configuration for detection and are not
compatible with porous films because of the optical scattering invariably
accompanying such materials.

Recent improvements in the spectral purity, stability and tunability of
microwave sources are creating the opportunity for highly sensitive magnitude
and phase measurements of signals up to at least 20 GHz that can be used to
detect subtle dielectric changes with high accuracy over a large dynamic range.
Recently it was shown that specific molecular binding events occurring at an
interface can be detected by microwave dielectric spectroscopy. If microwave
structures could be optimized (design and materials) and used for unambiguous
identification of specific binding of low concentration analytes without
extrinsic tags, the technique has the potential to revolutionize biomolecular
detection. Furthermore, as is proposed in this project, since microwaves can
interrogate optically opaque regions, the technique has potential applications
that cannot be addressed by optical means. While this initial development is
promising, it raises several important questions: (i) what is the nature of the
electromagnetic interaction that occurs in the microwave domain that leads to
the detection and identification of a molecular event that occurs in an
ultrathin macromolecular layer? (ii) can microwave structures be engineered and
optimized to provide a competitive advantage over optical biosensors to directly
detect and distinguish between different binding events?

This proposal brings together the complementary strengths of three groups with
the support of their institutions (UC Davis; microwave measurements and
spectroscopy, IBM-Almaden; materials research, Agilent Laboratories; expertise
in molecular detection and microwave instrumentation) with the goal of
implementing, characterizing, and analyzing microwave structures to investigate
real-time detection, differentiation and quantification of biomolecular binding
at interfaces. This interdisciplinary team will develop planar microwave
transmission line structures, integrated with meso-fluidic systems, that make
use of model immunoprotein binding assays of increasing complexity to
investigate the electromagnetic interactions which indicate specific binding
events occurring at planar (2D) interfaces and inside porous materials (3D
materials). Dual transmission line structures will be used to reduce external
effects that could otherwise obscure the detection and identification of a
binding event. The dielectric dispersion changes associated with binding events
will be studied in various microporous materials and structures of which the
morphology and surface energies have been controlled to stabilize receptors that
can entrap specific biomolecules.

This multi-disciplinary project immerses students in research that transcends
the boundaries between microwave engineering, the life sciences and organic,
inorganic and polymer chemistry. The students will be exposed to the
philosophies of two major industrial research organizations (Agilent and IBM
Almaden Research) and gain access to their personnel and resources.