* 0245323
* 3-manifolds and Floer homologies
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Weiping Li, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2005
* USD 64,755.00

The problems addressed in this project are in the area of
Topology.&lt;br/&gt;The main theme is to study the fundamental and important
properties of the gauge-theoretic/symplectic Floer homology, using invariants
and methods from &lt;br/&gt;3-manifold topology and symplectic topology. The
investigator studied the &lt;br/&gt;semi-infinity of the instanton (gauge
theoretic) Floer homology and the intrinsic &lt;br/&gt;dependence of the
monopole(Seiberg-Witten-Floer) homology of (homology)&lt;br/&gt;three-spheres.
The major part of the project is to study the interactive relation
&lt;br/&gt;between the symplectic Floer homology and the classical 3-manifolds,
and the&lt;br/&gt;relation between the Floer cohomology and the semi-infinite
cohomology, and the Seiberg-Witten-Floer theory intertwining the instanton and
monopole results. The &lt;br/&gt;other part of this project is to study
intrinsic properties for the invariants of larger&lt;br/&gt;classes of three-
spheres.It is a fundamental aim to investigate the change of the
new&lt;br/&gt;invariants under certain topological operations. The project will
integrate the &lt;br/&gt;interactions among the instanton theory, the monopole
theory, the symplectic Floer&lt;br/&gt;theory and the semi-infinite cohomology
of infinite-dimensional Lie algebras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A three-dimensional
manifold is a space where a nearsighted person sees a standard three-dimensional
space everywhere.(Homology) three-spheres are those three-manifolds
&lt;br/&gt;that one cannot tell from the standard three-sphere by using the
usual topological tools. A symplectic manifold is an even-dimensional space with
a special(symplectic) structure. For &lt;br/&gt;instance, the phase space of a
mechanical system is a symplectic space. Such a symplectic &lt;br/&gt;structure
is rich in mathematics and physics, and is canonical from any nearby region.
This &lt;br/&gt;shows the subtlety and the complexity of the world we live in.
Any local information is no &lt;br/&gt;longer useful, the global behavior and
the global (topological) invariants are the pivot. The &lt;br/&gt;refined
invariants studied in this project are intended to distinguish manifolds from
the &lt;br/&gt;aspects of mathematical physics, and to intertwine various
quantum field theories from the &lt;br/&gt;aspect of mathematics. Thus it is
extremely valuable to investigate the relation between the symplectic Floer
cohomology and the semi-infinite cohomology, as well as the interactive link
between the instanton homology and the monopole homology. This project addresses
some &lt;br/&gt;of the most fundamental problems in this subject.&lt;br/&gt;