* 0245386
* FRG: Tranparent Conductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Arthur Sleight, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 667,461.00

The goal of this project is to discover new transparent conductors for electro-
optic applications where light sensors and light emitters are made from
materials that are invisible. This program seeks new transparent conductors, and
aims to understand their properties. Growth of thin films for use in
applications such as transparent thin film transistors is emphasized. Bipolar
active transparent devices require both n-type and p-type conductivity,
preferably in the same material. This program provides new high mobility wide
band gap semiconductors, and aims to understand carrier doping properties.
Traditional oxide systems as well as novel chalcogenide materials will be
studied in bulk and thin-film form. Physical vapor deposition and solution
deposition methods will be used to prepare thin films for device fabrication.
Device development will include thin film transparent transistors as well as
p-i-n and Schottky diodes. Graduate and undergraduate students receive training
in forefront research in a highly interdisciplinary mode in this focused
research group of chemists, physicists, and engineers, who also interact with
the commercial research
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transparent conductors may
form the basis of a new class of electronics where light sensors and light
emitters are made from materials that are invisible. This would facilitate the
realization of invisible circuits on flexible plastics, and three-dimensional
screens. Active transparent devices usually require both n-type and p-type
conductivity in transparent materials, and preferably in the same material.
Graduate and undergraduate students receive training in forefront research in a
highly interdisciplinary mode in this focused research group of chemists,
physicists, and engineers. Because these research areas are of high relevance to
the commercial research sector, these students are highly competitive in related
job markets. This project is co-funded by the Chemistry Division and the
Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;