* 0245369
* Gaussian Curvature, Geometric Combinatorics and the Fourier Transform
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Alex Iosevich, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 125,715.00

PI: Alex Iosevich, University of Missouri, Columbia&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0245369&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main theme of
this proposal is interaction between analytic, combinatorial and number
theoretic methods. The specific problems discussed in the proposal include the
distribution of lattice points in convex domains, analysis and combinatorics of
distance sets, decay properties of&lt;br/&gt;the Fourier transform of
characteristic functions of bounded domains, the existence and non-existence of
Fourier bases, and bounded-ness of maximal averages over hypersurfaces. Each
category has an important geometric combinatorial component. In addition, the
distribution of lattice points in convex domains, the problems involving
distance sets, and the study of Fourier bases have interesting number theoretic
aspects. Finally, these problems have an impact on each other. For example,
decay properties of the Fourier transforms of characteristic functions of sets
are used in the study of all the aforementioned problems. Similarly, the
geometric combinatorial techniques developed in the study of the existence of
Fourier bases have also been applied to the study of the distribution of lattice
points and properties of distance sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many of the
issues described in this proposal are quite theoretical, they are closely
connected with widely applicable concepts and problems. Many of techniques used
to study the existence of Fourier bases are strongly related to concepts used in
data transmission and coding. The techniques developed in the study of maximal
averages over surfaces have been applied&lt;br/&gt;over the years to obtain
regularity results for the linear and non-linear wave equations, highly useful
in physics and engineering. It is quite interesting is that these results, in
turn, have deep combinatorial applications, creating a cycle of useful and
beautiful applications.&lt;br/&gt;