* 0245736
* Symposium: Recent Developments in Neurobiology, Toronto, Ontario, Canada on January 4-8, 2003
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Richard Satterlie, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 12/31/2003
* USD 2,000.00

0245736 Satterlie RA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Society for Integrative &amp;
Comparative Biology (SICB) emphasizes the comparative approach and
multidisciplinary integration of cellular and molecular concepts into a
functional framework involving the whole organism. The Division of Neurobiology
is one of the youngest of the ten divisions of SICB; this symposium is its
second annual program. The symposium highlights work from the local region near
the meeting city, with a unique plan that pairs talks from a junior member with
one from the laboratory head. This plan gives excellent experience and exposure
with low cost to younger researchers in a small meeting. This year the talks are
related to motor control, with five pairs of speakers, and the meeting in
Toronto, Canada involves international participants. The topics are timely, on
invertebrate and vertebrate systems, and the main speaker in each pair is widely
recognized. Modest funding is for travel awards for participants. Dissemination
of the SICB Symposia is through publication in the journal Integrative &amp;
Comparative Biology.&lt;br/&gt; The SICB meetings also have an impact on
training and education by bringing in graduate and undergraduate students and
postdocs for interdisciplinary interactions with established
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;