* 0245109
* A Search for Gravitational Radiation at LIGO:  Oregon Experimental Relativity Group
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* James Brau, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 08/31/2006
* USD 780,000.00

The Oregon experimental relativity research program is aimed at the search for
burst sources of gravity waves (GWBs). An important prerequisite to the
realization of this significant scientific discovery is identification and
amelioration of noise sources in the LIGO interferometers. Dealing with these
sources is one principal focus of the Oregon effort, as is the development of
data analysis tools directed at a range of issues from instrumental effects to
astrophysical investigations. The overall effort can be categorized into four
areas: 1.) identifying and reducing environmental influences, in order to
improve interferometer sensitivity and decrease false detection rates for the
individual interferometers. This involves identifying sources, reducing coupling
and helping produce environmentally based vetoes. In addition to environmental
coupling, this involves coupling between auxiliary interferometer channels and
the gravity-wave channel for veto production purposes. 2.) studying and, where
possible, reducing the false coincidence rates between the three LIGO
interferometers. This will involve a continuation of the inter-site
environmental correlations project and an investigation of any phenomena which
reduces the statistical independence of noise from the two Hanford
interferometers. 3.) developing and applying data distribution, monitoring and
astrophysical analysis tools. The active role developed during the LIGO
engineering and science runs will continue. 4.) applying the lessons learned
with Intial LIGO to the plans and preparation for Advanced LIGO.

The research of the Oregon group contributes significantly to the outside
community through a number of efforts undertaken to broaden the impact. These
include undergraduate participation in the group's research activities, summer
research programs for talented high school students, work with Oregon high
school teachers to bring the research experience into the high school (part of
the Quark Net program), and speaking engagements to community groups. This
research will also contribute to the broader benefit of society through the
publication of the scientific results, and the education of the graduate
students and postdoctoral associates working on the project.