* 0245406
* Arithmetic Cycles, Eisenstein Series, Automorphic L-Functions, and Complex Multiplication
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Tonghai Yang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 105,000.00

DMS-0245406 Yang, Tonghai

Abstract:

Title: Arithmetic Cycles, Eisenstein Series, Automorphic L-Functions, and
Complex Multiplication

This project involves the connections between generating functions for height
pairings of arithmetic cycles on certain Shimura varieties, on the one hand, and
second terms in the Laurent expansions of elliptic modular and Siegel modular
Eisenstein series at certain critical points, on the other. The generating
functions can be viewed as arithmetic analogues of theta functions and can be
use to define arithmetic analogues of the classical theta correspondence, now
taking certain types of modular forms to elements of arithmetic Chow groups. One
application is to prove a version of the celebrated Gross-Zagier formula without
base change the L-function. It is also hoped that one may ultimately obtain
information about higher dimensional analogues of the Gross-Zagier formula and
the Birch-Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture. Another part of the project is to use
arithmetic of genus two curves to study cryptography, which has very practical
application in electronic communication.



In the later part of the 20th century significant advances were made in
developing a `number theoretic' geometry, in which an additional dimension is
added to carry information involving the interaction between the geometry and
prime numbers. To a point on such a space, one can attach a number call its
height, which is a measure of its `arithmetic complexity'. More generally,
heights can be defined for higher dimensional objects, curves on surfaces, for
example. The present project studies combinatorial relations among such heights,
which reflect hidden structure carried by the spaces of `number theoretic'
geometry. One of the most important part in electronic communication such as
credit card processing is security, which is done by means of cryptography.
Since late 80's, it is found that number theory can be applied to obtain highly
secure cryptographic system.

