* 0245324
* Melt Blowing:  Advanced Modeling and Experimental Verification
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* David Nelson, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 04/30/2006
* USD 320,922.00

The goal of this project is to describe with an experimentally verified model
the commercially important process of fiber melt blowing. Worldwide, about 150
10kg year of melt blown fabric is produced. Typical examples of this material
are Pall Corporation's cartridge filters, Kimberly-Clark's Spunguard surgical
gowns, and Du Pont's Tyvek. Tyvek is used for computer diskette sleeves, house
wrap, sterile packaging, high strength envelopes, and many other uses. Melt
blowing involves the impact of high velocity air streams upon a molten polymer
to form fine webs of fiber. We propose to combine computational fluid mechanics
CFD to describe the airside flow with a previously developed model by our group
for the polymer side. The result should be an accurate, comprehensive model for
melts blowing. This comprehensive model will be compared with experimentally
determined fiber parameters. The experimental work will primarily be done with
the spinning equipment available at the University of Oklahoma. In addition,
pilot scale spinning will also be done at the 3M Research Center in St. Paul,
MN. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand the university/industry
interface by using the 3M companies as an active collaborator with the
university. A 3M research manager will serve as a co-advisor to the students
involved in this project. Frequent visits will occur between the personnel at
the university and 3M. The 3M companies will donate use of its pilot equipment
and analytical facilities. The knowledge gained from this proposal will allow
more economical production of nonwoven products that are used in a high-volume,
rapidly expanding, billion-dollar market. In addition, the knowledge will help
create entirely new processes and products&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;