* 0245650
* GOALI:     Collaborative Research - A Systems Approach to Modeling Real-Time Market Prices of Electricity
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Jorge Valenzuela, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 08/31/2007
* USD 125,957.00

The purpose of this research project is to determine suitable approaches for
finding the statistical distributions of real-time electricity prices in a
deregulated market. It will use a bottoms-up systems based approach in which the
market is represented via a production-costing model. The components of this
model will be the capacity, reliability, and cost characteristics of the
generators that comprise the market, fuel prices, demand, and the meteorological
influences that affect it. As a first approximation, the price at every hour
will be equated to the marginal cost of the last generating unit used to supply
each hour's demand. The initial effort will concentrate on finding the
statistical distribution of the marginal unit at each hour via the production-
costing model from the available information on the supply and demand sides of
the market. Empirical data suggest, however, that when the supply approaches
demand and under an oligopoly market, the spot price exceeds the marginal cost
of production. This phenomenon will be investigated using different economic
models under a stochastic framework based on a production-costing representation
of the market. Attempts at modeling the entire statistical distributions require
that the stochastic processes associated with the generator outages and
chronological load are accounted for. The project will develop approximate
analytical procedures that are applicable to large systems and will evaluate the
accuracy of these approximations using Monte Carlo simulation. The computations
will be validated by comparing the results predicted by these models with
historical data.