* 0245425
* Magneto-optical imaging of nanomagnetic structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Holger Schmidt, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 03/31/2007
* USD 314,923.00

In recent years, research on the use of magnetic properties of materials for
electronics (spintronics) and data storage has grown tremendously. In both
areas, spintronics and magnetic storage, size and operational speed are defining
properties of a device. As the size of a magnetic element is reduced below a few
hundred nanometers, another qualitative change occurs as the magnet can only
sustain a single domain. This has severe consequences for dynamic properties,
which do not depend on domain wall motion anymore. To this day, the time scales
over which magnetization changes on the single-domain levels occur are not
known. It is therefore essential to develop the capabilities to measure these
fundamentally and technologically relevant quantities that present the ultimate
intrinsic limit for the speed of nanoscale magnetic devices.

We will study the magnetization dynamics of nanoscale magnetic structures with
high temporal and spatial resolution as an area of research with large impact on
(nano)-magnetic applications. Ultrafast optical methods such as magneto-optical
Kerr spectroscopy will be used to provide the time resolution required to
resolve changes in the magnetization direction of single-domain particles. Based
on an integrated ultrafast spectroscopy system with near-field scanning
microscopy capabilities, a setup for the magneto-optical measurement of the
magnetization dynamics of single single-domain (nano)-magnetic structures will
be built. Subsequently, measurements on nanomagnetic structures of varying sizes
and shapes will be carried out to gain a qualitative and quantitative
understanding of the magnetization reversal time scales and mechanisms.

In addition, highly sensitive magneto-optical spectroscopy methods will be
developed. The detection of small magneto-optic reflection signals from
individual nanostructures requires exquisite sensitivity. Therefore, cavity
enhancement of the magneto-optical Kerr effect will be studied to extend this
technique to the ultrafast single-particle regime. In the course of the project,
cavity enhancement will first be investigated in larger samples or arrays of
nanomagnets before then being applied to individual single-domain particles.

The work proposed here is expected to have significant broader impact. As
magneto-optics and spintronics evolve and device dimensions shrink further,
sensitive methods to measure magnetic properties will play an important role in
determining the limitations of such devices. Over the course of the program,
graduate students will be trained in two key areas of experimental research,
ultrafast spectroscopy and scanning microscopy. In addition, undergraduates will
be actively involved in the project and aspects of this research will be
incorporated into a multidisciplinary graduate class in nanotechnology currently
being developed at UC Santa Cruz.