* 0245360
* A Request for Infrastructure Support for the MECO Project
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Ed Hungerford, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* MARVIN GOLDBERG
* 07/31/2007
* USD 450,000.00

This is a proposal for infrastructure support in order to continue the work of
the Houston group in developing the Muon to Electron Conversion (MECO) (AGS
Experiment 940) tracking detector. Traditionally, support for the group's
research has been obtained from the US Department of Energy - Nuclear Sciences.
However, it appears unlikely that infrastructure funds to support personnel
working on MECO will continue from this source. NSF is currently providing
support for materials and equipment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MECO experiment
is one of two experiments which constitute the Rare Symmetry Violating Processes
(RSVP) physics program currently under development by the NSF. RSVP is a Major
Research Equipment (MRE) program, approved by the National Science Board in
February 2001, and currently scheduled to begin construction in FY 2006. The
program is at present in an R&amp;D phase, supported by R&amp;RA funds from the
Division of Physics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the principal intellectual endeavors in current
physics exploration is the search for new physics beyond the Standard Model, and
there are good reasons to believe that the Standard Model is at best incomplete.
For example, the hierarchy of elementary particle masses has no explanation.
Further, the recent observation of neutrino mixing requires at least a revision
of the Standard Model to allow mass mixing in the lepton as well as the quark
sector. The MECO experiment is a search for violation of Lepton Flavor in the
charged lepton sector via the direct conversion of a muon to an electron within
the field of an atomic nucleus. The proposed sensitivity of this experiment is
three-to-four orders of magnitude below current limits; well below the levels
predicted by several extensions to the Standard Model, including
Supersymmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Houston is the sub-system
manager for the MECO tracking detector. This tracker measures the energy of the
ejected conversion electrons and is crucial to background rejection and the
ultimate sensitivity of the experiment. It is composed of a cylindrical, thin-
walled, straw-tube composite, ~290 cm long and ~88 cm in diameter. The proposed
project will fund infrastructure so that work can proceed along three parallel
paths: (1) development of computer models, calibrated to small prototype
detectors, to simulate the electronic response of the detector, (2) study of the
mechanical design and construction techniques required to produce a full-scale
detector, and (3) development of readout electronics capable of data acquisition
at the expected singles rates, digitization, and presentation for event storage
in a computer buffer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will provide support for the
education of students in both physics and modern distributed signal processing.
The MECO international collaboration consists of eleven institutions, and the
Houston group is presently discussing cooperative participation in the
integrated circuit development with Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory and the
Engineering Physics Department at Tsinghua University in Beijing, China. It also
appears that the development of the proposed rescaled digitizing integrated
circuit (IC) can find application in many high-rate, multi-channel data
acquisition applications from non-destructive testing to medicine.&lt;br/&gt;