* 0245002
* GOALI - A University/Industry Partnership to Study Reaction and Transport During Depositions from Supercritical Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* James Watkins, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/2007
* USD 360,184.00

Research: The continuous drive towards smaller and more complex microelectronic
devices is placing new demands on the fabrication technologies used for their
production. One of the most difficult challenges is the rapid, defect-free
deposition of high purity metals within narrow device features with dimensions
below 100 nanometers. One prominent example of immediate concern is the
fabrication of advanced copper interconnects for integrated circuits. With
recent NSF funding, a fundamentally new technique that meets the performance
criteria for device metallization, called supercritical fluid deposition (SFD),
was developed at the University of Massachusetts. In SFD, soluble organometallic
compounds are reduced in supercritical fluids including carbon dioxide to yield
high purity deposits at low temperature. A supercritical fluid can be viewed as
hybrid medium with properties that lie intermediate to those of gases and
liquids. These properties are such that the limitations of current liquid and
vapor-phase techniques can be circumvented while preserving the benefits of
each. The result for Cu deposition is unprecedented feature fill at sub-100 nm
device dimensions, while maintaining other critical film
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's results to date indicate SFD offers
great promise for the fabrication of semiconductor and other devices, but the
technique is still in its infancy and fundamental studies are required to
further development and broaden its impact. Toward this end, the PI will examine
two issues that are essential to understanding SFD and related SCF processes.
First, the mechanisms for SFD reactions will be determined and models that
capture both deposition kinetics and step coverage will be elucidated. Knowledge
of reaction pathways during SFD will have direct implications for device
metallization and broader impact for catalytic reactions in supercritical media.
Second, computation fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations will be developed to
describe heat and mass transfer in multi-component supercritical deposition
reactors under highly turbulent flow. These capabilities are not accessible in
commercial packages and will be invaluable for a broad range of SCF
applications. Experimental data will be used to validate and refine the models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact: The research program is a cooperative effort
between the University of Massachusetts and Novellus Systems, a leading
semiconductor equipment company that has licensed SFD for microelectronic
applications. It will facilitate the development of SFD for interconnect
technology, which may prove enabling for future generations of integrated
circuits, a $100 billion / yr. industry. Success will result in the transfer of
academic research to commercial applications while eliciting fundamentals of
reaction and transport in SCFs that have broad relevance to a number key
industries. The program will also provide a unique opportunity for graduate
students to work at the interface of industry and academia.&lt;br/&gt;