* 0245056
* Research in Theoretical Hadronic Physics and Related Topics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Carl Carlson, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 05/31/2007
* USD 225,000.00

We propose to investigate a n mber of topics,including:&lt;br/&gt;Hard Pion
Electroproduction. We will calculate high transverse momentum semi-
exclusive&lt;br/&gt;pion electroproduction,considering especially the higher
twist process where the pions are pro-&lt;br/&gt;duced directly and appear
kinematically isolated,but including leading twist (where the
pions&lt;br/&gt;are produced by parton fragmentation and appear as part of a
jet)and estimates of soft pro-&lt;br/&gt;cesses.The direct and leading twist
processes allow data to yield information about the quark&lt;br/&gt;and gluon
distributions in the target.Two particular new items are to do
electroproduction&lt;br/&gt;rather than photoproduction and to include initial
state parton transverse momentum.An ap-&lt;br/&gt;plication is to see if the
higher twist process are relevant to data from HERMES,and
possibly&lt;br/&gt;Hall B data from Je .erson Lab,where there is considerable
interest in the result.&lt;br/&gt;Dipions and the Polarization of Gluons. HERMES
has measured dipions photoproduced&lt;br/&gt;with polarized photons o .polarized
targets,which has given the .rst determination of the po-&lt;br/&gt;larization
of gluons in the proton.The published result depends heavily upon the
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;analysis,in turn heavily based on program packages that
are tuned to higher energies.We&lt;br/&gt;propose what we believe is a necessary
independent calculation the contributions of the vari-&lt;br/&gt;ous processes
(photon-gluon fusion,QCD Compton,and vector meson dominance
(VMD)),in&lt;br/&gt;particular to see the sensitivity of the results to di
.ering fragmentation models,initial state&lt;br/&gt;transverse momentum,and di
.ering estimates of the VMD contribution.&lt;br/&gt;The Deuteron Form Factor.
The only perturbative QCD calculation of the asymptotic&lt;br/&gt;deuteron form
factor lies well below the data,but strikingly omits the short range wave
functions&lt;br/&gt;that provide for hidden color states.We have recently
developed ways to manipulate 6-quark&lt;br/&gt;cluster wave functions that model
these components.We propose to calculate the asymptotic&lt;br/&gt;form factor
with wave functions including a hidden color component,to see the e .ect of
the&lt;br/&gt;hidden color components upon the magnitude of the
result.&lt;br/&gt;Bringing Perturbative QCD to Lower Momentum Transfers. We will
study formal and&lt;br/&gt;applied aspects of relations between the Breit and
light-front helicity amplitudes,next-to-leading&lt;br/&gt;power corrections to
the high momentum transfer behavior of those amplitudes,and
application&lt;br/&gt;of discrete symmetries to light-front amplitudes.The
formal results can allow s,for example,to&lt;br/&gt;.nd constraints that
approximations to the subdominant helicity amplitudes must obey
(which&lt;br/&gt;are not always realized in the literature).More positively,we
can se the formal results to guide&lt;br/&gt;investigation of how non-leading
powers can be parameterized and see,again for example,how&lt;br/&gt;and where
the N .(1232)transition may approach the perturbative QCD
results.&lt;br/&gt;Phenomenology of Noncommutative Field Theory. Following up on
an earlier research&lt;br/&gt;path,we would like to complete the set of Feynman
rules for the Lorentz conserving noncom-&lt;br/&gt;mutative .eld theory and .nd
the signatures of noncommutative spacetime for a selection
of&lt;br/&gt;processes in addition to fAfA elastic scattering.Also we would like
to consider ways to do Lorentz&lt;br/&gt;conserving noncommutative .eld theory
with operator algebras in addition to the contracted&lt;br/&gt;Snyder algebra we
have worked out so far.&lt;br/&gt;NSF Review Criteria. Intellectual merit of the
proposed activity:Most of the activity is at&lt;br/&gt;the forefront of modern
hadronic physics,and the rest is at the forefront of the
phenomenology&lt;br/&gt;of an interesting direction in particle physics.The
projects will lead to many publications&lt;br/&gt;in the leading refereed
journals.Broader impacts of the proposed activity:The projects
will&lt;br/&gt;help bridge the gap between hadronic theory and observed
phenomena,and lead to greater&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the mechanisms of
hadronic reactions.They will also train new students,&lt;br/&gt;including
undergraduates.The PI has had two successful women Ph.D.students,and
the&lt;br/&gt;present project may extend opportunities for women entering the
.eld.The PI is regularly at&lt;br/&gt;the Je .erson Laboratory and bridging the
gap between university and national lab as well as&lt;br/&gt;between data and
theory.