* 0245165
* Career: Synthesis of Freight Origin-Destination Matrices from Intelligent Transportation Systems Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/31/2002,02/29/2008
* Jose Holguin-Veras, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 02/29/2008
* USD 339,969.00

0092938

ABSTRACT The research component of this proposal focuses on designing a
methodological framework that, ultimately, will lead to the estimation of
origin-destination matrices for freight movements, using secondary data,
gathered through Intelligent Transportation Systems. These methodologies will
improve transportation modeling by adding another layer of realism to the
modeling process; and they will improve the efficiency of traffic management by
ensuring proper consideration of freight movements, significant contributors to
urban congestion. Furthermore, enhanced consideration of freight transportation
will benefit the transportation planning process as a whole, making it truly
multimodal in its scope. Such approaches will bypass two major obstacles in
freight planning: the significant cost associated with conducting surveys to
obtain origin-destination patterns, and the reluctance of freight providers to
provide information they consider commercially sensitive. The research plan has
the following three objectives: 1) to develop a framework for the synthesis of
origin-destination matrices in real-time, based on information gathered through
Intelligent Transportation Systems in transportation networks; 2) to create a
platform for the display of estimated freight movements; and, 3) to develop
methodologies for the integration of real-time information on freight movement
into the evaluation process and the analysis of traffic control strategies. The
proposal considers the use of the Integrative Freight Market Simulation (IFMS).
The IFMS attempts to depict a comprehensive picture of freight movements, in
which both the user side, i.e., commodity flows, and the logistic side, i.e.,
vehicle-trips, are considered. The uniqueness of freight transportation requires
the use market equilibrium concepts to depict the competition process among
freight transportation providers, and a subset of routing problems to represent
the actions of these companies when picking up and delivering the goods. The
IFMS entails a bi-level approach in which the top level corresponds to the
estimation of the provision of service consistent with a Cournot-Nash
equilibrium, while the bottom level focuses on the construction of tours that
satisfy the Cournot-Nash solution and the remaining system constraints, in a
context of a large scale optimization problem. Although a multitude of issues
need to be solved before this concept becomes operational, the IFMS has the
potential to enhance freight modeling. An integrated educational plan is
included as part of this proposal. The educational plan is intended to achieve
the following objectives: a) to provide students with leadership experience in
addressing complex problems, such as those in freight transportation; b) to
create an atmosphere of cooperation among stakeholders; c) to provide both
undergraduate and graduate students with the tools they need to analyze freight
transportation problems; b) to provide the students with a thorough
understanding of the interplay between transportation and the environment, and
the role of transportation in the betterment of local communities; c) to provide
the students with the foundations for a life long search for excellence; d) to
provide the students with the opportunity to tackle real-life problems and to
contribute to their solution; e) to provide meaningful and stimulating career
choices for minority students and women. Achieving these objectives will: a)
lead to the creation of a new generation of transportation professionals with a
wholistic view of the interactions between freight transportation, the
environment and economic development; b) lead to a transportation planning
process sensitive to, and responsive to, community concerns, and economic
development issues; c) enhance the quality of research and education by
incorporating real-life problems and challenges into the class room
interactions; d) promote retention among minority students and women; e)
introduce students to the potential benefits of using modern information
technology in multi-disciplinary settings.