* 0245101
* RUI:  Hadron Structure and Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Mary Alberg, Seattle University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 07/31/2007
* USD 110,000.00

A central problem for theoretical physics is the description of the structure of
hadrons and their interactions.The building blocks of hadrons are quarks and
gluons,among which the distribution of .avor,momentum,and spin is an area of
intense study.This project will study two of the outstanding challenges to
theory posed by recent experimental results:1) .avor asymmetry in the proton
sea,measured by E866 at FermiLab,in which the excess of d -antiquarks (Pd )over
u -antiquarks (Pu )for low values of x (the fraction of proton momentum carried
by the antiquark),is replaced by a dominance of Pu over Pd for larger values of
x ,and 2) the spin transfer measurements of PS185 at CERN,for Pff production
from Pp collisions with a polarized proton target,which disagree with all
theoretical predictions.These investigations will be extended to calculation of
polarized .avor asymmetry in the proton sea,and to other antihyperon-hyperon
(PYY )production reactions.A new area of research,singular potentials and limit
cycles,will be studied in the context of e .ective .eld theory. Flavor asymmetry
in the proton sea will be calculated in terms of a meson cloud model, in which
the proton can .uctuate into meson-baryon states,whose quark distributions then
contribute to the measured quark distributions of the proton.The quark and gluon
degrees of freedom of the proton will also be included in a statistical model of
the gbare proton, hthe leading term in the proton wave function.E .ects of
charge symmetry violation,arising from di .erences in the masses of the Pd and
the Pu ,will be included.The goal of this project is to explain the x
-dependence of the experimentally determined unpolarized .avor asymmetry, and to
predict the polarized asymmetry. High precision calculations of Ppp PYY will be
carried out which will include:a)e .ective interactions that represent the
leading contributions to Pqq annihilation and creation,b) an initial state
interaction which has been determined by .t to PNN reaction data in the momentum
region spanned by the strangeness production experiments,and c)a contribution to
the reaction mechanism from a spin singlet term,for which there is evidence from
the recent spin-transfer data.The goal of this project is to learn about the
reaction mechanism and the otherwise unknown PYY interactions in the .nal state.
The study of singular potentials and limit cycles will include investigation of
real and complex potential regulators and their renormalization
properties.Applications to cold atom scattering and problems in e .ective .eld
theory will be made. This project has intellectual merit because,as described
above,it addresses important problems in hadron structure and interactions for
which there is signi .cant disagreement between nuclear theory and experiment.It
extends prior work to new areas.The preliminary work necessary for the project
has been successfully completed by the P.I. Broader impacts of the project
include placing the research in an undergraduate setting, in which students are
drawn from a diverse population (40%minority)with a high percent- age of women
physics majors (40%).The student research experience will be complemen- tary to
coursework,and provide an integration of classroom learning and the excitement
of contemporary research.Students will receive training in research methods and
scienti .c communication.They will work in teams,mentor younger students and
present their work in papers,posters and talks at meetings of professional
societies.In addition to presentation of research .ndings in journal articles
and at scienti .c meetings,seminars and colloquia will be given at other
undergraduate institutions.