* 0245040
* Studies in Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Bruce Barnett, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2004
* USD 600,000.00

This proposal requests funds to support a program of experimental particle
physics research at the world's highest energy hadron colliders. The program
involves the continuing collaboration in the CDF experiment at the Fermilab
Tevatron and the CMS experiment at the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC). The CDF
experiment is currently in a tuning/data-taking phase and is expected to run for
a number of years. The CMS experiment is being prepared to begin operation in
2007. The scientific goals of the program are to determine the source of
spontaneous symmetry breaking and to make precise heavy quark measurements that
constrain physics beyond the Standard Model. Many theoretical mechanisms of
spontaneous symmetry breaking include states that preferentially decay into
heavy quarks or other "long"-lived states. As the luminosity of the Tevatron
increases, the search for new states related to spontaneous symmetry breaking
should become feasible and will rely on techniques associated with heavy flavor
physics. The technical contributions of the group to both experiments follow
this theme. They are contributing to the silicon-based vertex tracking of both
experiments. This technology permits the identification of long-lived states by
searching for secondary vertices displaced from the primary vertex. They have
contributed to the hardware, software, commissioning, and calibration of new
silicon strip vertex detectors for CDF and are also contributing to the next
upgrade of this system for Run 2b. The group is making contributions to the
forward pixel tracking system of CMS, particularly in the areas of sensor
development, system design, infrastructure, and software.

In the education/outreach area, the impact of the proposed research program
reaches beyond the narrow definition of "particle physics". The proposed work on
active pixel detector technology has application to instrumentation used at
synchrotron light sources to study materials and biological systems. They are
discussing the application of their pixel simulation code to infrared pixel
sensors with colleagues in astronomy and the code may be useful in the
understanding and optimization of infrared detectors for use in satellite-borne
telescopes. The proposed work on distributed databases has strong overlap with
work being done by JHU colleagues for several large astronomy projects.
Distributed databases are another internet-based technology that could have far-
reaching application in all sectors of our society. The proposed research has a
strong educational component. It provides direct support and training for a
number of graduate and undergraduate students and they are the hosts of a
QuarkNet center that has already provided summer research experience for two
Baltimore City public high school teachers.