* 0245120
* Arithmetic Groups in Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Daniel Allcock, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 123,006.00

The goal of the project is to study the geometry and topology of certain special
&lt;br/&gt;moduli spaces arising in complex algebraic geometry. Here, "special"
means that &lt;br/&gt;they may be described as quotients of Hermitian symmetric
spaces by discrete &lt;br/&gt;groups. (There are surprisingly many examples of
these spaces.) The first &lt;br/&gt;specific goal is to understand the topology
of a large family of these spaces &lt;br/&gt;that includes the moduli spaces of
polarized smooth K3 surfaces and several other &lt;br/&gt;examples arising in
singularity theory. By "understand the topology of" we mean &lt;br/&gt;that we
beleive these spaces have contractible universal covers, and we want to
&lt;br/&gt;prove this. The idea is to use tools from the theory of negatively-
curved metric &lt;br/&gt;spaces that generalize the idea of a negatively-curved
Riemannian manifold. The &lt;br/&gt;second specific goal is to complete a joint
project with J. Carlson and D. Toledo, &lt;br/&gt;to prove that the moduli space
of cubic hypersurfaces in 4-dimensional projective &lt;br/&gt;space is
isomorphic to a quotient of the complex 10-ball by a certain discrete
&lt;br/&gt;group. The third specific goal is to close the last open aspect of
Hilbert's &lt;br/&gt;14th problem, by showing that there is a representation of
the 2-dimensional &lt;br/&gt;additive group for which the ring of invariants is
not finitely generated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses concrete
problems in algebraic geometry concerning the &lt;br/&gt;classification of
various objects like curves and surfaces. Algebraic geometry &lt;br/&gt;as a
subject deals with curves and surfaces that can be defined by means of
&lt;br/&gt;equations, and also with higher-dimensional versions of these curves
and surfaces. &lt;br/&gt;An example giving the flavor of the classification
problem is that a circle is &lt;br/&gt;essentially the same as an ellipse,
because one of them can be got from the other &lt;br/&gt;by stretching the plane
in one direction. An ellipse is also essentially the same &lt;br/&gt;as a
parabola, because you can imagine keeping one end of the ellipse fixed and
&lt;br/&gt;pushing the other off to infinity. You can go even further and push
the end off &lt;br/&gt;past infinity, so that it reappears on the other side of
the plane, and you see a &lt;br/&gt;hyperbola. An algebraic geometer expresses
these ideas by saying that any two &lt;br/&gt;conics are "projectively
equivalent". What these shapes all have in common is &lt;br/&gt;that they are
defined by simple equations--two variables, and only terms of degree
&lt;br/&gt;two or less. A major part of modern algebraic geometry is studying
similar &lt;br/&gt;questions but with the number of variables increased, or the
complexity of the &lt;br/&gt;equations increased to allow higher-degree
polynomials. For example, it turns &lt;br/&gt;out that not all curves in the
plane that are defined by degree three equations &lt;br/&gt;are projectively
equivalent. The ways in which these curves can differ from each &lt;br/&gt;other
is very important for many fields of mathematics and even physics. This
&lt;br/&gt;example was understood in the 19th century, but similar problems
remain open. &lt;br/&gt;One purpose of the current proposal is to gain an
understanding of how the &lt;br/&gt;projective equivalence classes of the
degree-three "surfaces" in four-dimensional &lt;br/&gt;space can vary. We
believe that this may be described in a beautiful and &lt;br/&gt;surprising way
using the unit sphere in 10-dimensional complex space. This result
&lt;br/&gt;would be similar to a classical result for degree three curves in the
plane. We &lt;br/&gt;want to prove that our intuition is right. Another problem
to address is that of &lt;br/&gt;finishing a part of Hilbert's 14th problem, one
of the celebrated problems posed &lt;br/&gt;by David Hilbert at the beginning of
the 20th century.&lt;br/&gt;