* 0245532
* Cold Rydberg Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Georg Raithel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Charles W. S. Conover
* 04/30/2006
* USD 431,040.00

The research component of this project focuses on experiments to study the
dynamics of cold Rydberg atom gases and cold plasmas, using both Rydberg atom
trapping and beams of cold Rydberg atoms. The experimental system is unique in
that it provides dense, laser-cooled atom clouds as well as a variable
temperature of the radiation field down to 4 Kelvin. One component of the
research is the study of l-mixing, n-mixing, ionization and recombination in the
dynamics of cold Rydberg atom gases and plasmas as a function of important
parameters such as the atom density, the Rydberg-atom excitation energy, and the
temperature of the radiation field. Trapping of Rydberg atoms is the second
component of the project. It is planned to demonstrate static electric and
magnetic quadrupole Rydberg atom traps, and to trap Rydberg atoms in optical
lattices that are derived from the ponderomotive energy shift of the weakly
bound Rydberg electrons. The latter is a fundamentally new trapping method. The
project involves both graduate and undergraduate students in research, and in
the oral and written presentation of research. A broader outreach component
includes an involvement in the NASA Summer High School Apprenticeship Research
Program (SHARP), the University of Michigan Physics Olympiad, and the Michigan
Math and Science Scholars (MMSS) program.