* 0245589
* Precision Molding of Metallic Micro-Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* John Ziegert, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 03/31/2006
* USD 317,999.00

This project involves an interdisciplinary interaction between researchers with
expertise in tribology, materials, and precision engineering. Bulk metallic
glasses are materials that may permit the mass production of high strength
micro-components of arbitrary geometry at extremely low cost. The successful
development of micro-molding technology with these materials will revolutionize
micro-systems and enable numerous wholly new classes of micro-devices. The PIs
have shown that certain bulk metallic glasses can be molded to produce micron
sized or potentially sub-micron sized features at low temperatures (350C-400C),
and retain their high strengths. The ability to flow the bulk metallic glasses
in the supercooled liquid state appears to be ideally suited for mass production
using a micro-molding process.&lt;br/&gt;During the project, the material
properties relevant to processing of bulk metallic glasses will be
characterized. This will be used to determine the processing parameters for
forcing this metal glass into molds for micro-components. Accuracy of molded
micro-component features will be assessed using an embossing technique with
three primary processing parameters varied: pressure, temperature, and embossing
rate. &lt;br/&gt;As part of this project, some of the undergraduate students in
the Integrated Product and Process Design (IPPD) group will work on the design
of specific devices and systems. The IPPD students are from 7 different
engineering and business departments and typically work on industry-submitted
projects. The University of Florida has one of the largest populations of Latino
students, and the PIs intend to utilize the close interaction in the IPPD
program to recruit these minority students into research and the graduate
program. &lt;br/&gt;At the conclusion of this project, a knowledge base will
have been created to enable a whole new class of products with applications in a
wide range of micro and meso-scale systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;