* 0245667
* SGER:  Light Scattering Manometer
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Walter Goldburg, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 01/31/2005
* USD 80,515.00

This a Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) project to develop and
calibrate a novel manometer that senses small, rapid pressure fluctuations in
turbulent and almost laminar fluids (e. g., air or water), while introducing
minimal perturbations in the flow. If successful, the instrument may find
additional use in studying small pressure variations in the circulatory system,
the heart, and in other biomedical settings. The new and unique technique
employs a small volume of a soft clear gel containing micron-size particles
chosen for their light scattering properties. Pressure fluctuations elastically
compress the gel. Measured time correlations in the inter-particle separations
can be directly related to the pressure experienced by the gel sensor. The
manometer will be sensitive to pressure fluctuations at the sub-Pascal level (1
mm Hg = 130 Pa), and with a frequency range from dc to higher than 10 KHz.
Existing (strain-gauge) pressure sensors are confined to wall regions. The
proposed sensor can monitor the bulk fluid region, a great advantage for
turbulence measurements. One graduate student will be supported to work on the
project. The project is co-funded with the Fluid Dynamics and Hydraulics Program
in the Division of Chemical and Thermal Systems in the Engineering
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This a Small Grants for Exploratory Research
(SGER) project to develop and calibrate a novel manometer that senses small,
rapid pressure fluctuations in turbulent and almost laminar fluids (e. g., air
or water), while introducing minimal perturbations in the flow. If successful,
the instrument may find additional use in studying small pressure variations in
the circulatory system, the heart, and in other biomedical settings. One
graduate student will be supported to work on the project. The project is co-
funded with the Fluid Dynamics and Hydraulics Program in the Division of
Chemical and Thermal Systems in the Engineering Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;