* 0245606
* Arthur's Conjecture, Spectural Theory, and Analytic Number Theory in Higher Rank
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2003,02/29/2008
* David Vogan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/29/2008
* USD 110,659.00

DMS-0245606 Vogan, David A.

Abstract

Title: Arthur's Conjecture, Spectural Theory, and Analytic Number Theory in
Higher Rank

Abstract.

The proposal concerns two problems with applications to automorphic forms. The
first problem is in representation theory: it is a conjecture in local harmonic
analysis that is motivated by taking Arthur's conjectures together with results
of Burger, Li and Sarnak. This problem is of interest as a question in
representation theory; it also offers a testing ground for Arthur's conjectures
and affords the possibility of a better understanding of the automorphic
spectrum. The second problem is to study analytic number theory in the context
of automorphic forms on groups of higher rank. The dream goal of this is a
better understanding of higher moments of L-functions, but there are a number of
easier and concrete problems, such as the development of large-sieve
inequalities, whose solution would also have immediate consequences for analytic
number theory.

The project concerns two questions in the field of ``automorphic forms.'' This
is a relatively new field of mathematics, guided by the Langlands program -- it
seeks to establish connections between certain (apparently) far-separated areas
of mathematics. These connections have allowed work in automorphic forms to have
a significant impact in other fields. Many cryptographic algorithms -- necessary
for secure communication over the Internet -- are based on very subtle
properties of prime numbers, and underlying many of these algorithms are
difficult results from analytic number theory and automorphic forms. Another
application of automorphic forms has been the construction of ``Ramanujan
graphs'' -- these are graphs with remarkable connectivity, and have had
application to communication networks and to theoretical computer science. The
questions under consideration will deepen our understanding of automorphic
forms. In addition to the type of application just discussed, these questions
lie at the intersection of different fields of mathematics, and will encourage
collaboration between experts in these different fields.