* 0245628
* Topological complexity and quantitative o-minimality
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Andrei Gabrielov, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2006
* USD 130,501.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0245628 Principal Investigator: Andrei Gabrielov

The principal investigator proposes to investigate the topological complexity of
definable sets in o-minimal structures on the real numbers, in particular, of
the real semialgebraic and sub-Pfaffian sets. This research will be based on the
new tools for computing homology of such sets: a spectral sequence associated
with a surjective map, and the relative closure operation on one-parametric
families. The results will be applied to the problems of quantitative
o-minimality: the complexity of topological, geometric and algebraic operations
on definable sets in o-minimal extensions of the real numbers. The results of
the proposed research will advance quantitative and algorithmic aspects of the
o-minimal theory. As a broader impact, these results will provide a theoretical
basis for computer algorithms for operations on sparse polynomials, exponential
and trigonometric functions.

Objects defined by systems of algebraic equations and inequalities (semi-
algebraic sets) appear in many areas of mathematics and its applications, such
as control theory, robotics, and computer-aided design. Understanding the
complexity of operations on such objects is crucial for developing efficient
computer algorithms. In many practically important cases, polynomials in the
definition of a semi-algebraic set are sparse, i.e., have few non-zero
coefficients. Sparsity is not preserved by many natural operations, such as
projection to a subspace or closure. The results of the proposed research would
allow one to evaluate the complexity of operations on semi-algebraic sets in
terms of the complexity of some auxiliary sets, retaining sparsity of the
original polynomials. This may drastically improve upper bounds on the
complexity of such operations, leading to more efficient, faster computer
algorithms.

