* 0245285
* CAREER: System-wide Traffic Condition Monitoring and State Estimation for Intelligent Transportation Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/31/2002,11/30/2007
* Billy Williams, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 11/30/2007
* USD 355,302.00

Traffic congestion continues to be one of the most pressing problems facing
urban America. Intelligent transportation systems (ITS) provide the systems
perspective needed for sustainable solutions to urban mobility problems. During
the final decade of the 20th century, hundreds of millions of dollars were
invested in ITS surveillance, detection, and traveler information technologies.
In this first generation ITS there remains a largely untapped potential to
exploit the wealth of remotely sensed data for automated, time critical
management and control. Multi-scale system-wide forecasting and state estimation
is required for next generation ITS to support proactive rather than reactive
transportation system management.

This career development plan will provide an integrated research and education
framework for system-wide traffic condition monitoring and state estimation for
intelligent transportation systems. Research activities will include: (1)
development of a system-wide ITS traffic condition monitoring and forecasting
framework, (2) seasonal ARIMA based Kalman filtering for univariate forecasts,
(3) application of continuum traffic flow theory to one-step system forecasts,
and (4) continuum theory-based incident detection, missing data estimation, and
shock wave propagation prediction. The first research activity is broad in scope
and will provide a typological focus for ITS forecasting research and guidance
for new course development and course enhancements to support the education and
training of 21st century ITS practitioners and researchers. Specific educational
activities will include (1) undergraduate course development and enhancement to
increase student exposure to information technologies and infrastructure
sustainability, (2) development of a new traffic flow theory course directly
linked with ITS research activities, (3) involvement of undergraduates in
ongoing ITS research activities through interdisciplinary research teams under
graduate student leadership, and (4) active recruitment of students from
traditionally underrepresented groups through various programs aimed at incoming
students and graduate school candidates.

These research and educational activities will be built and integrated around a
new campus traffic operation center and ITS lab. The lab will provide direct
access to system-wide traffic condition data and full motion surveillance video.
This ready access to system-wide data will greatly enhance the research and
graduate education efforts. Special emphasis will be placed on exposing
undergraduates to ITS research and development through course projects and
undergraduate participation in ITS research teams. The ITS lab will also serve
as a showcase for student recruitment, including efforts to attract women and
underrepresented minorities to civil engineering.

