* 0245485
* Compressive Response and Crushing of Cellular Solids
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Stelios Kyriakides, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 04/30/2007
* USD 322,605.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt; Cellular solids are a class of light-weight materials with
unique properties such as high stiffness- and strength-to-weight ratios and
excellent energy absorption characteristics. Modern foams are made from
polymers, metals, ceramics and other materials. They are used as structural
components as cores in sandwich structures and in impact mitigation, cushioning
and other energy absorption applications in atmospheric and space vehicles,
automotive components, ship structures, civil engineering structures, mass
transit vehicles, sporting goods, etc. Advances in foaming processes enable
their manufacture to prescribed cell sizes and densities. For this technology to
reach its full potential, the cell size, density and properties of the base
material must be related to the foam properties of interest. The main objective
of this project is to use experiment and analysis to understand how the
microstructure governs all relevant mechanical properties of open cell foams.
Polyurethane and aluminum foams of various densities and cell sizes will be used
as representative material systems. &lt;br/&gt; A typical foam compressive
response consists of a nearly linear elastic regime terminating into a limit
load which is followed by an extensive load plateau. The limit load represents
the onset of instability and localization. For polyurethane foams the
instability is elastic buckling of the microstructure while for aluminum foams
it is due to plastic collapse. The plateau, which represents the energy
absorbing capacity, is related to progressive spreading of the crushing through
the material. The project aims to understand the micromechanisms governing these
behaviors and to develop models which are able to reproduce them.&lt;br/&gt; The
problem will be tackled through experiments coupled with several levels of
modeling. The experiments will involve: (a) Measurement of the elastic and
"inelastic" mechanical properties of the foams; (b) characterization of the foam
microstructure; and (c) measurement of the mechanical properties of the foam
struts in situ. The modeling will involve: (a) beam-type models for the elastic
properties; (b) numerical characteristic cell-type models for the elastic
properties and the onset of instability; and (c) large-scale models which can
reproduce all aspects of the compressive response including the large
deformation crushing. At first the microstructure will be represented as regular
Kelvin cells but with realistic strut geometric characteristics. Other more
representative microstructures will be considered as deemed
required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;