* 0245253
* Experiments on Three-Dimensional Disturbance Interactions Leading to Boundary-Layer Transition
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2006
* Edward White, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 04/30/2006
* USD 220,870.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0245253 PROPOSAL TYPE: INVESTIGATOR INITIATED PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATOR: EDWARD B. WHITE INSTITUTION: CASE WESTERN RESERVE UNIVERSITY

EXPERIMENTS ON THREE-DIMENSIONAL DISTURBANCE INTERACTIONS LEADING TO BOUNDARY
LAYER TRANSITION

The laminar-to-turbulent transition of boundary layers is a complicated process
that can proceed via a number of scenarios depending on fluid velocity, surface
geometry, environmental disturbances, and other factors. In spite of its
complicated nature, past research on the subject of transition has tended to
focus on single disturbance-growth mechanisms in isolation from all other
competing mechanisms. For Blasius boundary layers, the growth of streamwise-
traveling, spanwise-invariant disturbances known as Tollmien-Schlichting (T-S)
waves is one such mechanism that has been extensively studied. A newly
discovered mechanism known as transient growth, which favors stationary,
spanwise-varying disturbances, has also received significant attention. Although
much progress has been made in understanding these mechanisms in isolation,
little progress has been made in predicting or controlling transition onset in
real systems in which several competing mechanisms can exist. To address the
lack of useful data on realistic transition scenarios involving competing
disturbances, a wind-tunnel investigation of the interactions of T-S waves and
transient disturbances in a Blasius boundary layer will be undertaken. The
proposed experiments will provide a controlled and systematic investigation of
how T-S waves, transient disturbances, and the secondary instabilities of both
compete and interact to bring about transition. The input disturbances will be
varied over wide parameter ranges and will be designed to take full advantage of
signal-analysis techniques suitable for extracting very low amplitude
disturbance signals from a noisy background. The results will provide data
necessary for transition prediction and control efforts. Beyond the intrinsic
scientific value of the project, the proposed work will also contribute to the
improvement of important technological systems and to the promotion of the role
of research in teaching at Case Western Reserve University. Transition affects
the performance and efficiency of a broad range of vehicles and industrial
systems because laminar boundary layers result in low vehicle drag, whereas
turbulent boundary layers are often desired for complete and efficient fluid
mixing. It would be of great benefit if designers were capable of predicting and
controlling the conditions under which laminar flows become turbulent. Accurate
prediction would shorten design cycles and reduce the over design typical of
systems sensitive to transition, and flow control would permit the design of
radically more efficient systems. More immediately, this project will enhance
the role of research in teaching by supporting a vigorous experimental program
in a wind-tunnel laboratory that is accessible to undergraduates and by
incorporating the work performed in the tunnel into experimental-methods and
fluid mechanics instruction.