* 0245218
* GOALI:  Capturing, Implementing, and Generating Product Brand Through Shape Grammars
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Randall Smith, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Judy M. Vance
* 07/31/2007
* USD 301,227.00

This GOALI project, jointly run by Carnegie Mellon and General Motors, focuses
on the development of computational tools to express product brand. The
technology, known as shape grammars, requires unique approaches to computer
implementation. The four main contributions from this work will be 1) furthering
the science of shape grammar implementation, 2) further understanding of the
logic of brand, 3) articulation of design objectives for aesthetics through a
mathematical (utility) function in conjunction with optimizing search
strategies, and 4) further advancement of the field of automated design
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach will be as follows: 1) Create a
shape grammar that captures the core views of a product, in this case a vehicle
of a given brand. 2) Provide an inter-relation between those different views. 3)
Use the inter-relation between the 2D views to create a 3D grammar of the
product and its brand. 4) Create computer technology to enable implementation of
the 2D views. 5) Specify the technological requirements of a 3D implementation.
6) Use an optimization-based search strategy to automate the generation of
products that fit within a brand. 7) Use a utility based decision tool to select
among the generated designs and tune the automated algorithm. All of the
findings of this work are general, with broader impacts that go even beyond the
auto industry. The goal is to help companies better understand their brand
identity, place their contemporary styling within the context of their
historical product line, and provide a clear communication between engineers and
industrial designers/stylists. One graduate student will have extended visits to
GM each summer over the life of the project. GM will in effect serve as a test-
bed for this award.&lt;br/&gt;