* 0245359
* Parameter Dependence in Weakly Hyperbolic Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Dmitry Dolgopyat, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 132,603.00

Abstract: DMS-0245359&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; PI: D DOLGOPYAT, U
Maryland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smooth ergodic theory studies the long-
time asymptotics of those autonomous systems&lt;br/&gt;which can be described by
a finite number of parameters. Both analytic and&lt;br/&gt;numerical results
suggest that most of systems fall in one of the following&lt;br/&gt;classes:
elliptic (quasiperiodic) and hyperbolic (exhibiting &lt;br/&gt;sensitive
dependence on initial conditions). Systems close to elliptic
systems&lt;br/&gt;are described by the famous Kolmogorov--Arnold--Moser theory.
By contrast&lt;br/&gt;small perturbations of hyperbolic systems have been
analyzed only&lt;br/&gt;in a few special cases. This proposal aims at the
general perturbation&lt;br/&gt;theory for hyperbolic systems. This includes both
the description of the&lt;br/&gt;perturbed dynamics up to the certain specific
times as well as computing equilibrium characteristics of the
perturbed&lt;br/&gt;system. Because there is sensitive dependence on
&lt;br/&gt;initial conditions, it is hopeless to deal with perturbations of
individual&lt;br/&gt;orbits. Rather, using the fact that hyperbolic systems
usually have&lt;br/&gt;strong stochastic properties, I will study parameter
dependence of frequencies&lt;br/&gt;of visits to a given domain in the phase
space. My previous work on &lt;br/&gt;statistical properties of hyperbolic
systems is essential to this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the recent
years it has been understood that many systems&lt;br/&gt;we encounter have
chaotic behavior. On the other hand there&lt;br/&gt;are several models of
chaotic systems which can be exactly solved, which can&lt;br/&gt;be analyzed
mathematically. However it can be asked how much one&lt;br/&gt;could trust
predictions made on the basis of these models since &lt;br/&gt;the specific
features which allow us to precisely solve these models might &lt;br/&gt;make
them in some sense exceptional. In particular since chaotic systems
are&lt;br/&gt;very sensitive to initial conditions it is conceivable that a
slight&lt;br/&gt;change in the parameters of the system could drastically change
their&lt;br/&gt;behavior. The goal of the current project is to describe the
conditions&lt;br/&gt;when this drastic change does not happen. The main idea is
that most&lt;br/&gt;chaotic systems are so complicated that changing parameters
does not&lt;br/&gt;lead to an appearance of a new pattern of behavior but
&lt;br/&gt;rather to changing slightly probabilities of already existing
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;