* 0245045
* RUI:    Detectors to Explore Quarks and Leptons
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Kevin Giovanetti, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 05/31/2007
* USD 247,796.00

This project is designed to integrate important contributions to research
&lt;br/&gt;with an educational experience for promising undergraduate students.
The &lt;br/&gt;James Madison University Particle and Nuclear Physics Group,
consisting of &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Giovanetti, Dr. Niculescu, and a group of
undergraduate students, is &lt;br/&gt;conducting research in the area of
Intermediate Energy Nuclear Physics at &lt;br/&gt;Thomas Jefferson National
Accelerator Facility, TJNAF, and at the Paul &lt;br/&gt;Scherrer Institute, PSI.
The members of the group are actively involved in &lt;br/&gt;the ongoing
research at TJNAF and are contributing by designing and testing
&lt;br/&gt;equipment, participating in data taking and performing data analysis.
This &lt;br/&gt;group is also a key collaborator in an experiment underway at
PSI (Muon &lt;br/&gt;Lifetime Experiment).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
explore the rich structure of particles like the proton &lt;br/&gt;and the
neutron, which are the basic building blocks of the atomic nucleus.
&lt;br/&gt;It is widely held that protons and neutrons are built out of three
quarks. &lt;br/&gt;These quarks are viewed as fundamental particles that have
simple &lt;br/&gt;properties. Gluonic forces hold the quarks together. The basic
nature of &lt;br/&gt;the forces are believed to be understood. However there is
not yet a &lt;br/&gt;complete picture of the three-quark system. Studies that
probe the nature &lt;br/&gt;of the proton, and the neutron will clarify the
important ingredients, test &lt;br/&gt;the validity of models and
approximations, and perhaps discover new &lt;br/&gt;features that require a
closer look at the underlying theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvements in
technology and progress in theoretical physics have created &lt;br/&gt;the
opportunity to improve our knowledge of the strength of another basic
&lt;br/&gt;interaction, the weak force. By measuring the lifetime of the muon
the &lt;br/&gt;Fermi coupling constant can be extracted. This constant
determines the &lt;br/&gt;strength of the weak force in the same manner as
electric charge determines &lt;br/&gt;the strength of the electromagnetic force.
The goal is to improve this &lt;br/&gt;measured value to one part per million.&l
t;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*************************************************
**&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-- &lt;br/&gt;Giovanetti, Kevin
L&lt;br/&gt;giovankl@jmu.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;