* 0245466
* Mellin Transform and Global Optimization Techniques for Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Irina Mitrea, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 01/31/2005
* USD 80,793.00

PI: Irina Mitrea, Cornell University DMS-0245466

Abstract:

A central problem at the interface between harmonic analysis and partial
differential equations (PDEs), on the one hand, and functional analysis and
operator theory, on the other hand, is the study of elliptic boundary value
problems on non-smooth domains. One typical approach for solving many classical
PDEs of mathematical physics in Lipschitz domains in the Euclidean setting is
the method of layer potentials.

The PI plans to address a number of important and long-standing questions
regarding fundamental properties of boundary layer potential operators on
Lipschitz domains, which still remain open despite the tremendous progress made
in the last three decades. Some of the specific themes of this proposed research
program are The Spectral Radius Conjecture for boundary layers on rough
domains;Displacement prescribed problems of elasticity in multi-connected
regions with rough boundaries; and Regularity properties of Green functions and
Poisson kernels.

The study of boundary value problems (BVPs) with minimal smoothness assumptions
(on the coefficients or on the domain under discussion) has been the driving
force behind fundamental developments in the area of Partial Differential
Equations and has deep connections with many areas of Analysis. The interest in
such problems resides both in their theoretical importance as well as in their
numerous applications to engineering.