* 0245423
* Novel 1- and 2-Dimensional Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Larry Sorensen, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This project will investigate novel thermodynamic and structural properties of
atoms and molecules deposited (adsorbed) on single-wall carbon nanotube (SWNT)
bundles and other surfaces. Nanometer-size, low dimensionality systems are at
the forefront of research on new states of matter. SWNT bundles and other
uniform substrates have made possible the fabrication of one- and two-
dimensional (1d, 2d) forms of matter by adsorption of atoms/molecules on their
surface. Heat of adsorption, heat capacity and X-ray scattering measurements are
used to study several systems: (a) 1d helium, expected to remain in a single
fluid phase down to absolute zero, (b) 1d molecular hydrogen, which may remain
fluid to very low temperatures, (c) 1d and 2d crystals formed by Ar, Kr, and Xe,
(d) 1d and 2d oxygen expected to show a crossover from 2d to 1d magnetic
properties, and (e) quantum effects on the 2d phases of helium isotopic
mixtures. SWNT bundles show promise for hydrogen storage, a matter of high
technological importance addressed in this program. Participating graduate and
undergraduate students learn a broad range of modern experimental techniques
that position them well for future employment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanometer
size, low dimensionality systems are at the forefront of research on novel fluid
and solid states of matter. This experimental work focuses on measurements of
the one- and two-dimensional (1d, 2d) properties of simple gases and molecules
deposited (adsorbed) on single-wall carbon nanotube (SWNT) bundles, and the 2d
properties of helium isotopic mixtures adsorbed on very small flat surfaces.
Thermal and X-ray measurements characterize the phases and phase changes of the
adsorbed substances as a function of temperature and density. Fascinating novel
systems are: 1d helium which should remain in a single fluid phase at all
temperatures, 1d molecular hydrogen which may remain fluid to very low
temperatures, 1d and 2d Ar, Kr, and Xe which show solid structures being formed
on the bundles, 1d and 2d oxygen with possible crossover from 2d to 1d magnetic
properties, and the 2d properties of helium isotopic mixtures and their
pronounced quantum effects. Bundles show promise for hydrogen storage, a matter
of considerable technological importance. Participating graduate and
undergraduate students acquire an array of modern experimental skills that
position them well for future employment in any sector. &lt;br/&gt;