* 0245402
* Development and Implementation of Monitoring and Damage Detection Methods for Large Civil Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2008
* Shirley Dyke, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 04/30/2008
* USD 215,299.00

Development and Implementation of Monitoring and Damage Detection Methods for
Large Civil Structures, CMS proposal 0245402

PI: Dyke, Washington University

This proposal focuses on a research effort to develop, verify, and implement
structural health monitoring (SHM) strategies to detect, locate, and quantify
structural damage in large civil structures. The objective is on the development
of methodologies appropriate for damage resulting from significant natural
events, such as earthquakes, wind, blasts, as well as age/environmental
deterioration. Strategies that are appropriate for large structures (long-span
bridges, tall buildings, etc.) require special consideration due to the fact
that these structures have closely-spaced vibration modes. Other characteristics
of these structures include: they are continuous structures that are not well-
represented with lumped masses; lateral and torsional motions can be highly
coupled; using a limited number of sensors is feasible; and they have closely-
spaced modes. Methods traditionally used for identification of the modal
parameters are not necessarily appropriate for structures with closely-spaced
modes, especially in a SHM situation where automation of the algorithms is
needed. The focus is on the development of SHM methodologies that use rates of
change of the eigenvalues, eigenvectors and static parameters (deformed shape,
for a cable-stayed bridge) to locate and quantify damage (i.e., sensitivity-
based). Additionally, using sensitivity-based analysis techniques, the
capabilities and limitations of SHM techniques to detect various classes of
damage will be examined for realistic damage scenarios.

Numerical and experimental verification of the methodology is planned using
existing models of and data obtained from cable stayed and suspension bridges
(Emerson bridge spanning the Mississippi, and the Hakucho bridge in Japan).
Furthermore, full-scale testing will be performed on the Pereira-Dos Quebradas
bridge (a cable-stayed bridge constructed in 1995) which has a fully
operational, ~300-sensor response acquisition system (sensors and data
acquisition). This bridge has experienced several earthquakes since construction
(including the Armenia earthquake in 1999) and response records are available.
The advantages of using this particular bridge include: a full response
acquisition system is already in place; the bridge is located in a seismically
active area and response records are available; the temperature is also quite
constant in this region of the world (fluctuating only 20F year-round)
indicating variations in the modal parameters with temperature are expected to
be small (daily changes will probably dominate temperature effects); the mass of
long-span bridges is relatively constant; numerical models of the bridge have
been already developed; and, the project has a broadly international
perspective, providing an opportunity to consider hazard mitigation needs in
several countries.

The proposed research is linked to current research at Tokyo University (Japan,
Prof. Masato Abe) and the Universidad del Valle (Colombia, Prof. Peter Thomson),
facilitating a strategic collaboration between the three institutions and
enhancing the research activities of the individuals. Significant efforts have
been made to encourage prior student and faculty exchanges between these
investigators, and these activities are being expanded. Prof. Abe has data from
bridges in Japan, and is conducting research to examine realistic damage
scenarios. He will share previously obtained data obtained from long-span
bridges in Japan, collaborate on the development of these techniques, and offer
his expertise in the area of long-span bridges. Prof. Thomson has a cooperative
agreement and funding to implement a SHM system on the Colombian bridge. He has
committed to examining temperature effects with his experience in this area
using other bridges, verifying the existing finite element model, and hosting a
multilingual web page for worldwide access/education (with mirror sites at
Washington University and Tokyo University). The activities proposed will result
in a better understanding of the effect of damage in the static and dynamic
properties of large scale civil structures, as well as the training of a group
of researchers that have a broad international perspective.