* 0245377
* GOALI:      Quantitative Methods for Designing Lean Buffering in Production Systems:     Theory and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Scott Garberding, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 07/31/2007
* USD 206,000.00

This research proposes to provide funding for the development of rigorous
quantitative &lt;br/&gt;methods for the design of lean buffering in large volume
production systems and for the experimental verification of the techniques to be
developed on the factory floor. The theoretical part of the project will
&lt;br/&gt;be carried out at the University of Michigan; the experimental part
will take place at the DaimlerChrysler Detroit Axle Plant. In this project, the
lean buffering is understood as the smallest buffer capacity, which is necessary
and sufficient to achieve the desired throughput of a production system. At
present, no analytic methods for selecting lean buffering are available and,
therefore, production line designers and production managers use simulation and
experience-based techniques, which often lead to suboptimal results. The
approach of this project is based on analytical investigations of the production
lines at hand and subsequent minimization of buffer capacity as a function of
machine efficiency, production line efficiency, and the number of machines in
the system. This approach will be carried out for production lines with machines
having exponentially distributed up- and downtime. For non-exponential machines,
the project will develop and verify an empirical law, according to which lean
buffering is a piecewise linear function of the downtime coefficient of
variation with the slopes defined by the level of lean buffering in the
exponential case. These results will be verified experimentally and implemented
within the 8.25" rear axle production system at the DaimlerChrysler Detroit Axle
Plant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this project will
provide a theoretical foundation of lean manufacturing. In addition, production
line designers and production system managers will receive a simple quantitative
tool for designing lean systems. Practical implementations of this tool will
contribute to increased competitiveness of the US industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;