* 0245234
* Astroparticle Physics with MILAGRO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Gaurang Yodh, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2006
* USD 705,000.00

This is a proposal to operate the full Milagro air shower telescope,the Milagro
pond and&lt;br/&gt;the surrounding array of outrigger water tanks,for the next
three years and analyze the&lt;br/&gt;data to study the generation of TeV gamma
rays from extremely energetic cosmic objects,&lt;br/&gt;such as nearby Active
Galactic Nuclei (Blazars),Gamma Ray Bursts(GRB)and steady&lt;br/&gt;emitters in
our own Galaxy.Study of TeV gamma rays from sources provides a
sensitive&lt;br/&gt;tool for understanding the mechanisms for particle
acceleration and subsequent gamma ray&lt;br/&gt;generation.TeV gamma rays from
GRBs of short duration may allow s to test for possible&lt;br/&gt;energy
dependence of the speed of light as predicted by theories of quantum
gravity.The&lt;br/&gt;upper end of the gamma ray spectrum is particularly
sensitive to the bulk Lorentz factor&lt;br/&gt;and magnetic .elds of the source
shock.The shape at TeV energies can provide a probe of&lt;br/&gt;the extra-
galactic IR absorption.&lt;br/&gt;Milagro is a water Cherenkov air shower
telescope.It consists of a 5000 m 2 central pond&lt;br/&gt;and an array of 175
water tanks distributed out to 120 meters from the center of the
pond.&lt;br/&gt;Its point spread function for gamma rays has a width of 0.8
deg.Its strengths are:all-sky&lt;br/&gt;sensitivity,continuous 24 hour operation
and ability to study transients on many di .erent&lt;br/&gt;time scales.Milagro
will be the only contin ously operating TeV gamma ray telescope&lt;br/&gt;before
GLAST will operate.Milagro is a collaboration of Irvine(UCI),Santa
Cruz(UCSC)&lt;br/&gt;and Riverside(UCR),LANL,Maryland,New Hampshire,NYU and GMU
groups.&lt;br/&gt;In the last three year grant,we have operated full Milagro
pond detector at a data rate of&lt;br/&gt;1700 Hz.We have developed a new
trigger to be able to study GRBs down to a few hundred&lt;br/&gt;GeV so that we
can be sensitive to GRBs out to a red shift of 0.4.We have completed
the&lt;br/&gt;array of 175 outrigger tanks to be able to locate shower cores out
to about 100 meters which&lt;br/&gt;will improve our pointing and angular
resolution substantially.We have working algorithms&lt;br/&gt;to reject more
than 90 percent of cosmic ray triggers while keeping more than 50 percent
of&lt;br/&gt;gamma ray triggers.We have implemented on-line capability of
detecting bursts or transients&lt;br/&gt;in real-time,within 5 minutes and
sending out alerts for m ltifrequency searches.We have&lt;br/&gt;observed the
steady Crab at greater than 5 sigma.We have observed Mrk421 during
its&lt;br/&gt;active phase in 2001.We have observed a 30 sigma de .cit for the
shadow of the moon in a&lt;br/&gt;year of operation which provides direct energy
calibration of Milagro and enables search of&lt;br/&gt;anti-proton component of
cosmic rays in the TeV energy range.We have begun the study&lt;br/&gt;of gamma
rays expected from cosmic ray interactions in the galaxy in TeV energy
range.&lt;br/&gt;Milagro not only makes a signi .cant contribution to high
energy astrophysics but also&lt;br/&gt;provides an excellent tool for
teaching,training and learning for graduate students,under-&lt;br/&gt;graduate
students and science teachers from K-12.With its location in New
Mexico,it&lt;br/&gt;provides research and learning experience to Native
Americans.At UCI,we have developed&lt;br/&gt;educational outreach activities for
research experience to undergraduates as a part of on-&lt;br/&gt;going UCI REU
program,to train high school science teachers through the COSMOS
and&lt;br/&gt;Quarknet programs of UCI.The UCI Milagro group will continue to
provide training to&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and graduate students to work on di
.erent aspects of the research and on&lt;br/&gt;site work at the Milagro site
for gaining real research experience.