* 0245462
* Ternary and Quaternary Nitrides
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Francis DiSalvo, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 05/31/2006
* USD 660,000.00

The goal of this project is to explore the preparation of ternary and quaternary
nitrides and determine their properties. As with oxide chemistry where ternaries
and quaternaries offer a greater, more tunable, qualitatively different and more
useful set of properties than the binaries, so too is it expected that ternary
and quaternary nitrides will eventually provide the same since so many useful
binary nitrides are known. Although structurally interesting compounds have been
found, some with unusual properties, the study of such ternary and quaternary
nitrides is still in its infancy, especially when compared to ternary and
quaternary oxides, or even to sulfides, phosphides, carbides, etc. New synthetic
techniques are being invented and exploited to prepare a wide variety of novel
nitride compounds. Although there are only a few groups in the U.S. exploring
the solid state chemistry of nitrides, it is a very active field of research in
Europe and Japan. Close ties to many of those groups and this U.S. effort have
resulted in programs for exchanging students and postdocs. This project will
focus on the use of molten metals and their alloys as fluxes (solvents) to
prepare conducting, possibly even superconducting, as well as magnetic multinary
nitrides that will be examined for potential technological uses and for novel
phenomena. Low melting point metals, such as sodium, zinc, gallium, indium, tin,
and bismuth will be explored for this purpose. Initial results suggest that
these fluxes and alloys of these fluxes will be highly useful for producing a
large number of new compounds with novel structures and properties. This
research will also be a vehicle for the training of undergraduates, graduate
students and postdocs in the science and art of Solid State Chemistry. The
results of this research will be widely disseminated via the WEB, publications,
seminars, professional meetings and, where appropriate, via patents.
Interactions with industry prompted by current findings are underway. The
methodology and results have also been and will continue to be incorporated in
undergraduate courses and especially in a graduate course on Solid State
Chemistry developed by the PI. The PI and his research group are also very
active in bringing science to a wide audience, including K - 12 school children,
science teachers in middle and high schools as well as community colleges, and
to undergraduates from smaller colleges and universities. The latter students do
not otherwise have the opportunity to be involved in research at the forefront
of materials chemistry or use the advanced instrumentation available at Cornell
University. K - 12 students are reached through Chemistry Demonstrations that
are performed in the local schools. Undergraduate students from smaller colleges
and local high school teachers spend up to 10 weeks in the summer working in
these laboratories. The entire community is reached by several local newspaper
columns the PI has written for the Ask a Scientist weekly feature reaching
80,000 readers. These outreach activities are not only aimed at attracting a
broad cross section of young people to science, but perhaps more importantly,
they are an integral part of helping to develop a scientifically literate
public.

%%%

There are already many important uses of binary nitrides. These include aluminum
nitride (high thermal conductivity substrates), silicon nitride (as chemical
vapor deposited coating on electronics, etc.), titanium nitride (hard coatings
for tools), tantalum nitride (metallic conductors and diffusion barriers in
electronics, colored surfaces in jewelry, artistic displays, etc.), niobium
nitride (thin film super-conducting devices), gallium nitride (blue light
emitting diodes, high speed - high power electronics). Is it expected that
ternary and quaternary nitrides will eventually provide a whole new class of
functional materials of high value to advancing new technologies. Students
trained in these areas are very competitive for a wide range of jobs in the
academic, industrial, and government laboratory sectors.