* 0245082
* The Combinatorics of Representations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Georgia Benkart, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2007
* USD 140,754.00

Principal Investigator: Georgia Benkart Proposal Number: 0245082 Institution:
University of Wisconsin-Madison Abstract: The combinatorics of representations
This proposal focuses on three different projects -- all related to the
combinatorics of representations. The first involves Temperley-Lieb and Jones
algebras. Temperley-Lieb algebras appeared initially in statistical mechanics as
transfer matrices between physical states. Later they were discovered to provide
important invariants of knots and links. Similarly, the Jones algebras are
related to knots and links on an annulus. Results in knot theory are playing an
ever more significant role in such topics as DNA analysis and protein folding.
The proposed work is to study certain algebras of matrices that commute with the
Temperley-Lieb and Jones algebras. The goal is to understand the associated
combinatorics and its applications in addressing a variety of problems in areas
such as knot theory and group theory. The second project studies down and up
operators on sets with a partial order. Such operators have appeared in many
different contexts -- for example, in physics where they are often interpreted
as creation and annihilation operators on particles. The algebra generated by
these operators reveals much information about the set; it encodes essential
combinatorial data; and it contributes to the understanding of such things as
random walks on the set. The final project investigates certain reflections in
hyperplanes (mirrors) related to extended affine root systems, their
combinatorics, and their actions on various spaces. All the projects involve the
representation theory of algebras and groups.

The goal of representation theory is to ``represent'' an abstract algebraic
object as explicit matrices (rectangular arrays of numbers) that describe its
action on a space. The algebraic object might be acting as the symmetries of a
crystal or as rotations of a physical system. Representation theory has had an
enormous impact on particle physics, on the study of crystals in chemistry, and
on mathematical research ever since the pioneering work of mathematician Issai
Schur and physicist Hermann Weyl in the 1920's. Its continuing vitality is
evidenced by much current activity and many open problems. Combinatorial
representation theory takes the concrete realization one step further by
associating to such representations, combinatorial objects that can be
manipulated and counted explicitly. The subject has had an explosion of activity
in recent years with numerous important applications in diverse areas of
mathematics and physics. This proposal seeks to understand the combinatorics of
certain algebras called Temperley-Lieb algebras and various other related
algebras. Temperley-Lieb algebras first arose in statistical mechanics where
they were used to describe the transfer of energy between physical states. In
the 1980's, Vaughan Jones showed that they are related to the study of knots. By
studying various properties of them, the project seeks to develop new ways of
distinguishing knots and links. This has potential applications to such subjects
as DNA analysis and protein folding. Some components of these projects can be
undertaken by undergraduate and beginning graduate students, as combinatorics
provides an excellent vehicle to introduce students to research because of its
concrete nature. The principal investigator, Georgia Benkart, feels it is
important to expose students to mathematical research and to convince them that
they can understand and take an active role in research. Students will
participate in the project in essential ways and will conduct their own research
projects related to the ones proposed here.