* 0245622
* Structure and Algorithms, Between Logic and Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Ralph McKenzie, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2007
* USD 100,004.00

Principal Investigator: Ralph McKenzie&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0245622&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Vanderbilt
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: Structure and algorithms,
between logic and algebra&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;McKenzie will investigate, on the
one hand, algorithmic questions which involve properties of finite algebras
determined by the varieties and quasi-varieties they generate, and, on the other
hand, structural questions which involve the necessary algebraic properties that
must be true throughout a locally finite variety or quasi-variety as a
consequence of that class possessing some natural property defined through
logical or set-theoretic means. The outstanding algorithmic questions: Is there
an algorithm to determine whether the quasi-equations valid in a finite algebra
F are finitely based? Is there an algorithm to determine if the quasi-variety
generated by F possesses a natural duality? Is the class of finite algebras
possessing a finite equational basis recursively enumerable? Is the class of
finite algebras generating a residually large variety recursively enumerable?
Among the important structural questions: What collection of algebraic
properties is necessary and sufficient for a finitely generated variety to be
finitely decidable, or to have few models? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Purely
theoretical research in this branch of general algebra is driven today not by
the likelihood of supplying any pressing practical needs, but rather by the
sheer difficulty of the intellectual challenge and the tremendous sense of
satisfaction that accompanies success. However, this work, like all of algebra,
spawns a constant stream of algorithms, many of which, though feasible, are
extremely difficult to implement efficiently on a computer, providing a severe
test of the state-of-the-art in hardware and software and programming skills.
The current theorem-proving programs for equational logic are a good example of
this phenomenon. There appears to be a growing realization in the theoretical
computer science community that general algebra is the mathematical language in
which they most need to be fluent. The principal investigator believes that
research into the interplay between, on the one hand, the existence or
nonexistence of algorithms to recognize fundamental properties of finite
algebras, and on the other hand, the levels of structural complexity manifested
in the algebras---what this project is all about---has the potential not only to
expand our understanding of the structural possibilities in finite algebraic
systems (which it has already done), but to produce, some day, superior codes
and ciphers for secure information transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;