* 0245054
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Lynn Singer, Case Western Reserve University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,499,580.00

The goal of this project is to contribute to the development of a national
science and engineering academic workforce that includes the full participation
of women at all levels of faculty and academic leadership, particularly at the
senior academic ranks, through the transformation of institutional practices,
policies, climate, and culture. Case Western Reserve University (CWRU) proposes
a multifaceted project called Academic Careers in Engineering and Science (ACES)
to increase the number of women faculty in science and engineering at all
academic ranks. The ACES project will operate on 3 levels: (1) At the highest
levels of leadership of the University, including the President, Provost, and
Deputy Provost. This leadership is committed to fundraising for 5 endowed chairs
to attract senior women scientists and engineers and to annual evaluation of
deans' progress toward transformational change. (2) At the school and
departmental level with intensive coaching, mentoring, networking, and training
and development of deans, chairs, faculty, and students in 4 test departments in
Phase 1, and extension of the best practices to all science and engineering
departments in Phase 2. (3) At the campus-wide level with distinguished
lectureships for senior women in science and engineering, mentoring
opportunities, a spousal hiring network, and a unique minority pipeline
initiative including faculty exchanges with Fisk University and summer research
internships.

The outcome of the proposed institutional transformation will be increased
transparency and accountability as well as more equitable practices, procedures,
and structures. Throughout the ACES project, CWRU will self-study, evaluate, and
disseminate the findings so that other private institutions can benefit from
their work, building on a resource equity study begun two years ago. Case
Western Reserve University is at a pivotal time in its history, and is poised to
make transformational change at every level of the university.