* 0245039
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award:  A Change in the Culture at the University of Rhode Island
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2010
* Janett Trubatch, University of Rhode Island
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kelly M. Mack
* 02/28/2010
* USD 3,500,000.00

The goal of this project is to contribute to the development of a national
science and engineering academic workforce that includes the full participation
of women at all levels of faculty and academic leadership, particularly at the
senior academic ranks, through the transformation of institutional practices,
policies, climate, and culture. &lt;br/&gt;The University of Rhode Island (URI)
proposes to use the ADVANCE Institutional Transformation initiative to increase
the number and facilitate the career advancement of women STEM faculty, and
improve the institutional climate for women scientists. Through a 5-year, multi-
level approach, URI will: 1) increase the number of ranked women faculty in the
STEM departments, 2) provide existing STEM faculty with career development and
training opportunities, 3) improve social support services for faculty, 4)
systematically educate and promote awareness of women-in-science issues at the
individual, departmental, and administrative levels, and 5) develop and utilize
a broadly applicable collaborative organizational change model. &lt;br/&gt;The
ADVANCE program at URI features a Pre-Faculty Fellows Program, in which
qualified doctorates will conduct research (with options for teaching) while
being mentored and trained for a 1 - 3 year period, with the intent that they
will fill tenure-track STEM faculty positions as they become available.
Congruent with this program will be an infrastructure of enhanced support and
training, which will also be offered to other STEM faculty. This includes a
yearlong series of career workshops, a mentor training program, a topical lunch
series, a social networking program, and visiting speakers. The ADVANCE
Incentive Fund, eventually fully supported by URI, will provide awards to
research endeavors that include women faculty collaborators, especially Pre-
Faculty Fellows and junior faculty, and departmental or individual efforts that
promote relevant climate or policy changes. In addition, proactive efforts will
be made to provide quality support services for balancing work and family,
including trailing spouse placement assistance and coordination with an ongoing
childcare assistance program.&lt;br/&gt;Overseeing the multiple efforts at URI
will be an Advisory Committee, a Program Coordinator, a Leadership Team, and
auxiliary faculty and staff who have demonstrated a commitment to these issues.
Support from top administrators and a permanent ADVANCE Resource Center office
with many sponsored campus activities will provide the foundation for a visible,
influential presence on campus.&lt;br/&gt;Developing a database through a
comprehensive self-study will be the first step in a 5-year process of
evaluation, action, and reporting, that will culminate in an organizational
model for change potentially applicable to other institutions. The theoretical
underpinning of the proposed program is the Transtheoretical Model of Change,
one of the most influential stage-change models currently in use. Its
fundamental premise is that organizational and behavioral change must be
welcomed before it is to be successful. At the departmental and administrative
levels at URI, meetings, workshops, and speakers aimed at diversity education
and awareness will be implemented, using a collaborative framework.
&lt;br/&gt;The efforts from the ADVANCE initiative will benefit all faculty at
URI, will serve as a model for progressive action in Rhode Island and the
Northeast, and will be a step towards the inclusion of expanded perspectives in
science nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;