* 0245047
* Arkansas Spring Lecture Series 2003:    On the Andrews-Curtis and Poincare Conjectures;  April 10-12, 2003; Fayetteville, AR
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2004
* Yoav Rieck, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/29/2004
* USD 24,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0245047&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Yoav Rieck&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the center of the proposed
conference will be a series of lecture&lt;br/&gt;by Professor Andrew Casson of
Yale University. These lecture will&lt;br/&gt;focus on two of the most important
open questions in the fields of&lt;br/&gt;topology and group theory. The first
question, the Poincare&lt;br/&gt;Conjecture, was posed by Henri Poincare almost
100 years ago. It is&lt;br/&gt;concerned with the basic structure of very simple
3-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;spaces; while the Andrews-Curtis Conjecture is about
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;structures, and is very relevant to the Poincare Conjecture.
In&lt;br/&gt;addition to a survey of existing approaches, partial results and
open&lt;br/&gt;questions related to these conjectures, these talks will attempt
to&lt;br/&gt;describe some intriguing similarities and differences between the
two&lt;br/&gt;conjectures. In addition, 10 leading experts from around the
world&lt;br/&gt;will deliver talks about their own
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will be the 28th annual Arkansas
Spring Lecture&lt;br/&gt;Series. The format of the lecture series is 5 one hour
talks by a&lt;br/&gt;world leading mathematician, accompanied by about 10
lectures of&lt;br/&gt;invited experts, and several shorter talks by a variety of
people,&lt;br/&gt;including graduate students. This structure is valuable,
particularly&lt;br/&gt;for younger researchers, that get an excellent learning
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;This year's Lecture Series is about 3-dimensional
topology. The&lt;br/&gt;importance of low dimensional topology has been growing
in recent&lt;br/&gt;tears, with numerous applications starting at robotics and
control,&lt;br/&gt;and ending with theoretical physics and cosmology. For
example, one&lt;br/&gt;intriguing question is what the shape of the Universe is.
The&lt;br/&gt;spherical shape of the earth was discovered two millennia ago, and
yet&lt;br/&gt;we have no clue as to the shape of the Universe. The work
of&lt;br/&gt;Professor Casson as well as other leading mathematician, may
help&lt;br/&gt;answer this question by leading astronomers is the right
direction,&lt;br/&gt;and helping design the right experiments to answer these
questions.&lt;br/&gt;Jeff Weeks, a McArthur Fellow, will discuss such
experiments in a&lt;br/&gt;lecture open to the public and using a language
accessible to all.&lt;br/&gt;This will give the public an opportunity to
understand the work of&lt;br/&gt;world leading mathematicians. Jeff Weeks talk
should have great&lt;br/&gt;educational value in motivating younger students to
enjoy basic&lt;br/&gt;research.&lt;br/&gt;