* 0245642
* The Critical Heat Flux Condition in Micro-Channels
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Michael Jensen, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 06/30/2007
* USD 540,630.00

Two-phase heat transfer has significant advantages over single-phase heat
transfer, but a crucially important factor that must be taken into account in
the design of micro-channel boiling heat transfer is the critical heat flux
(CHF) condition, which sets the upper thermal limit on the micro-channel
operation. Literature on the CHF condition in micro-channels is quite sparse and
the applicability to micro-channels of existing CHF correlations for
conventionally sized channels is unknown; therefore better capability to predict
the CHF condition for micro-channels is needed. The objectives of this project
are to develop a better quantitative and qualitative understanding of the CHF
condition in single and multiple, parallel micro-channels, to assess the
applicability of current CHF correlations to micro-channels, to develop a
technique to minimize or eliminate flow instabilities and flow maldistribution
in multiple micro-channels, and to develop a phenomenological model of the CHF
condition that takes into account the confounding effects of conduction in the
solid. To accomplish these objectives, both experimental and analytical
investigations are performed. In the experimental study, circular tubes and
rectangular channels heated on all sides are tested over a range of channel
diameters, number of channels in parallel, flow rates, pressures, and power
levels. The test section configurations include single circular tubes with
varying tube-wall materials and wall thicknesses, multiple channels machined
into large copper blocks, and microfluidic systems fabricated on silicon wafers,
all instrumented with fast-responding arrays of temperature and pressure
sensors. Two fluids, refrigerant R123 and water, are used. Because flow
instabilities can be significant with boiling in multiple parallel channels,
time-varying data are obtained and the channel geometry is modified in both on
the microfluidic and copper block systems by the addition of upstream flow
restrictions to reduce or eliminate instabilities; these same channel
modifications are used to minimize or eliminate flow maldistribution. High-
speed, microscopic flow-visualization studies are undertaken to complement the
quantitative measurements. In the analytical study, a phenomenological model
that includes the effects of local fluid and solid conditions and dynamic
contact angles is produced by extending the previously developed CHF model for
pool boiling to flow boiling in micro-channels. Effects due to wall thermal
conductivity and thermal capacity (density-specific heat product) are
incorporated while evaluating local wall temperature conditions. The model is
tested against the single-tube CHF data. Differences between the CHF condition
in single and multiple, parallel channels are clearly elucidated through
experiments in the microfluidic and copper-block systems. Novel schemes of
incorporating upstream individual flow restrictors in the microfluidic system
and individual removable inserts in the copper-block system are used to study
their effects on improving CHF in parallel-channel operation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better method for
prediction of CHF will permit engineers to pursue ideas that cannot be
implemented now because of uncertainties in thermal operating limits, such as
higher-power electronics, computers, lasers, etc. The research findings are
presented at national conferences, published in appropriate journals, and shared
with industry and national laboratories during visits and seminars. To enhance
the value of this research, an international short course on micro-channel heat
transfer is held in conjunction with the ASME Rochester Heat Transfer Chapter.
Also, the project enhances educational opportunities through the partnering of a
PhD-granting institution (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute) with one that does
not grant PhD degrees (Rochester Institute of Technology). Minority graduate
students are recruited from historically black colleges and universities.
Because early exposure to research has been proven to be a significant spur for
undergraduates to continue for a graduate degree, promising undergraduates are
identified to participate in the project.&lt;br/&gt;