* 0245702
* Ordering/Lithography in Glasses/Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Uwe Weierstall, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2007
* USD 332,450.00

This project addresses fundamental atomic level characterization, alloy
ordering, and direct-write lithography. These activities are relevant to
superconducting, semiconducting and optical nanos-tructures. The lithography
approach utilizes a direct-write, inorganic process which uses the high-energy,
0.5nm diameter beam of a scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) to
convert doped silicate glass films to nanostructures, such as nanorings. Silicon
nanodots and nanowires may also be formed. Patterned Ge and Nb nanorings in
silicate glass (about 20nm in diameter) have been demonstrated. Arrays of
nanorings (of various elements) will be fabricated in silicate films on silicon
nitride membranes, and their semiconducting, superconducting and optical prop-
erties measured. Calculations of optical properties of nanorings are in
collaboration with F. Gar-cia de Abajo. The project also addresses formation of
Josephson arrays and weak link fabrication via STEM. The general intellectual
merit of the project lies in prospects for understanding, char-acterizing and
forming atomic structures within thin films by new means in order to obtain
wanted novel properties. These include electrical currents which circulate
forever, media with negative optical refractive index, semiconductor quantum
nanorings for computing and improved intermetallic alloys.&lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental materials science research issues
associated with electronic materials having technological relevance. An
important feature of the project is the strong em-phasis on education, and the
integration of research and education. The project includes support of students,
a planned exhibit at the Arizona Science Museum, visits to elementary and high
schools in a specially equipped minibus, and laboratory tours for high school
students (http://www.asu.edu/clas/csss/csss/).&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;