* 0300484
* GOALI: Engineering Coating Microstructure Through Advanced Plasma Spray Processing: Fuel Cell and Thermal Barrier Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Elaine Strock, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 04/30/2007
* USD 410,954.00

This research is focused on developing enhanced plasma spray processing
capabilities that will enable meeting the advanced materials and manufacturing
requirements in two important areas: the emerging fuel-cell industry and
advanced thermal barrier coatings (TBC) for engine and power applications. The
research is directed at both expanding the science base needed to better
understand the process-structure-property relationships critical for these
applications, as well as utilizing this knowledge to develop an advanced real-
time control system that more directly controls the process physics that
determines the resulting microstructure. The benefit will be both in expanding
the ability to engineer advanced coating systems as well as improving
manufacturing capabilities. Our research approach is designed to bridge the gap
between extensive parametric design of experiments studies and more fundamental
studies of the process physics involving highly "idealized" conditions, such as
single splats on smooth interfaces. Plasma spray is a high-throughput,
economical, low environmental impact process that can be used to custom engineer
coating microstructure to meet specific performance requirements. However, fuel-
cell and advanced TBC applications, important to improving energy efficiency and
reducing environmental impact, require the ability to engineer coating structure
and meet manufacturing requirements (yield and variation levels) that are beyond
today's current plasma spray capabilities. We focus on these two applications
not only because of their importance, but because they involve the same ceramic
material (yitria stablized zirconia, YSZ) but with significantly different
microstructural requirements. We believe that by basing our development effort
on a deeper knowledge of the process-structure relations, we will develop a
control system that is generalizable and widely applicable. This research will
be conducted by an interdisciplinary team of academic-industry researchers with
expertise in materials, thermal-fluids, controls, manufacturing, and the
application areas. We will take a combined modeling-experimental approach in
order to better understand the complex process-structure issues under real
processing conditions. Research areas include: a) developing a more complete
understanding of the underlying physics that determines the process-structure
relationships for critical coating features, b) developing non-dimensionalized
models to relate the process physics and measurable process characteristics to
production objectives such as coating thickness and deposition rate, c)
investigating the distributed nature of the process in terms of its impact on
coating structure and control requirements, and d) incorporating these elements
explicitly into the architecture of an advanced control system. Guided by
expertise from our industry co-PI's (GOALI Partners: Siemens-Westinghouse and
Engelhard Surface Technologies), we will then evaluate these new capabilities in
meeting the fuel-cell and TBC requirements. Building on our record over the past
9 years (50% of 38 undergraduate researchers were from underrepresented groups),
we intend to continue actively involving underrepresented groups and
undergraduate students in our research.