* 0300208
* Lagrangian and Autonomous Sampling Methods in Oceanography:  A Workshop,March 2003,  San Diego, CA
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Daniel Rudnick, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2004
* USD 69,600.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0300208&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rudnick /
SIO&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator, in
collaboration with M. J. Perry at the University of Maine, proposes to co-chair
an interdisciplinary workshop to develop a strategic planning document that
details the exciting, new scientific opportunities for using Lagrangian and
autonomous platforms for interdisciplinary studies of the ocean. The last decade
has witnessed a revolution in ocean observing capabilities as new platforms and
sensing systems have been introduced and matured. It is now possible with a
class of oceanographic platforms that can be loosely characterized as autonomous
to track water masses, record their biological, physical, optical and chemical
properties, and periodically receive the data at home via satellite telemetry
All of the recent disciplinary and interdisciplinary oceanography reports
sponsored by the Foundation in the last few years highlight the potential and
profound impact of these new observing capabilities on experiments and
observations. Because of the new and rapidly evolving nature of this mode of
sampling, there has been to date no concerted effort to detail the new
opportunities that will be enabled in cross-disciplinary activities. The time is
now right to develop a national plan so that all oceanographers can share in the
technological advancements achieved to date and can participate in future
activities. We propose a workshop to formulate such a plan with the goal of
answering four primary questions:&lt;br/&gt;* What new science can be done with
Lagrangian, autonomous, or other novel platforms?&lt;br/&gt;* What technological
developments need to be pursued, including sensor development and information
technology?&lt;br/&gt;* How should these new platforms be made available to the
community?&lt;br/&gt;* What training, education, and outreach efforts must
accompany these activities?&lt;br/&gt;A steering committee with representation
from a diverse cross section of the ocean community will organize a workshop of
40 participants in San Diego in March 2003. Broad participation from senior and
junior scientists in ocean sciences, engineering, information technology, and
sensor development will be solicited. The participation of women at all levels
and scientists from under-represented groups (who most likely will not be at the
senior level) will be sought. A draft report will be vetted and community
comment incorporated in the document; the final report will be published in
autumn 2003. The goal of the workshop is to help catalyze the revolution in
ocean observations and to facilitate access to these tools and data by a broader
community. The research resulting from these technologies will contribute to
more detailed studies of climate and the impacts of climate variability on ocean
ecosystems. The workshop will address how data sets can best be used in
educational venues as a vehicle for enticing K-16 students into science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;