* 0300525
* Algebraic Cycles, K-Theory, and Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Eric Friedlander, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2009
* USD 324,999.00

DMS-0300525&lt;br/&gt;Eric M. Friedlander&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Friedlander
proposes to investigate topics in algebra, geometry,&lt;br/&gt;and topology.
Each of these topics entail a synthesis of techniques&lt;br/&gt;and results from
various mathematical fields with the goal of progress&lt;br/&gt;toward solutions
of fundamental problems, and each has seen progress&lt;br/&gt;achieved by
Friedlander and his collaborators. Firstly, Friedlander&lt;br/&gt;proposes to
investigate algebraic K-theory and algebraic cycles on&lt;br/&gt;algebraic
varieties, with the expectation that his investigation will&lt;br/&gt;contribute
both specific computations and general properties of these&lt;br/&gt;fundamental
invariants. Friedlander will seek to produce topological&lt;br/&gt;constructions
associated to objects arising in algebraic geometry&lt;br/&gt;which closely
reflect subtle aspects of algebraic cycles and algebraic&lt;br/&gt;K-theory.
These constructions, many planned in conjunction with Mark&lt;br/&gt;Walker, are
envisioned to involve a blend of techniques from stable&lt;br/&gt;homotopy
theory and recent techniques developed by Voevodsky for
motivic&lt;br/&gt;cohomology. In particular, Friedlander plans to investigate
further the&lt;br/&gt;semi-topological K-theory of varieties and its connections
with algebraic&lt;br/&gt;and topological K-theory. The second topic involves the
introduction&lt;br/&gt;of new spaces determined by the representation theory of
a finite group&lt;br/&gt;scheme which provide a new perspective on cohomological
support varieties.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research, in part to be achieved
in collaboration with&lt;br/&gt;Julia Pevtsova, is to produce finer invariants
in the general context of&lt;br/&gt;finite group schemes which are accessible to
computations and which extend&lt;br/&gt;our understanding of (modular)
representations. Finally, in joint work&lt;br/&gt;with Vincent Franjou,
Friedlander proposes to study the cohomology of&lt;br/&gt;polynomial bifunctors
with the aim of improving earlier computations by&lt;br/&gt;himself and others
to cases more closely related to questions in
K-theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics continues to reveal
beautiful relationships which are both&lt;br/&gt;useful and surprising. This
project involves the study of shapes&lt;br/&gt;(topology) which arise as the
solutions of polynomial equations.&lt;br/&gt;Such a study uses geometric
insights and algebraic manipulations,&lt;br/&gt;augmented by constructions and
computations of many mathematicians over&lt;br/&gt;the centuries. Some of the
questions considered still seem dauntingly&lt;br/&gt;difficult, but partial
progress towards their solutions will lead to&lt;br/&gt;advances in different
branches of mathematics and mathematical physics.&lt;br/&gt;A second aspect of
this project is the study of formal algebraic objects&lt;br/&gt;which arise as
symmetries of familiar structures. Once again, geometry&lt;br/&gt;is blended
with algebra to provide motivation for questions to be asked&lt;br/&gt;as well
as to suggest methods of solution. A third aspect consists of&lt;br/&gt;efforts
to maintain the strength of the national effort in mathematics
by&lt;br/&gt;mentoring graduate students and junior faculty, by organizing
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;meetings, by editorial efforts for journals and special
volumes, and&lt;br/&gt;by participation in the on-going discussion of policy
issues for the&lt;br/&gt;American Mathematical
Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;