* 0300639
* Topics in Model Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2009
* C. Ward Henson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2009
* USD 499,113.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0300639&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Anand Pillay&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal covers problems in
several areas of model theory (a&lt;br/&gt;branch of mathematical logic) and its
applications. On the pure&lt;br/&gt;side are problems involving definability and
fine structure in&lt;br/&gt;models of simple theories, which will be approached
using the&lt;br/&gt;theory of elementary pairs of models. Also questions on
the&lt;br/&gt;structure of the Lascar group, a certain Galois group attached
to&lt;br/&gt;any first order theory, raise new conjectural
relationships&lt;br/&gt;between first order logic and descriptive set theory.
The applied&lt;br/&gt;side of the proposal deals mainly with jet-space methods
in&lt;br/&gt;differential fields, the Galois theory of differential
equations&lt;br/&gt;in positive characteristic, and the model theory of
Kahler&lt;br/&gt;manifolds. Among the common themes on the applied side is
the&lt;br/&gt;manner in which model theory predicts that the further
a&lt;br/&gt;definable set is from algebraic geometry, the more rigid is
its&lt;br/&gt;structure, and the mathematical implications of this behaviour
in&lt;br/&gt;the concrete situations under
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is in a certain branch of
mathematical logic called&lt;br/&gt;model theory. Modern mathematical logic
developed in the&lt;br/&gt;twentieth century. Although the present proposal does
not touch&lt;br/&gt;directly on computability questions, it is worth remarking
that&lt;br/&gt;mathematical logicians such as Turing provided the first
rigorous&lt;br/&gt;notions of computability and played a role in the development
of&lt;br/&gt;actual computers. Model theory, on the other hand, is
concerned&lt;br/&gt;with a detailed study of the language in which
mathematicians&lt;br/&gt;express themselves and define
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;objects. Model-theorists such as Robinson and Tarski
showed how&lt;br/&gt;such preoccupations can have wide-ranging implications
for&lt;br/&gt;mathematics itself, and so indirectly for science as a whole.
The&lt;br/&gt;development of nonstandard analysis provides an example. The
past&lt;br/&gt;fifteen years have seen striking advances in applications
of&lt;br/&gt;model theory to areas of mathematics such as number theory
and&lt;br/&gt;geometry. The proposer plans, among other things, to extend
these&lt;br/&gt;advances, using new methods he has recently
developed.&lt;br/&gt;