* 0300297
* Planning and Optimizing 5-Axis High Speed Machining with Feed Scheduling for Sculptured Surface Machining
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Yuan-Shin Lee, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/2007
* USD 338,964.00

The objective of this research is to investigate strategies and techniques for
optimizing five-axis tool paths required in high-speed machining of complex
products. To generate optimal feed schedules for high-speed machining, both the
geometric error analysis and the physical mechanistic errors that are relevant
to five-axis machining of complex parts are considered. A robust modulated
performance control system combined with a machining potential-field analysis
will be developed to improve the computational efficiency of contour-curve
interpolation for optimization of five-axis high-speed machining.

Successful completion of this research project would open up a number of
possibilities for high-speed machining of complex products. The application of
high-speed machining has been recognized as an economically viable manufacturing
technology for increased productivity and throughput. The results of this
research will provide techniques that are critical for future development of
high-performance, five-axis machining with feed scheduling. This research could
also extend the capability of computational geometric and mechanistic modeling
of high-performance machining to provide both the speed and accuracy required
for state-of-the-art manufacturing operations. The developed techniques will
enable more adaptive and agile machining processes for next-generation
manufacturing.