* 0300605
* A Statistical Learning Framework for Investigating Scalability and Performance of Measurement-based Network Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Chuanyi Ji, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 04/30/2006
* USD 270,000.00

Measurement-based network monitoring and surveillance is an important area for
providing reliability and security to IP network infrastructure. A challenge is
how to develop scalable monitoring approaches.

This Project will investigate the scalability and performance of measurement-
based network monitoring. At the high level scalability relates to the growth
rate of monitoring resource with respect to the size of a network. The
performance characterizes the accuracy of network monitoring. The scalability
and performance together impact the feasibility of such approaches to large
networks.

The PI will use a statistical learning framework to investigate the issues of
scalability and performance. She will formally define and analyze scalability,
and provide understanding on when and why scalability may be achieved. She will
then investigate the trade-off between scalability and performance, and provide
guidelines for developing good measurement-based approaches for large networks.

Although there have been many efforts to develop measurement-based methods for
network monitoring, the scalability and performance issues have been
investigated little. Meanwhile, though statistical learning theory has been
applied to many areas, it has not been widely used in measurement-based network
monitoring. The proposed investigation hopes to benefit measurement-based
network monitoring, and to enrich the statistical learning theory also. This
research will be done in Collaboration with Anwar Elwalid at Bell-Labs Lucent
Technologies.