* 0300037
* Integrated Research on Distributed Control for Large-Scale Dynamically-Interconnected Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Fen Wu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 05/31/2007
* USD 190,072.00

Recent advances in engineering design have generated a variety of large-scale
systems that offer tremendous economic benefits. Many of these systems are
composed of multiple individual units, which directly interact with their
neighbors. Examples include micro electro-mechanical sensor and actuator arrays,
electric power grid, and closely coupled aircraft formation flight. Several
limiting factors in designing effective distributed control algorithms for
large-scale dynamically-interconnected systems include: (a) the complexity
associated with high state dimensions and large numbers of inputs and outputs;
(b) the interaction between subsystems through both dynamic coupling and
communication; (c) heterogeneity and modeling uncertainty at subsystem level.

The strong connection among communication, control and computation has become
increasingly important, as the systems grow in complexity and more powerful
tools are made available in computing and communications. This project seeks to
exploit these connections and develop distributed control techniques for large-
scale, dynamically interconnected systems by synthesizing ideas from control
theory and optimization techniques. Specifically, game theory will provide a
general approach to exploit dynamic interaction between subsystems, and advance
control design in the distributed game framework. The distributed control
strategy will provide interconnected systems with simplified control
implementation and improved system reliability. Moreover, significant
performance improvement will be achieved by applying on-line optimizations to
such complex systems.

Other engineering systems on which the proposed research will have a significant
impact include distributed operation of object transportation and manipulation
using sensor and actuator arrays, telecommunication network flow, and power
distribution over large-scale electric network.

The development of innovative educational approach will enhance North Carolina
State University educational program by providing undergraduates and graduate
students valuable research experience and hands-on practical skills. The
developed toolbox on large-scale system analysis, distributed control design,
and simulation will serve as a vehicle to disseminate the research outcome to
control community, and facilitate technology transfer to industrial
practitioners.