* 0300568
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Parameter and Control Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2006
* Mustafa Khammash, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 03/31/2006
* USD 234,379.00

Project Summary Motivated by design problems i anotechnology and by key
theoretical problems of interest, we consider a paradigm whereby the plant
description depends on one or several parameters that are subject to design.We
propose a general framework for I tegrated Parameter and Controller (IPC)design
that allows multiple performance requirements.We propose to address the problem
of designing these parameters in conjunction with the feedback controller i
order to achieve one or more objectives.We then propose to address and solve the
underlying optimization problem.The theoretical underpinnings will rely o ew
results in the non-convex optimization literature that utilize convex relaxation
i order to get global optimal solutions.The potential of our approach to yield e
.ective solutions to the resulting problems is demonstrated by our recent work
that applies the proposed methods to the robust synthesis problem in 1 giving
the only global optimal solution to this important problem.Aside from its
contribution to the theory of control design, the IPC design tools to be
developed will be used to address several practical problems where the
simultaneous parameter and controller design can have a large and measurable
impact.Speci .cally, we will address a signi .cant nanotechnology design problem
i volving ultra-high resolution micro- cantilevers.This problem will take adva
tage of existing expertise i the laboratory of the PIs and will be conducted i
close collaboration with the relevant industry.Based o the interdisciplinary
tools eeded for IPC design theory,we also address educational goals that are
made possible by the proposed research. The intellectual merit of this proposal
stems from the novel approach for a well recognized unsolved problem of
integrated parameter and controller (IPC)design.The proposal will contribute
signi .cantly to optimization based methodologies in control theory solving
hitherto unaddressed problems that are of importance for practical control
design.The proposal lays particular emphasis on applying the theory developed to
micro-cantilever based technologies in the context of IPC design.The theoretical
paradigm is well suited and timely for furthering this technology. Apart from
the theoretical impact the related technology to be developed will be applicable
to practical problems i the two hundred million dollar scanning probe
industry.The PIs have signi .cant collaboration with industry and the technical
knowhow developed will be guided and transferred e .ectively to the industry.E
.ort will be placed on integrating the software developed on a typical Matlab
platform.This will enable wide use of the tools developed by the related
communities.The main topic of the proposal provides a unique opportunity to
expose the student to the importance of plant structure that facilitates good
overall plant-controller performance.A novel course that builds o the ideas and
results of this project to motivate the general philosophy and techniques of
integrated parameter and control design will be developed. 1