* 0300361
* Automated Generation of Automated Visual Inspection (AVI) Routines for Surface Mounted Assembly Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Jesus Villalobos, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 08/31/2006
* USD 118,000.00

This research proposes the development of a methodology that will result in the
automated generation of inspection algorithms of new surface mounted Technology
(SMT) components. The envisioned methodology will make possible the development
of automated visual inspection (AVI) systems that develop and optimize their own
inspection algorithms for new components. Under this notion the resulting
development framework will minimize the intervention of human developers to
obtain inspection algorithms that meet minimal performance measures in terms of
component discrimination and sensitivity to changes in environmental variables.
This methodology will be based on a vector discrimination approach for the
identification of defective components whose basic characteristics have already
been developed. This vector approach, in conjunction with a hierarchical
classification, will be used to obtain the envisioned methodology. This
methodology does not seek the replacement of the human developer; the proposed
framework will free him/her from tedious tasks, so that s/he can focus on more
complex tasks such as the development of morphology-based features that may be
needed for more sophisticated inspection tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this research will significantly shorten the time required to
develop inspection algorithms for SMT components. This reduction in development
time will result in added manufacturing flexibility that will translate into
more rapid introduction of new products into existing manufacturing lines and
shorter design lead-times. This flexibility will contribute to give a
competitive advantage to the electronics industry, which has a clear strategic
importance for the USA. It is also expected that as a direct result of the
funded activities the PI expand the concept of multi-disciplinary pyramidal
research teams. This concept has given excellent results in terms of recruiting
undergraduate students to continue on to graduate school and also in terms of
the participation of minority students in research activities.&lt;br/&gt;