* 0300263
* Chip-Level Self-Assembly: Tools and components that self-assemble and self-package to form desired microsystems
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Heiko Jacobs, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 11/30/2007
* USD 239,988.00

Broader Impact: If the research part of this work proves successful, it could
have tremendous impact. The ability to assemble multiple components (integrated
circuits, optical components, sensors, actuators, fluidic devices) in two or
three dimensions will enable the creation of improved and entirely new
microsystems that go far beyond the capacities of current micromachining and
microassembly. Furthermore, it would allow the merging of technologies based on
otherwise incompatible materials. Examples of known applications include
flexible displays, smart materials, integrated circuits on plastics or fabrics
for wearable intelligence, and merged optical/electronic structures for optical
off-chip and cross-chip communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Societal
Implications: Advances in Microtechnology including Self-assembly Based
Manufacturing promise to have major implications for health, wealth, and peace
in the upcoming decades. Knowledge in this field is growing worldwide, leading
to fundamental scientific advances. In turn, this will lead to dramatic changes
in the ways that materials, devices, and systems are understood and created. The
proposed research is one element to advance knowledge in this field. It suggests
a dramatic change in the way that devices and systems are
created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective is to develop a parallel tool
that is based on directed self-assembly to assemble, and electrically connect
chip-level-sized components, to form two and three-dimensional microsystems.
This research includes (i) the study of the key factors affecting the assembly
in experiment and theory, (ii) the demonstration of large area assemblies with
minimal defects, (iii) the investigation of different schemes of agitation using
acceleration and fluid flow, (iv) and the study of the resolution limit of
surface tension-driven self-assembly involving liquid
solder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second objective is to apply the gained
knowledge to design intelligent components that undergo self- assembly to form a
desired device. Proposed examples are (i) self-packaging chips for micro- and
optoelectronics, and (ii) hemispherical emitter/detector arrays for
surveillance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third objective of this program is to
foster a cross-disciplinary education of our students and outreach to the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;