* 0300121
* Optimization of Jump Stochastic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Eugene Feinberg, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Robert L. Smith
* 06/30/2008
* USD 306,675.00

This research project investigates dynamic optimization of continuous time jump
stochastic systems with single and multiple performance characteristics. The
goals of this project are: (i) to develop new theoretical results that describe
the structure of optimal strategies for problems that are applicable to large
classes of engineering systems and provide efficient algorithms for computation
of optimal policies, and (ii) to apply these results to solve particular
optimization problems for production, service, information, and other man-made
systems. This project consists of two major parts. The first part develops new
methods for the analysis of jump stochastic systems based on: (a) developing new
approximations of objective criteria for undiscounted continuous-time jump
processes, (b) developing a theory of such processes that describes the
structure of optimal policies and provides algorithms for their computation, (c)
studying multiple-objective problems and the corresponding infinite-dimensional
linear programs. The utilization of these techniques will lead to the
development of new results for the optimization of continuous time jump
stochastic systems with multiple objectives and constraints. These results will
include the description of the structure of optimal strategies for undiscounted
problems with unbounded cost functions and the algorithms for their computation.
The second part of this project deals with the applications of the results of
the first part to the analysis and optimization of particular engineering and
operations management models. The results of the first part of this project will
be applied to production, service, and inventory systems with stochastic demand,
to replacement and preventive maintenance problems, to energy management, and to
other engineering problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual impact of this
research is that it will develop new methods for optimization of broad classes
of jump stochastic systems. It will contribute to a better understanding of the
structure of optimal policies and develop algorithms for their computation. It
will improve our ability to manage production, service, information, energy, and
other man-made systems. The broader impact of this project is that it will
contribute to the development of human resources in science and engineering, to
technological progress, and to mutually beneficial interactions between industry
and academia.&lt;br/&gt;