* 0300201
* Cardinal Invariants and Descriptive Set Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Jindrich Zapletal, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2008
* USD 103,827.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0300201&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Jindrich Zapletal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator
plans to work on the connections between&lt;br/&gt;the theory of cardinal
invariants and descriptive set theory, two&lt;br/&gt;subfields of set theory.
The central idea in the field of cardinal&lt;br/&gt;invariants is to assign
cardinal numbers to various Borel (that is,&lt;br/&gt;suitably definable)
structures on the real line or similar spaces.&lt;br/&gt;The comparison of these
cardinal numbers provides a way to measure&lt;br/&gt;differences between
distinct Borel structures, and the principal&lt;br/&gt;investigator has
developed a method for comparing many of these&lt;br/&gt;cardinal numbers. It
turns out that the comparison of cardinal&lt;br/&gt;numbers frequently
translates back to natural Borel questions about the&lt;br/&gt;Borel structures,
without loss of information. Questions to be studied&lt;br/&gt;under this grant
include the extension of the syntactically defined&lt;br/&gt;class of problems
for which the technique sketched above works; the&lt;br/&gt;relevance of large
cardinal axioms to the translation method; particular&lt;br/&gt;cases of Borel
structures arising in dynamical systems or in the study&lt;br/&gt;of Borel
equivalence relations, and a duality that relates these results&lt;br/&gt;to a
method recently found by W. Hugh Woodin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ordinary cardinal
numbers are used for counting, i.e., for comparing&lt;br/&gt;the sizes of
collections of objects. For more than one hundred years&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians
have had a version of cardinal numbers for infinite&lt;br/&gt;sets, beginning
with the notion of comparison: if two sets A and B can&lt;br/&gt;be put into a
one-to-one correspondence then we say that A and B have&lt;br/&gt;the same
cardinality. From this point of view the set of natural&lt;br/&gt;numbers {1, 2,
3, ...} and its subset of even natural numbers {2, 4,&lt;br/&gt;6, ...} have the
same cardinality (size) since multiplication by 2&lt;br/&gt;gives a one-to-one
correspondence from the first set to the second&lt;br/&gt;one. Both of these
sets are infinite, i.e. larger than any finite&lt;br/&gt;set, and one of the key
steps in the development of logic and set&lt;br/&gt;theory was the realization
by Georg Cantor that the set of real&lt;br/&gt;numbers is definitely of a larger
cardinality than the set of natural&lt;br/&gt;numbers. Modern set theory has
developed notions and tools for&lt;br/&gt;working with sets of larger
cardinality than the real line, and&lt;br/&gt;these tools are becoming useful in
exploring constructions and&lt;br/&gt;properties that arise in dynamical systems
and measure theory.