* 0300522
* Integrated Magnetics for Hybrid Resonant Transition Converters
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Rajapandian Ayyanar, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 07/31/2005
* USD 86,643.00

Integrated Magnetics (IM), which combines the various discrete magnetic
components of a power converter, such as power transformers and filter
inductors, into a single physical structure, can lead to significant improvement
in power density of converters. Integrated magnetics can also impact converter
performance in terms of soft-switching and EMI, which have not been explored.
Concerted research efforts are needed, especially in deriving and validating
suitable analytical tools, synthesis rules and models, before the advantages of
integrated magnetics can be fully exploited. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A main
objective of the proposed research is to formulate a unified set of synthesis
rules to translate any given discrete magnetics, with arbitrary voltage and
current waveforms, in to integrated magnetics, which is independent of the
converter topology. Rigorous methods to quantitatively determine the reduction
in size and volume of magnetics in moving from discrete to integrated version
will also be developed. Integrated magnetics can significantly affect the zero-
voltage switching (ZVS) characteristics of a converter, by influencing effective
leakage inductances, magnetizing currents and current waveforms in different
windings. The proposed research aims to extensively study the effect of IM on
ZVS characteristics. The analysis and design methods will be validated initially
by simulation using gyrator-capacitor modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The class
of hybrid resonant transition converters (HRTC) is a promising topology for dc-
dc conversion, since it achieves ZVS under all operating conditions, and also
reduces the filter requirement. A drawback of this class of converters is the
requirement of two power transformers. A main objective of the proposed research
is to use the above theoretical study to integrate the two transformers as well
as the inductor of HRTC, improving both power density as well as ZVS
characteristics. Much of research on IM so far has concentrated on two-
dimensional core geometries. Several new possibilities with superior performance
can be realized by moving towards three-dimensional magnetic structures. Three-
dimensional core geometries for integrating the magnetic components of hybrid
converters will be investigated, making extensive use of finite element analysis
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research outputs of this project will
enhance the electromagnetics aspects of the present power electronics
curriculum. The models, design techniques and measurement procedures for IM
developed as part of this research proposal will be incorporated into the
Advanced Power Electronics course at ASU. Power electronics has been taught and
practiced mainly from a circuit theory point of view. However, with ever-
increasing switching frequencies, shrinking sizes and EMI issues, the need for
analyzing and understanding power electronic converters from an electromagnetic
perspective is increasingly being felt. This project is a step towards
integrating electromagnetic theory into power electronics curriculum.
&lt;br/&gt;