* 0300788
* Conference: FASEB Ciliate Molecular Biology Conference, to be held in Saxtons River, Vermont, Summer 2003
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Lawrence Klobutcher, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 06/30/2004
* USD 8,650.00

The "Tenth International Meeting on Ciliate Molecular Biology" will be held as a
FASEB Summer Research Conference at the Vermont Academy in Saxton's River,
Vermont, July 19-24, 2003. The meeting will bring together an international
group of 160-170 researchers who employ molecular approaches for investigating
diverse biological problems using ciliated protozoa as their model system.
Historically, work on ciliated protozoa has provided a number of remarkable
insights into important and universal biological processes, including the
discoveries of self-splicing RNA, telomeres and telomerase, and chromatin
remodeling by histone acetyltransferases. The continued development of molecular
tools for these organisms has made them favorable models for studying numerous
biological processes shared with a wide variety of eukaryotic organisms. This
meeting seeks to foster the efficient exchange of unpublished research results
and technical advances. Ten platform sessions and two poster sessions will be
held at the conference. The topics of the platform sessions represent active
areas of ciliate research, and include "Chromatin Structure and Function",
"Genome Organization and Reorganization", "DNA Rearrangement: Epigenetics and
Chromatin", "DNA Replication, Repair, and Telomeres", "Genetics, Genomics, &amp;
Molecular Technology", "Cytoskeleton and&lt;br/&gt;Cell Motility", "Protein
Trafficking and Regulated Secretion", "Morphogenesis and Development",
"Environmental Sensing &amp; Behavior", and "Evolution and Population Biology."
There will also be two workshops held in conjunction with the conference. The
first will focus on "Ciliates in the Classroom". Ciliated protozoa have long
been used as teaching tools because of their complex biology, large size, and
simple culture requirements. Many conferees have developed teaching modules
(primarily for undergraduate courses) that utilize ciliates. The workshop will
provide a forum for exchanging such teaching tools, discussing programs that
work, and stimulating the development of new approaches to effective
undergraduate education. "Functional Genomics and Bioinformatics", will be the
focus of the second workshop. A similar event at the 2001 FASEB conference on
ciliate molecular biology was instrumental in the planning of ciliate genome
sequencing efforts. The session and workshop at the 2003 meeting are intended to
further develop the ciliate genome sequencing efforts, as well as to plan for
bioinformatic and post-genomic resources for ciliates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past work on ciliates has contributed greatly to many
areas of biology, and the further development of genomic-based resources will
assure that these organisms remain useful and popular models for investigating
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;biological problems.&lt;br/&gt;