* 0300072
* SGER: Political Views of Middle East Citizens Following Western Military Intervention
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Katherine Meyer, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2004
* USD 53,262.00

SES-0300072 Katherine Meyer Ohio State University

In recent years, Western military intervention in the Middle East, for example,
in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Israel and the Palestinian has garnered political,
journalistic and popular attention. Such intervention impacts citizens of the
involved countries and becomes part of the cultural context that shapes their
views towards democratic government, the West, the Arab World, and the Middle
East. If growing resentment of the West follows military intervention, it is not
just a matter of political, but also scholarly concern since citizen opinion is
a critical component in understanding nation-building and peacekeeping efforts.
It is a basis for the legitimacy of regimes, particularly those with democratic
structures and procedures. This Small Grant for Exploratory (SGER) examines the
public opinion of citizens in the Middle East in the ten years after the Gulf
War in two ways. First, it explores the views of Kuwaiti citizens toward
democracy, the West, the Arab World and the Gulf Coast countries using survey
data gathered at three points in time during the 1990s. It investigates
questions made salient to Middle Eastern populations by Western military
intervention in the war; namely, is democracy increasingly legitimated as a form
of government; have citizens' political identities become more Westernized or
more specific to their region and history, as in some Asian nations; and are
changes in attitudes distributed evenly across the Kuwaiti population or do they
reflect differences among status groups, such as gender, social class, religious
sect, class of citizenship, residency, and other variables that stratify
populations in the Middle East? Second, this project extends beyond Kuwait by
capitalizing on the discourse among scholars who are knowledgeable about the
spread of democratic views and the development of political identity among
Middle Eastern populations. From their vantage points, what changes in public
opinion have scholars of the Middle East and Arab World observed regarding
democratic governance, the West, the Arab World and the region in the decade
since the end of the Gulf War? The project has the potential to increase our
understanding of the development of public opinion in the Middle East, and the
globalization of democracy within the cultural context not only of Islam but
also Western military intervention.