* 0301807
* International Research Fellowship Program: The Break-up of the Rodinia Supercontinent and Snowball Earth: Paleogeography and Geochronology of the Western Amazon Craton
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Eric Tohver, Tohver                  Eric
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 02/28/2006
* USD 95,444.00

0301807 Tohver

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Eric Tohver to
work with Dr. Wilson Teixeira at the University of Sao Paulo in Sao Paulo,
Brazil.

This fellow will undertake a paleomagnetic and geochronological study of the
late Precambrian sediments of the western Amazon craton in the western Brazilian
states of Mato Grosso and Mato Grosso do Sul. These sediments record the opening
of the Iapetus Ocean between ancestral North America and the Amazon craton
during the break-up of the Rodinia supercontinent. Glacial sediments found in
this rift sequence have been ascribed to a snowball Earth episode, a period of
extreme climatic conditions linked to the break-up of Rodinia. Radiogenic dating
using the 40 Ar/39Ar technique will be carried out on primary, authigenic
minerals from these sediments in order to determine the timing of rifting as
well as the age of the glacial event. These geochronological results will be
used in conjunction with paleomagnetic data to establish the paleogeographic
context of the glacial deposits. In addition, these data will be compared with
those from North America to document the opening of the Iapetus Ocean. This
project will establish the tectonic link between North and South America
Precambrian times. These sediments present a unique opportunity to help resolve
the ongoing debate regarding extreme climates proposed for end Precambrian
times.

The host, Dr. Teixeira is a leading expert in the Precambrian geology of South
America and has recently established a new laboratory with laser extraction
lines to complement the existing paleomagnetic laboratory, which utilized a
field-free room and a 2G cryogenic magnetometer.