* 0301918
* Third International Symposium on Quantum Theory and Symmetries; September 10-14, 2003; Cincinatti, OH
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2004
* P Argyres, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 10/31/2004
* USD 11,000.00

The main objective of this project is to host QTS3, the third of a biennial
international symposium &lt;br/&gt;entitled "SYMPOSIUM ON QUANTUM THEORY AND
SYMMETRIES." QTS1 was held in Goslar, &lt;br/&gt;Germany, in 1999 and QTS2 in
Krakow, Poland, in 2001. These symposia, which take place in odd
&lt;br/&gt;numbered years are similar in format to and complement the well known
biennial conferences, held in &lt;br/&gt;even numbered years, entitled
"INTERNATIONAL COLLOQUIUM ON GROUP THEORETICAL &lt;br/&gt;METHODS IN
PHYSICS(ICGTMP)". The Conference Boards for the two symposia have several
&lt;br/&gt;common members. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; An important intellectual
merit of such a symposium is that its format brings together physicists and
&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians from diverse fields to interact on topics on frontiers
of mathematical physics. Previous &lt;br/&gt;such meetings have enabled the
participants to identify and explore common mathematical themes that
&lt;br/&gt;unify their research efforts in fields ranging from atomic and
nuclear physics, gauge theories, string &lt;br/&gt;theories, and foundations of
quantum mechanics, to group theory, quantum groups, quantum
&lt;br/&gt;computing, and noncommutative geometries. This is to be contrasted
with the equally worthy and &lt;br/&gt;more frequently held symposia that are
focused on a single subject such as QCD, neutrinos, &lt;br/&gt;supersymmetry,
etc. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Among the broader impacts of this project, one is
that it fills the vacuum for the conferences of this &lt;br/&gt;type in the
United States. To our knowledge, the last of such conferences held in the United
States was &lt;br/&gt;in mid 1980's. They are held frequently in Europe, Canada,
Mexico, etc. As a result, young US &lt;br/&gt;theorists, such as postdocs and
graduate students, who are financially more constrained, have had
&lt;br/&gt;difficulty attending these conferences. To partially offset this
trend, recently NSF provided travel funds &lt;br/&gt;for young US participants
to a similar UNESCO conference, called International Conference on
&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical Physics, held in Paris, France, July 22-27, 2002. One of
aims of QTS3 is to facilitate the &lt;br/&gt;participation of young theorists
from the United States. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To further strengthen the broader
impacts of this Symposium and to make it a tradition, we have &lt;br/&gt;invited
Professor Edward Witten of the Institute for Advanced Studies to deliver the
Taft Lecture, &lt;br/&gt;sponsored by the Charles P. Taft Foundation. There will
also be a public lecture on a topic of broad &lt;br/&gt;interest. We plan to
make every effort to bring these lectures to the attention of the high schools
and &lt;br/&gt;small colleges in the nearby Ohio-Kentucky-Indiana region and
encourage their participation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The five-day symposium
will be held at University of Cincinnati, September 10-14, 2003. The local,
&lt;br/&gt;organizing committee includes, Philip Argyres, Paul Esposito, Timothy
Hodges, Alexander Kagan, &lt;br/&gt;Freydoon Mansouri (Chair), Joseph Scanio,
Peter Suranyi, Rohana Wijewardhana and Louis Witten. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The
funds needed to cover the expenses of the invited plenary speakers and the
publishing of the &lt;br/&gt;proceedings of the Symposium is estimated at
$42000.00. We already have a commitment of $20000.00 &lt;br/&gt;from University
of Cincinnati and intend to simultaneously apply for $11000.00 from DOE. The
&lt;br/&gt;amount requested from NSF is $11000.00. &lt;br/&gt;