* 0301213
* Operation of the National Center for Atmospheric Research and Support of Other Scientific Activities
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2011
* Richard Anthes, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sarah Ruth
* 09/30/2011
* USD 0.00

This award to the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) defines
the manner in which UCAR will manage the National Center for Atmospheric
Sciences, a Federally Funded Research & Development Center (FFRDC) of NSF, in
order to conduct and support research in atmospheric sciences and related
fields.

Intellectual merit:

The NCAR mission is to support, enhance and extend the capabilities of the
university community, nationally and internationally; to understand the behavior
of the atmospheric sciences and related systems and the global environment; and
to foster the transfer of knowledge and technology for the betterment of life on
Earth. To fulfill this mission NCAR will: a) Build, operate and maintain broadly
accessible, shared observational facilities, computational infrastructure and
databases; b) Ensure quality data stewardship and curation; c) Enhance the
ability of the community to collectively explore, develop and extend its ideas;
d) Facilitate the definition, construction and use of community models; e)
Enable the education and development of diverse human capital for the nation's
science and engineering needs; f) Attract, support and advance a quality,
diverse scientific and technical staff and provide for their continued training
and career advancement as befits a national center; g) Foster interdisciplinary
and multidisciplinary research; h) Address challenging scientific problems that
require long term focus and integration across global, regional and local
scales; i) Ensure the application of the best scientific understanding to
recognized and emerging problems of interest to society; j) Integrate research
and education in an increasingly interdisciplinary and cross disciplinary arena;
k) Transfer developed technology to the U.S. Government and the private sector
as appropriate; l) Conduct other activities as the awardee and NSF mutually
agree upon.

Broader impacts:

As manager of the operation of NSF's strategic partnership with NCAR, UCAR will
include the nation's university researchers in the full range of NCAR's
scientific activities, support the education of graduate students in the
atmospheric and related disciplines, and enhance the research endeavors of
participating university faculty. Kindergarten to postgraduate educational
activities will provide source materials and training opportunities for the
integration of research and education at all ages and levels. Outreach programs
specifically targeting underrepresented groups will assist them in pursuing
careers in the sciences. Research and educational infrastructure needs of
interest to the atmospheric and related sciences such as supercomputers,
research radars, satellites, instrumented aircraft, and educational networks
will be developed and deployed in support of university and government research
programs. The results of NCAR research will be broadly disseminated in the
scientific literature and presented in scientific meetings, and contribute to
the nation's understanding of environmental issues, their societal impacts and
enable informed policy and decision making.