* 0301938
* International Research Fellowship Program: Biological Control of Meloidogyne Graminicola on Rice Using Endophytic Organisms
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2003,09/30/2005
* Jonathan Padgham, Padgham                 Jonathan       L
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 09/30/2005
* USD 131,980.00

0301938 Padgham

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship (within a duration of
27 months) by Dr. Jonathan L. Padgham to work with Dr. Richard A. Sikora at the
University of Bonn in Germany.

The PI and his host will investigate biological control of M. graminicola using
endophytic organisms (bacteria and fungi that colonize internal root tissue).
Biocontrol from within the host root, where the nematode completes its
lifecycle, is potentially more effective than the predominate method of bulk and
rhizosphere soil. The objectives of the research are 1) to test the biocontrol
potential of endophytes, and their mode of action against M. graminicola; 2) to
examine how the method and timing of endophyte delivery to the root impacts its
biocontrol efficacy; and 3) to examine how soil flooding affects endophytic
communities, and to investigate the combined effect of biocontrol and soil
flooding on nematode suppression. These research questions will be tested in pot
experiments at the University of Bonn, by artificially inoculating rice with the
endophyte and the nematode in order to measure nematode penetration and
reproduction, and assess endophyte colonization of root tissue. The application
of this activity to society would be an enhanced capacity for the development of
less invasive control measures for root-knot nematodes.