* 0301487
* Multiple RF Ion Trap Coupled to Orthogonal TOF Mass Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 08/31/2002,02/29/2004
* Bruce Reinhold, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 02/29/2004
* USD 281,745.00

Abstract Reinhold &lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry (MS) coupled with methods to
fragment ions is fundamental&lt;br/&gt;for elucidating molecular structures in
biology. Combining mass measurements&lt;br/&gt;with fragmentation patterns is
necessary as the bare ion mass (to arbitrary&lt;br/&gt;precision) often fails to
identify the ion's molecular structure. The&lt;br/&gt;development of ion
trapping mass spectrometers (based on Paul or Penning&lt;br/&gt;traps) allows
multiple sequences of ion isolation and fragmentation (MSn).&lt;br/&gt;These
instruments allow the disassembly of complex ions into
components,&lt;br/&gt;generating a nested hierarchy of fragmentation patterns.
The ensemble of&lt;br/&gt;fragmentation patterns substantially extends what can
be determined by mass&lt;br/&gt;spectrometry. Ideally, combining ion disassembly
with knowledge of fragment&lt;br/&gt;dissociation patterns could allow
structural understanding for almost all&lt;br/&gt;complex biomolecules, e.g.,
peptides, oligosaccharides, lipids, and&lt;br/&gt;glycoconjugates. As important
as these advances have been, it is also clear&lt;br/&gt;that present MS
instruments fall short of the developing needs in biology.&lt;br/&gt;The
explosion of genome data has accelerated a shift in biology
from&lt;br/&gt;focusing on individual molecules and interactions into a focus
where complex&lt;br/&gt;networks of interactions at the cell and organism level
are studied.&lt;br/&gt;Addressing these demands will require MSn analyses of
mixtures of complex&lt;br/&gt;molecules and a major limitation of present
instruments is the loss of&lt;br/&gt;sensitivity in such MSn analyses. Ions are
lost by deliberate ejection&lt;br/&gt;during the isolation of a specific
component and by incidental and unwanted&lt;br/&gt;losses through dynamical
instability during the instrumental execution of&lt;br/&gt;MSn steps. The
objective of the research is to develop a new technology for&lt;br/&gt;MSn
analyses that will eliminate or substantially reduce these
losses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer simulations of ion motion in radio
frequency ion traps of a novel&lt;br/&gt;geometry have suggested that it is
possible to couple these devices and use&lt;br/&gt;the array of coupled traps as
a new type of MSn instrument. A prototype mass&lt;br/&gt;spectrometer consisting
of a coupled series of ion traps mated to an&lt;br/&gt;orthogonal time-of-flight
mass spectrometer will be built. The mass&lt;br/&gt;selective transfer of ions
between trapping regions and characterizing ion&lt;br/&gt;dissociation within
the traps are the immediate experimental
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental analysis of the prototype combined
with computational&lt;br/&gt;simulations will be used to direct future
development of this class of mass&lt;br/&gt;spectrometers as analytical
instruments. Correlating the observations with&lt;br/&gt;numerical models of the
device will also aid the general technology of&lt;br/&gt;simulating (hence
designing) gas phase ion manipulation instruments.&lt;br/&gt;Substantially
higher performance MSn mass spectrometry will be an
important&lt;br/&gt;component in the technologies that address the analytical
challenge of&lt;br/&gt;genome-era biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;