* 0301423
* Collaborative Research: Kinematic Reductions of Underactuated Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Francesco Bullo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Masayoshi Tomizuka
* 07/31/2004
* USD 159,999.00

One of the most fundamental capabilities for an autonomous or semi-autonomous
robot system is the ability to quickly plan and reliably execute its own
motions. We will study these fundamental problems for underactuated mechanical
systems -- systems with fewer actuators than degrees-of-freedom. Our interest in
controlling this class of systems stems from two considerations. (1) It allows
software control redundancy (as opposed to mechanical or actuation redundancy)
when one or more actuators of a fully actuated system fails. (2) It is possible
to design inexpensive mechanical systems by minimizing expensive mechanical
elements such as actuators and transmissions and replacing them with advanced
control algorithms.

We will explore a novel concept for mechanical control systems called kinematic
reductions. A kinematic reduction of a mechanical system is a first-order
driftless system whose trajectories can be followed by the second-order
mechanical system. Kinematic reductions allow kinematic constraints (such as
obstacles and joint limits) and actuator limits to be handled in a
computationally efficient manner, allowing the possibility of real-time
trajectory generation for underactuated systems. Kinematic reductions encode the
notion of ``preferred'' motion directions for the system, allowing the planned
trajectories to be followed quickly.

To make full use of these properties of mechanical systems for real-time
trajectory generation and control, we will study a number of open issues. These
include understanding when the kinematic reduction allows for closed-form
calculation of motion plans for underactuated systems; adapting efficient
kinematic motion planners from the robotics literature to kinematically
controllable systems; local trajectory optimization; feedback control to
stabilize trajectories of the kinematic reductions; and implementation and
validation of the control strategies on an experimental vehicle. We also plan to
explore the role kinematic reductions will play in developing reduced-complexity
hierarchical hybrid motion models.

