* 0301448
* Applicability of "Full-Flow" Penetration Probes for Characterizing Soft Soil Deposits
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Jason DeJong, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 04/30/2006
* USD 153,454.00

Soft soil sediments, primarily due to their high sensitivity, underconsolidation
and very low strength, present a unique challenge to the geotechnical community
in both their characterization and use as an engineering material. Conventional
drilling and in situ testing methods do not quantify soft sediments at a level
of accuracy and reliability now required for many geotechnical projects. While
performance modifications can be made, these in situ devices are restricted by
inherent characteristics of their test procedure and/or geometric design that
cannot be overcome through minor improvements. The insufficiency of these
methods is compounded by steady increases in the quantity and complexity of on-
shore, near-shore, and off-shore soft sediment applications such as tunnels,
bridges, wind turbines, submarine slope stability, buried pipelines, and oil and
gas platforms. This project is focused on a unique and important opportunity to
validate the ability of "full-flow" penetrometers to characterize soft soil
deposits through leveraging the resources of five existing highly characterized
international test sites. "Full-flow" penetrometers provide a measure of the
pressure differential necessary to induce soil flow around a symmetric geometric
probe. In principal, the penetrometers are akin to a viscosity measurement as
they induce plastic flow of the soil around a geometric probe during
penetration. This unique flow measurement is free from the correction factors
that limit the accuracy of state-of-practice devices and therefore have strong
potential in the applications mentioned above. To date, three types of "full-
flow" penetrometers have been evaluated (T-bar, ball, and plate) though
analytical, numerical, laboratory, and centrifuge investigations. From these
analyses, "full-flow" penetrometers demonstrate potential to obtain profiles of
the undrained shear strength (su) and the remolded shear strength (su-remolded)
respectively, which in turn provide an in situ estimate of sensitivity (St).
Through performing "twitch" tests, a series of consecutive short penetrations
where the penetration rate is sequentially halved, an in situ estimate of the
coefficient of consolidation (cv) may be obtained. "Full-flow" penetrometers
will be validated at full-scale through an extensive field investigation at five
highly characterized test sites, three in North America, one in Norway, and one
in Australia, in a cost-effective manner. The field testing program at each site
will consist of performing a minimum of 13 soundings, selected excavation of the
penetrometers to verify flow patterns, and limited sampling for validation of
the applicability of existing data. This will culminate in the
validation/development of interpretation methods and procedural guidelines for
"full-flow" penetration probes. The broader impacts of this proposal include the
potential to affect worldwide soil engineering practice with respect to site
investigations and the design of geosystems on-shore, near-shore, and off-shore
including the applications listed above. The use of international test sites and
collaboration with international experts on in situ testing ensures broad
applicability and dissemination of the research findings. The results of this
research will be posted on the PIs website, presented at conferences, and
published in journals in a timely manner.