* 0301166
* CAREER: Synthesis and Investigation of Novel Condensed Matter Compounds and Development of a High-Resolution Capacitive Dilatometer
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2005
* John Neumeier, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 01/31/2005
* USD 114,220.00

This CAREER project is focused on transition metal oxides and related materials.
Specimen synthesis, magnetic and electrical measurements, and experiments under
high pressure (pressures to 1.5 GPa) will bridge aspects of the chemistry and
physics of these materials. Investigations of layered nickel oxides, such as the
single-NiO2-layer La2NiO4 compound, are expected to clarify relations between
the nickel oxides and the superconducting cuprates. This work will yield the
first studies of these systems under high pressure. Syntheses and related
experiments are designed to simulate the magnetism of the cuprates. Other
targeted chemical systems include molybdenum oxides and the copper pnictides. An
innovative high-resolution quartz dilatometer, the only device of its kind in
the USA, will be constructed to measure the thermal expansion of sub-millimeter
sized single crystals, thus enabling the investigation of phase transitions. The
education component of the project will involving graduate and undergraduate
students in the research, and will also involve new classroom teaching methods
for introductory physics. The teaching method for introductory physics will
integrate active processes into lectures through demonstrations and single-
concept problems aimed at improving conceptual understanding and creating a more
enthusiastic learning experience.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award will
enable the development of a research project involving transition metal oxides,
and an educational component leading to new classroom teaching methods for
introductory physics. The research focuses on the study of transition metal
oxides which are known to exhibit unusual electrical and magnetic properties.
These materials may ultimately find important technological applications.
Specimen synthesis, magnetic and electrical measurements, and experiments at
high pressure play major roles in the research, which spans areas of chemistry
and physics. A number collaborations with researchers at other institutions
extend the range of experiments that can be performed on the materials. An
innovative high-resolution quartz dilatometer, the only device of its kind in
the USA, will be constructed to measure the length change of tiny specimens as
the temperature is varied. This will allow the detection of important phase
transitions occurring in the materials. Graduate and undergraduate students will
receive valuable training for future careers in the high-technology marketplace.
The teaching method for introductory physics will integrate active processes
into lectures through demonstrations and single-concept problems aimed at
improving conceptual understanding and creating a more enthusiastic learning
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;