* 0301849
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Participatory Decision-Making Venues: A Comparative Analysis of Brazil's Participatory Budgeting
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Brian Wampler, Wampler                 Brian          D
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/2006
* USD 75,476.00

0301849&lt;br/&gt;Wampler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research
Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to
twenty-four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twelve month research fellowship by Dr.
Brian D. Wampler to work with Dr. Pedro R. Jacobi at University of Sao Paulo in
Brazil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participatory policy-making institutions have
proliferated at Brazil's municipal level of government since its transition to
democratic rule in 1985. The best known of these institutions, Participatory
Budgeting (PD), allows citizens to deliberate over the distribution of public
resources. PB has been implemented in over 100 municipalities, which now allows
us to begin to build generalizeable theories about how PB is transforming local
politics. The goal of this project is to undertake the first large-scale
comprehensive study of Participatory Budgeting based on the application of a
survey to government officials and participants in all known cases of PB. The PI
will also conduct an in-depth analysis of eight to twelve representative cases
to ascertain how civil society activists interact with political reformers in
their mutual efforts to promote political change. He will use interviews, budget
analysis and participant surveys. This research will contribute to broader
theoretical debates in political science.&lt;br/&gt;