* 0301266
* Ultrafast Dynamics in Complex Systems: Connecting the Molecular Architecture with the Functional Properties of Nanoscale Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* John Papanikolas, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2007
* USD 387,825.00

&lt;br/&gt;In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. John M. Papanikolas of the University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill will investigate the connection between the
molecular architecture of a material and its functional properties, emphasizing
systems that harvest energy from light and transfer that energy to other
materials. The project targets hierarchical structures that exhibit increasing
structural and functional complexity, namely monomer structures that are
attached to polymer chains to form functional substructures, which in turn are
combined to form larger nanosystems. The focus is on monomers that are Ru(II)
and Os(II) polypyridil complexes. Ultrafast spectroscopy and computer simulation
will be used to study excited state energy transport and charge carrier
conduction. The goal is to identify the photophysical factors that dictate
performance in processes such as solar energy conversion, LED devices, and
optical limiters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to our
understanding of complex systems while promoting teaching, training, and
learning in the context of a research program. Graduate and undergraduate
students will participate in this research. They will acquire technical
knowledge and skills, while at the same time experience the planning and
successful execution of experiments, as well as becoming attuned to the larger
context within which the work is carried out. As part of an outreach program
Prof. Papanikolas will develop science workshops for elementary school students
and include undergraduate students interested in science education in the
development of these workshops.&lt;br/&gt;