* 0301930
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Microstructural and Micromagnetic Origins of Exchange Bias in Ferromagnetic/Antiferromagnetic Thin-Films
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Heather Brown, Brown                   Heather        L
* Fellowship
* John Snyder
* 05/31/2004
* USD 76,006.00

0301930 Brown

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twelve-month research fellowship by Dr. Heather L. Brown to
work with Dr. Amanda K. Petford-Long at the University of Oxford in the United
Kingdom. Co-support is provided by the Math and Physical Sciences Directorate's
Office of Multi-disciplinary Activities.

Exchange biased layers form important components in magnetic multilayer systems
used for advanced data storage and sensing application. Better understanding of
the interactions that can take place between ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic
films will be of interest particularly in regard to the role that the interface
plays. During this fellowship, the PI will learn three new and powerful
techniques that have applicability to a wide range of film systems. The PI will
study films whose bulk properties she has already measured. These three
techniques will provide a good description of the film microstructure, the local
elemental distribution around the interface and the magnetic properties of the
ferromagnetic layer. From these a fuller characterization of the interface
should be possible.

