* 0301886
* International Research Fellowship Program: Genetic Analysis of Arabidopsis Seed Endosperm Development
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Jonathan FitzGerald, FitzGerald              Jonathan       N
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/2007
* USD 98,173.00

0301886&lt;br/&gt;FitzGerald&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research
Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to
twenty-four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-four month
research fellowship by Dr. Jonathan N. FitzGerald to work with Dr. Frederic
Berger at Ecole Normale Superieure de Lyon in Lyon,
France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In animals, the pattern of the developing embryo is
established by the activity of the Polycomb group (PcG) and Trithorax group
(TxG) chromatin remodeling complexes. In Arabidopsis thaliana, the high
resolution time-lapse 3D confocal microscopy techniques developed in the host
lab enable visualization of PcG action in the developing seed. With this
powerful experimental system the host lab is poised for studying gene regulation
and patterning by this important class of DNA modifying complexes. The PI plans
to isolate and genetically characterize a novel Arabidopsis TxG-like activity,
KRONOS, that has been identified in the host lab. Proposed functional studies of
KRONOS will further our mechanistic understanding of chromatin regulation during
development.&lt;br/&gt;