* 0301129
* RUI:    Combinatorial Fixed Point Theorems, Polytopes, and Fair Division
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Francis Su, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2007
* USD 146,640.00

Abstract for Proposal of Su&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0301129&lt;br/&gt;"RUI:
Combinatorial fixed point theorems, polytopes, and fair
division"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator's prior work has
introduced methods from combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;topology and discrete geometry
to the study of certain "fair division" &lt;br/&gt;questions in mathematical
economics. The current proposal will support&lt;br/&gt;the development of the
mathematics behind these methods and the solution&lt;br/&gt;of several
combinatorial questions that have been motivated from
economic&lt;br/&gt;problems, including: (1) the development of new combinatorial
fixed point&lt;br/&gt;theorems, (2) associated simplicial algorithms, and (3)
the study of&lt;br/&gt;minimal triangulations and minimal simplicial covers of
polytopes. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed work include its
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;application to negotiation support for group
decision making, and the&lt;br/&gt;active participation and training of
undergraduates in the
proposed&lt;br/&gt;research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Informally speaking, a "fair
division" problem is concerned with finding&lt;br/&gt;methods for dividing a set
of goods among players in such a way that&lt;br/&gt;everyone can be satisfied
according to some notion of fairness. This&lt;br/&gt;topic is of interest to
economists, political scientists, and game&lt;br/&gt;theorists, and it often
motivates interesting mathematical questions. &lt;br/&gt;The set of possible
solutions in such problems is often a polyhedron of&lt;br/&gt;high dimension (a
polytope), and one can usually find a solution by&lt;br/&gt;breaking the
polytope into many pieces (tetrahedra), and walking around&lt;br/&gt;the
polytope in a way that is guided by player preferences. Thus
the&lt;br/&gt;mathematics of how polytopes can be built up from its tetrahedral
building&lt;br/&gt;blocks using ideas from three areas (combinatorics, topology,
and discrete&lt;br/&gt;geometry) will have direct application to important
problems in the social&lt;br/&gt;sciences involving human strategy and decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being jointly funded by the Division
of Mathematical Sciences and the Directorate of Social, Behavioral, and Economic
Science as part of the Mathematics Sciences Priority Area.&lt;br/&gt;