* 0301231
* Controlled Environment Facilities for Examination of the Effects of Climate Change and Human Land Use on Terrestrial and Aquatic Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Charles Hopkinson, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 240,000.00

This award supports the acquisition of instrumentation to be part of controlled
environment facilities at the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL), to support
research and education on the effects of climate change and human land use on
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. The new facilities will contain controlled
environment chambers for experiments that examine the effects of environmental
variables such as temperature, light and CO2 on the cycling of key elements such
as C, N, and P, trace gas exchange with the atmosphere and the movements of
dissolved and particulate carbon and nutrients. One pair of plant growth
chambers will be capable of maintaining below-freezing temperatures under high
light intensities, which are particularly important for examining climate
changes that extend the growing season in the spring and fall, and in the Arctic
at any time of year. A second pair of growth chambers will be optimized for
microbial culture and soil incubation work. Both pairs of chambers will usable
for experimentation on aquatic soils and sediments, and on aquatic and
terrestrial ecosystem &lt;br/&gt;microcosms. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These
facilities will be shared across a large number of multi-investigator research
&lt;br/&gt;projects based at the MBL. They will benefit research programs on
climate change and human land use, including research at three Long Term
Ecological Research Sites (Arctic Tundra, Plum Island Sound, and Harvard Forest)
and a growing number of projects that examine microbial functioning that cut
across research programs at the MBL. The principal impact of the new facilities
will be to allow well-controlled experimentation on individual ecosystem
processes and ecosystem components, in conjunction with intensive field studies
and field experiments of the same processes and components.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The new facilities will also have a broader impact through their use
by the Ecosystems &lt;br/&gt;Center's educational program, which emphasizes
.project based. research by students as part of the Center's Semester in
Environmental Science program, a summer Research Experience for Undergraduates
program, and a hands-on science writers program. The facilities will represent a
significant addition to the Marine Biological Laboratory's infrastructure for
meeting its long-term mission of research combined with intensive, advanced
"hands-on" education.&lt;br/&gt;