* 0301108
* Collaborative Research: Resource and Data Management for Virtualized End-resources in Computational Grids
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Renato Figueiredo, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 523,716.00

This is a Collaborative Proposal between Northwestern University and University
of Florida which addresses the key research challenges associated with
management of dynamic Virtual Machines (VM) and interfacing these mechanisms
with existing grid middleware techniques. The project will develop novel
solutions that will address - resource management for distributed virtualized
end-resources that can be created dynamically, - image management for the on-
demand transfer of data representing the entire state to create a dynamic VM
instance, and - data management for the on-demand transfer of user and
application data between decoupled compute and data servers on the grid. The
proposed approach will lead to middleware solutions that will form an
information processing foundation for grid computing. The software generated in
this project will be sued to implement the next generation of network computing
hubs currently being used to support simulation needs in nanotechnology,
electronics CAD, computer architecture and parallel programming.

The project addresses key research challenges to allow the management of dynamic
instances of virtual machine middleware and will lead to solutions that will
form an information processing foundation for grid computing on virtualized end-
resources. In particular, the software generated in this project will be used to
implement the next generation of network computing hubs currently being used to
support simulation needs in nanotechnology, electronics CAD, computer
architecture and parallel programming.