* 0301037
* Collaborative Research: Mercury Cycling in Soils: Dynamic Sources for Aquatic Environments
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Mark Hines, University of Massachusetts Lowell Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Pilar M. Lopez
* 09/30/2004
* USD 42,646.00

Hines 9975407 The biogeochemistry of mercury in aquatic systems has received
considerable attention because of the toxicity and biomagnification of
methylmercury. However, much of the methylmercury entering water bodies is
derived from soils. This program will utilize a multidisciplinary approach to
investigate factors controlling mercury methylation in soils and its transport
into aquatic systems using the Carson River, Nevada as the test site. Field and
laboratory investigations will include analysis of mercury speciation,
measurements of methylation, demethylation, and reduction of mercury, the
distribution and expression of bacterial genes responsible for mercury
transformations, and application of a mercury biosensor for investigating
mercury bioavailability. Manipulative experiments will be conducted to determine
effects of wetting and drying cycles and oxygen availability on pathways of
mercury cycling. The biogeochemical/molecular results will be used to greatly
improve a mercury transport model, which will be tested empirically during low
and high flow conditions. The results will delineate controls on net
methylmercury formation and eventual transport in a contaminated site, and will
be useful for understanding the role of soils in controlling methylmercury
pollution in general.

This proposal was submitted in response to the Environmental Geochemistry and
Biogeochemistry solicitation NSF 99-9, and is being funded jointly by the
Divisions of Chemistry, Earth Sciences, Ocean Sciences, and MPS Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities.