* 0301395
* Punching Shear Upgrade of Reinforced Concrete Flat Plates
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Michael Kreger, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 04/30/2007
* USD 231,605.00

Abstract for: Punching Shear Upgrade of Reinforced Concrete Flat Plates-
&lt;br/&gt;CMS proposal 0301395&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Oguzhan Bayrak, UT-
Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing reinforced concrete slab-column
connections may require strengthening to prevent catastrophic punching shear
failure and/or to improve the ductility of connections. Change of the intended
use of the structure and load increases due to changing function, modification
of the structural system due to openings cut through slabs, partial loss of the
concrete contribution to shear strength due to cracking, spalling, and
delamination of the cover concrete due to corrosion of reinforcing bars and/or
concrete deterioration due to alkali silica reaction and delayed ettringite
formation, compliance with the current building code, and compensation for
design errors or construction deficiencies are some of the reasons that might
necessitate strengthening of slab-column connections to prevent punching shear
failures. In addition to the aforementioned reasons, the need to upgrade such
slabs in earthquake-prone regions for strength and ductility is also clear.
Examples of punching shear failures have been observed following the 1964 Alaska
earthquake, the 1985 Mexico City earthquake, the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake,
and the 1994 Northridge earthquake. Finally, in the wake of recent terrorist
activities, the need to strengthen various reinforced concrete buildings is also
obvious. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research is to
experimentally and analytically investigate the behavior of reinforced concrete
flat plates strengthened with fiber reinforced polymers to enhance punching
shear strength. The efficiency of various repair techniques in which fiber
reinforced polymers are used in a new and innovative manner will be
investigated. Design guidelines and analytical procedures will be developed
based on the experimental findings of the research program. It is well
established that the use of stud rail systems in new construction helps increase
the punching shear strength and the response to dynamic loads. However, no
established scheme for increasing punching shear strength has been reported in
the literature. Flexibility of fiber reinforced polymers during the application
process makes them very suitable for the purpose of establishing .external
stirrups through the holes drilled in reinforced concrete &lt;br/&gt;flat
plates. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to investigate the feasibility of the
proposed technique, pilot tests were conducted by one of the PIs. Reinforced
concrete slabs tested during this study were scaled laboratory models of typical
two-way flat-plate construction. During the pilot tests it was observed that the
failure surface shifted away from the loading plate in all specimens
strengthened by the proposed technique, indicating the effectiveness of the
method. Examination of the load-deformation responses of the specimens indicated
that punching shear strength of a strengthened specimen increased as much as 50
%, relative to the control specimen, using one of the proposed repair schemes.
For the specimens tested, the punching shear strength could &lt;br/&gt;have been
increased further if more transverse reinforcement had been used in an efficient
configuration. Preliminary analyses results suggest that size of the
strengthened zone and exact location of vertical FRP strands influence strength,
ductility and stress flow pattern in strengthened reinforced concrete flat
plates. In light of the results from the pilot test series and preliminary
analyses, the PIs propose to conduct an extensive experimental and analytical
program to investigate the efficiency as well as the limitations of the proposed
upgrade technique. Monotonic and reversed cyclic tests will be conducted on
twenty-four full-scale test specimens to investigate punching shear behavior of
strengthened flat plates. Behavior of the test specimens will be investigated
analytically to identify the most appropriate methods of analysis. Nonlinear
analysis techniques will be developed to capture the behavior more accurately,
should the &lt;br/&gt;existing analysis techniques and/or tools be deemed
inadequate. Analytical models will likely evolve over the course of the study as
additional test data become available. As models become more refined, they will
be more useful for aiding in the design of future strengthened specimens.
&lt;br/&gt;