* 0301935
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Impact of Bushmeat Hunting on Mammal Populations and Communities
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Justin Brashares, Brashares               Justin         S
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/2005
* USD 158,032.00

0301935 Brashares

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Justin S.
Brashares to work with Dr. Andrew Balmford at Cambridge University's
Conservation Biology Group (CBG) and with Mr. Moses Sam at the Ghana Wildlife
Division.

Massive over-hunting of wildlife for meat throughout the developing world is
causing local extinctions of hundreds of species of large mammals. Identifying
the sustainability and long-term effects of this bushmeat harvest, and the role
bushmeat plays in human food security are priorities for biodiversity
conservation. This project will describe long-term trends in large mammal
populations and investigate the influence of biogeographic, ecological and
socio-economic factors on rates of population and community decline of wildlife
in Ghana, West Africa. The work makes use of Ghana's 31 year wildlife monitoring
program and will provide desperately needed information on rates of decline for
41 mammal species, links between wildlife declines and characteristics of
reserves and human settlement, relationships between availability of alternate
sources of protein for humans and large mammal declines, and top-down and
bottom-up effects of local extinction of species. Results of the research will
build realistic models of the effects of bushmeat hunting on wildlife
populations and communities. These models will then be applied to devise and
implement conservation and monitoring strategies in the many areas of Africa
where the impact and scale of bushmeat harvests remain poorly documented.