* 0301730
* Formalizing Construction Sequencing Constraints for Rapid Generation of Schedule Alternatives
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Martin Fischer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Edward John Jaselskis
* 07/31/2006
* USD 179,658.00

Abstract: Construction planners typically rely on CPM (Critical Path Method)
based schedules to schedule and coordinate the work of the multiple disciplines
on a project. During the course of a project, planners frequently need to modify
activity sequences to meet changing demands. In particular, planners need to
coordinate multiple trades often working in limited workspaces to ensure that
intermediate milestones are met and that components are installed in a timely
manner to maximize the workflow of follow-on work. To determine an appropriate
sequence of activities for trades to work, planners need to develop and evaluate
different sequencing alternatives. When developing sequencing alternatives,
planners need to determine the physical or technical impact or "role" an
activity has on following activities. They also need to determine which
activities may or may not be delayed. Distinguishing the role and "status"
(i.e., whether an activity may be delayed) of activities in turn requires
planners to understand the rationale and flexibility of constraints between
activities. However, the current CPM framework only represents the temporal
aspect of constraints using precedence relationships (e.g., FS, SS etc.). In
addition, existing schedule acceleration techniques such as time-cost trade-off
assume that activity sequences are fixed and hence are not applicable for
developing sequencing alternatives. Consequently, identifying and developing
sequencing alternatives using CPM-based schedules is currently an error-prone
and time-consuming process. The anticipated contributions of this research focus
on formalizing the rationale and flexibility of constraints in CPM schedules and
on leveraging such a formalized representation to determine the role and status
of activities. This work should enable construction planners to identify and
develop sequencing alternatives correctly and rapidly, which in turn should help
reduce the time and cost to complete constructed facility.