* 0302799
* ATE Centers -- Environmental Resource Center
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Rudi Luyendijk, Hazardous materials Training and Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,455,367.00

Through this project the Advanced Technology Environmental Education
Center&lt;br/&gt;(ATEEC) is significantly expanding and enhancing its national
Environmental Resource Center capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The project is identifying environmental education information,
materials, research, expertise and support services of value to educators,
workers, and the general public; and to organizing and presenting this body of
knowledge and services in formats that are stimulating and accessible to a broad
array of user groups. The project builds upon ATEEC's eight years of experience
and success in serving as a national NSF Center of
Excellence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact &lt;br/&gt;The Environmental
Resource Center is having broad impact on a wide diversity of user groups. These
include: high school and community college students in environmental courses;
community college students across the spectrum of academic and technical
programs; workers engaged in retraining or skill upgrade; military and security
personnel; community and municipal leaders including Tribal colleges; the
environmental research establishment; the general public; and international
environmental educators. The Environmental Resource Center supports and promotes
quality teaching and learning by: &lt;br/&gt;(a) strengthening the Center's many
communication vehicles; &lt;br/&gt;(b) closely linking NSF-ATE environmental
projects to the Center;&lt;br/&gt;(c) initiating efforts to extend environmental
education across the curriculum; &lt;br/&gt;(d) focusing upon ease of access and
providing information electronically; &lt;br/&gt;(e) capturing emerging
environmental research and making it available to students and all of society,
&lt;br/&gt;(f) developing a segmented marketing approach to attract
underrepresented students to the field; &lt;br/&gt;(g) providing a comprehensive
mentoring program to environmental programs at colleges across the nation;
&lt;br/&gt;(h) providing stimulating professional development opportunities;
and, &lt;br/&gt;(i) expanding access to on-line environmental courses and
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ATEEC continues its focus on inclusiveness with
special outreach activities to&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups through the
composition of advisory committees and the selection of people to highlight in
marketing materials as well as by ensuring a diversity of attendees at
professional development events and special activities with underrepresented
groups. This project also continues to focus upon fostering the integration of
emerging research and education. Much of the strength of the Environmental
Resource Center derive from the manner in which ATEEC leverages its capabilities
and expertise with the capabilities and expertise of its many collaborators and
partners. The Environmental Resource Center is advancing environmental knowledge
and understanding in high schools, community colleges, the workforce, and
society at-large.&lt;br/&gt;