* 0302470
* Hydrogen-induced Material Degradation:  Brittle Decohesion Versus Plastic Flow Localization
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2003,12/31/2008
* Robert Ritchie, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 12/31/2008
* USD 604,999.00

&lt;br/&gt;The prime objective of the proposed work is to discern in a
quantitative fashion the fundamental mechanisms responsible for the hydrogen-
induced degradation of both model and industrially-relevant engineering
materials using a fully integrated, combined applied mechanics/modeling and
materials science/microstructural approach. The approach combines quantitative,
large-scale numerical simulations with novel experimentation and in situ imaging
to identify the salient physical micro-mechanisms and characteristic
microstructural size-scales involved in the local fracture events. Since such
fracture events are stochastic, the analysis is statistical in nature,
formulated for real microstructures and based on the operative physical micro-
mechanisms. The principal outcome of this work will be the establishment of
physically based engineering criteria for hydrogen-related fracture in both
ductile and brittle metallic materials, where the primary mechanisms of hydrogen
degradation, specifically decohesion and shear localization, are active. Because
of their industrial significance, these materials include low and ultrahigh
strength steels and a Ni3Al high-temperature intermetallic. A second outcome
will be the training of students in materials science, but in the context of
mechanics-based analyses of material behavior. Graduate and undergraduate
students who work on the project are exposed to both the materials science and
applied mechanics cultures; thereby, they will acquire an essential capability
required of modern researchers in fracture. Since the study focuses largely on
structural materials of real engineering significance, students are being
educated in an interdisciplinary way on the mainstay of structural
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Meeting these goals provides answers to
numerous pressing scientific issues associated with hydrogen embrittlement.
These include (i) the relative significance of brittle decohesion versus
hydrogen-assisted shear localization mechanisms, (ii) the process by which
hydrogen enhanced localized plasticity promotes localized fracture, (iii) the
relevance of equilibrium vs. non-equilibrium decohesion theories, and (iv) the
role, and potential synergism, of solute impurities in varying material
microstructures. The work also has a significant technological impact on the
general operation of materials under severe environmental conditions. Moreover,
it represents an enabling technology for the successful application of advanced
materials such as intermetallics in any environment, since so little is known
about the criteria for environmentally assisted local fracture events in these
materials. &lt;br/&gt;