* 0302192
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: NGOs and Political Participation in Monterrey, Mexico
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* April Brayfield, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 04/30/2004
* USD 7,330.00

How do non-governmental organizations (NGOs) facilitate and expand citizen
participation in the political process in Mexico? What role do these
organizations play in the mediation between citizens and the local and state
level government? To answer these questions, the proposed research will examine
the role of NGOs in political participation in one Mexican city in a country
whose political and economic terrain has undergone dramatic changes in the past
two decades. The proposed research seeks to elucidate three major themes. First,
the project investigates the strategies and tactics of the NGOs, which focuses
on the severity, frequency, and range of collective action. Second, I explore
the types of demands of the organizations, to whom do they make the demands, and
what social groups do they claim to represent. Third, I analyze the differences
of NGOs based upon the identity of the organization, such as class, gender, and
race/ethnicity. This project is a field case study approach with multiple data
collection strategies. Using a single embedded case study design, I examine the
power relationships in how NGOs represent citizens' interests as well as how
NGOs strategize their relationship with the State and other local institutions
of power. I will conduct in-depth, tape-recorded interviews with the directors
and members of the NGOs. Interviews will be supplemented by observations of NGO
activities, such as meetings and demonstrations as well as archival research.
This research is timely because of the recent political changes in Mexico and
important because of the unique setting of Monterrey, which is a stronghold of
an opposition party and a city that many scholars have tended to ignore. This
research will make a contribution to sociology in several ways: In an era of
political restructuring toward democracy and economic restructuring toward
Neoliberalism and market economies, understanding NGO mobilization is important
to build our knowledge of how these organizations provide access for citizens to
the political process. This project helps to promote learning, teaching, and
research across national boundaries and encourages cross-cultural exchanges
between U.S. and Mexican scholars.