* 0302469
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Regional Climate Model - Geographic Information System Approach To Wind Power Climatology
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Jeffrey Andresen, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 09/30/2004
* USD 5,903.00

Advances in wind turbine technology and reassessments of wind power potential
have resulted in a rapid buildup of wind energy capacity in the United States
and worldwide. Already several nations have mandated that a substantial portion
of their electricity needs be generated by wind turbines. Numerous wind farm
projects are under development in regions where the wind power resource has
traditionally been considered too low for economical extraction. Wind energy is
now, in many areas, less costly than conventional energy production methods. In
choosing wind farm sites, planners rely on a regional wind climatology (averages
and standard deviations) derived from the statistical interpolation of surface
wind speed observations that are not at the height of the turbine, are sparsely
distributed, and may be of questionable quality. Such interpolations may contain
a great deal of error when no nearby observations exist, especially over water
or complex terrain (often some of the windiest regions). As a result, wind farm
siting methodologies are largely post hoc and the best sites climatologically
may be overlooked. An alternative to traditional statistical methods is the use
of a regional numerical climate model (RCM) to provide estimates of wind speeds
at a fine temporal (hourly) and spatial (&lt; 12 km) scale, and do so at the
height of the wind turbine, rather than the surface. Thus, the primary goal of
this dissertation research is to develop a regional climate model (RCM) based
geographic information system (GIS) for the purposes of wind farm siting. The
key question this research will address is whether the RCM/GIS approach
represents a significant improvement over currently employed statistical
techniques (e.g., spatial interpolation, measure-correlate-predict [MCP],
probability density functions [pdf]). The research will make use of the wind
speed output of the MM5 RCM operated by the U.S. Forest Service for fire weather
analysis over the Great Lakes region of North America. The model output will be
validated against wind speed observation records at several surface stations
throughout the region. It is expected that the RCM will provide a significant
improvement over traditional statistical methods in the fine-resolution
estimation of the regional wind resource. Upon validation, the output of the RCM
will be included in a GIS and coupled with additional wind farm siting criteria
to create a siting tool that will identify the optimal wind farm sites in a
region based upon the considerations determined by a wind farm developer. After
the initial model development and validation, this grant facilitates the
evaluation of the RCM/GIS model over a different region (the UK) where wind
energy development also is growing rapidly and a great deal of wind climate
research already has been conducted. This evaluation, to take place at the
University of East Anglia will also provide an opportunity for leading European
wind energy researchers to provide input on the suitability of such a model to
varied and diverse regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research endeavors to
provide a new method for the optimal siting of wind farms such that they can
operate most economically and with a minimum of disruption to society and the
environment. It also represents a new and practical use for a RCM outside the
realm of atmospheric science. Such research would highlight the strengths and
limitations of utilizing regional climate models in practical applications.
Additionally, through the use of a regional climate model the wind resource of
regions where surface wind observations are sparse or lacking may be effectively
estimated. Such ability would facilitate the development of wind energy projects
in offshore locations as well as in less developed countries that would greatly
benefit from the development of an independent energy infrastructure.
Furthermore, as a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;