* 0302393
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Agroecology in Action: Nature, Networks, Knowledge and Risk in California Agriculture
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2003,10/31/2005
* Margaret FitzSimmons, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2005
* USD 8,810.00

Geographers have long studied change in agricultural regions, viewing shifts in
social relations, the application of technology, and nature's agency as the
primary forces driving change. Over the past three decades, the cumulate weight
of environmental regulations has begun to affect U.S. agricultural practices,
especially in California, where the public is increasingly concerned with water
quality and worker safety issues. During the past ten years, new agricultural
partnerships in California have sought to voluntarily replace toxic chemicals
with agro-ecological practices, creating networks of growers, agricultural
scientists, and private agricultural consultants. This project investigates the
impacts and strategies of these partnerships using Actor-Network Theory (ANT),
which was developed to trace the impact of scientific enterprises on society.
Geographers have returned to the topic of agriculture as a fertile subject for
exploring nature-culture relations using ANT methodologies. This research
project will answer the following question: how do California's agricultural
partnerships (a) enroll nature, (b) build networks of knowledge, (c) influence
the pest management decision making process, and (d) frame risk differently than
does conventional agriculture? The project consists of two phases: one extensive
and the other intensive. The first undertakes comparative analysis of all 32
partnerships; the second follows this with in-depth case studies in the three
commodities with the longest-running partnerships. The primary sources of
information for this are derived from fieldwork: interviews with project leaders
and members; participant observation with growers, scientists, and private
consultants; focus groups among growers and PCAs. This will be supplemented with
quantitative data from project reports and analysis of pesticide use. Case
studies in almonds, wine grapes, and prunes will explore how key actors have
influenced the pest management decision-making process, enrolling beneficial
organisms and human participants to change regional agricultural practices in
California.

This research project draws from applied questions that emerge from discussions
with agricultural professionals and agency personnel. It will contribute to a
broader investigation of the role of agricultural science in society, making use
of Actor-Network Theory to understand the social dynamics of reframing
technological choice in agricultural regions. At the same time, this research
will identify the key elements of these partnerships, and how they influence
their various forms of success. The results will be made available to the public
agencies and commodity organizations that have invested roughly $15 million in
California's agricultural partnerships over the past decade. These partnerships
are the primary strategy that public officials are using to reduce agrochemical
use in California by promoting ecologically-based farming practices. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.

