* 0302927
* Viticulture and Enology Science and Technology Alliance
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Murli Dharmadhikari, Missouri State University
* Continuing grant
* David A. Hanych
* 10/31/2007
* USD 756,343.00

The Viticulture (grape growing) and Enology (winemaking) Science and Technology
Alliance (VESTA), a partnership of two-year colleges, universities,
vineyards/wineries, and state agricultural agencies is encouraging both
traditional and non-traditional students from diverse backgrounds to enter post-
secondary education in a rigorous program of study leading to a degree in
viticulture and enology. The VESTA program is being designed and implemented as
a two-year AAS degree program so that students are fully trained to impact the
viticulture and enology industry throughout the Midwest. VESTA is developing and
delivering on-line advanced science and technology courses related to the
viticulture and enology industry, reinforced by the practical application of
laboratory and field experiences in vineyards and wineries. The VESTA
partnership includes academics skilled in on-line course development and content
and industry partners eager to place student interns, hire students as workers,
and encourage their workers to attend college with financial support. Current
industry workers, including many from underrepresented ethnic groups, are being
encouraged and supported to participate in the VESTA program. VESTA envisions
five broad outcomes: 1) a program of study for two-year colleges focusing on the
education and training needs of the viticulture and enology industry, 2) the
improved proficiency of traditional and non-traditional students enrolled at
partnership colleges as programs incorporate industry skill standards,
competency-based curriculum, on-line courses, field/laboratory experiences, and
common skills assessment; 3) the improved knowledge and skills of secondary and
post-secondary faculty through workshops and field experiences; 4) increasing
numbers of traditional and non-traditional students enrolling in VESTA programs
with increasing numbers of student placements in the field; and 5) VESTA
achieving self-sufficiency and expansion to other community colleges. A
partnership web site is the clearinghouse for VESTA with directories of
participating colleges, program descriptions, curriculum models, jobs,
internships, field experiences, and links to state agencies, vineyards and
wineries. The VESTA model is being presented at academic and industry
professional conferences.