* 0302832
* Integrating Low-Cost Virtual Reality into Design and Technical Graphics Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Adrian Sannier, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen F. Zuga
* 08/31/2007
* USD 860,450.00

The proposed project will introduce low-cost virtual reality technology into
design and technical graphics classrooms and laboratories, as well as develop
instructional materials to enhance course delivery. Changing market needs and
advances in technology, the focus of CAD technology education, and the shift
from drafting to design, problem-solving, presentation, and communication points
to the critical need to integrate virtual reality tools into the design and
technical graphics curricula. The primary audiences for this project are
students and faculty at all levels of design and technical graphics education
and CAD technologists in industry. This project reaches down to inspire the
interests of high school students by providing outreach days and virtual reality
experiences for students. The project, in collaboration with Community College
partners, will promote the advancement of their students and engage University
students in enhanced learning opportunities that will better prepare them to
contribute to the work force. The resulting instructional materials will be made
available to graphics and design educators at other institutions through a
project web site and by distributing a CD-ROM. Results will be disseminated
through national conference presentations and publications. In addition, fifty
community colleges will be selected and invited to use the instructional
materials developed.