* 0302425
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Spatial Dynamics of Internet Development in China
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Eric Sheppard, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 11/30/2004
* USD 9,650.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement project will investigate the
geographical organization of the Internet industry and unravel the driving
forces underlying such patterns, within different regions and at different
scales. The rapid diffusion of Internet and related digital technology is
restructuring the landscape of economic activities and redefining the meaning of
distance, location and scale, thus posing great challenges to theories of
traditional economic geography. The purpose of this research is: (1) to
determine the spatial distribution of China's Internet industry; (2) to examine
how China's major Internet clusters were produced and are sustained, at the
interface of contemporary globalization and localization processes; and (3) to
demonstrate in what ways the business operations of China's Internet firms are
shaped by China's transitional economic and institutional environment. The
research utilizes a combination of quantitative and qualitative research
methods, in a three stage research design: aggregate analysis and mapping of the
spatial patterns of China's Internet industries; a survey of Internet firms to
examine location choices, business networks and inter-organizational linkages;
and in-depth interviews with business managers and state officials to reveal
qualitative aspects of geographical decision-making and the role of the state.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research findings will be significant in a number of
ways. First, this project will make important contributions to our understanding
of the emergence and growth of a rapidly growing economic sector in one of the
most important global economies, China. Second, the research addresses
theoretical questions of scale, geographically-based networks, local and non-
local linkages, socio-institutional contexts, and the role of the state,
contributing to economic geographical conceptualizations of uneven spatial
development in the new information economy and its broader impacts on urban and
regional development. Third, this research will create a large database of
locational and attribute information for China's Internet firms, of use for
future research and teaching. Finally, the empirical material generated from
this research through a combination of qualitative and quantitative approaches
will be of interest not only to the academic geography community, but also to
economists, government agencies and NGOs who are charting China's economic
transformation and development of an information economy. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;