* 0302236
* Supporting the Conference Series: NSF/CBMS Regional Research Conferences in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Ronald Rosier, Conference Board Math Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 09/30/2006
* USD 213,601.00

The Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences (CBMS) promotes, administers,
and provides support services for the conference series known as the NSF/CBMS
Regional Research Conferences in Mathematics. Each year approximately six
conferences will be held. These conferences are intended to stimulate interest
and activity in mathematical research. Each five day conference features a
distinguished lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic of important current
research in one sharply focused area of the mathematical sciences. Support for
about 30 participants is provided and the conference organizer invites both
established researchers and interested newcomers, including postdoctoral fellows
and graduate students, to attend. The lecturer subsequently prepares an
expository monograph based upon the lectures and this is published as a part of
a regional conference series. Depending upon the conference topic, the monograph
is published by the American Mathematical Society, the Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the American Statistical Association and
the Institute of Mathematical Statistics. These conferences have been an ongoing
cooperative project administered by CBMS and supported by NSF for the last 34
years. A complete listing of all past conferences and their resulting monographs
is given on the CBMS website www.cbmsweb.org.