* 0302617
* NSF-Europe: Correlated Phenomena in Atomically Arranged Transition Metal Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Bogdan Dabrowski, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 600,000.00

Collaborative materials research will be undertaken on strongly correlated bulk
and single-crystal transition metal perovskite-related compounds with atomically
arranged local structure. New compounds with tailored characteristics will be
designed and an in-depth investigation of their properties and property
correlations will be performed to demonstrate the new materials' potential
applications. During this process, it is expected that novel collective
phenomena and ground states, quite different from conventional superconductors,
magnets, and dielectrics will be discovered in the tailored materials. The
research will focus on developing new synthesis tools, measurement techniques of
structural, physical, and chemical properties over a wide range of length
scales, and the description of these properties in terms of geometrical
constraints, interatomic distances, and ionic coordinations. By expanding
existing European collaborations, and developing new ones, the project will
build on the Laboratory for Materials Design at Northern Illinois University's
extensive experimental capabilities and expertise in crystal chemistry of
complex oxide compounds. Novel layered RAMnMO6-? (R = La, Y, Rare Earth's; A =
Ba, Sr, Ca; M = Transition Metals) materials will be explored for enhanced
magnetic and magneto-dielectric properties. A focused effort will explore the
concepts of tolerance factor and the variances of sizes and charges to reliably
describe the thermodynamic stability and prediction of structural and physical
properties of perovskites of Mn, Fe, and Ni and double-perovskites (atomically
Na/Cl-type ordered) of RAMM'O6. These systematic strategies will be used for
developing new manganese-oxide materials with closely matched lattice parameters
and improved magneto-resistive, thermal and mechanical properties. Coordinated
materials research in a broad range of novel, highly overdoped copper-oxide
superconductors will focus on the effects of external fields and pressures on
anisotropic magnetic and transport properties to discern the nature of the
conducting behavior. The Mo and Sr substituted CuBa2YCu2O7-d single-crystals
will be grown, critical superconducting parameters will be measured, and their
properties will be correlated to engineered atomic order to conclusively
demonstrate the compounds' potential for application as high current conductors
and sources of high magnetic field.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This international
collaboration entails the systematic exploration of the effects of composition,
temperature, and oxygen content on thermodynamic stability and physical
properties of atomically ordered transition metal perovskites. It will produce
new insights into many-body physics of transition metal oxides, electron
correlations, and the occurrence of novel ground states; it will also provide
new tools for tailoring the production of desired properties. The project's
impact derives from the increased understanding it will promote of the
organization and control of matter on the atomic scale that will lead to future
application of perovskites in all-oxide multifunctional
magnetic/dielectric/electronic devices. It is expected that improved magneto-
resistive, dielectric, and superconducting materials will result from the
enhanced understanding of the crystal chemistry of perovskites and advancement
of synthesis and characterization tools. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
project is co-funded by the Division of Materials Research and the International
Office (Western Europe and Poland) as a Cooperative Activity in Materials
Research between the NSF and Europe (NSF 02-135). This project is being carried
out in collaboration with the Laboratoire Crismat-ISMRA, Caen, France, Dr. A.
Maignan; University of Cambridge, United Kingdom, Prof. J. Paul Attfield;
Institute of Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland, Dr. A.
Wisniewski; and Institute of Low Temperature and Structural Research, Polish
Academy of Sciences, Wroclaw, Poland, Dr. K. Rogacki.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;