* 0302572
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How World Conferences Matter: Transnational Influences and Organizational Change in Two National Women's Movements
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Theda Skocpol, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 04/30/2005
* USD 6,490.00

This study seeks to understand the mechanisms by which transnational politics
influence national social movement organizations. There is growing consensus
among social scientists that transnational factors play an increasingly
important role in domestic politics, but there is dispute over how they matter
and how much they matter. This study helps illuminate the questions by
specifying how the United Nations sponsored Fourth World Conference on Women
affected women's movement organizations in China, India, and other Asian
countries. The emphasis of this research project is to ground the understanding
of transnational influences in national contexts and organizational practices.
Existing studies look to domestic factors when accounting for organizational
change. Those that look at transnational factors focus almost exclusively on the
effect on state action and policy. The study thus fills the theoretical gap in
existing literature by integrating transnational influences into theories of
organizational change. The research design calls for in-depth comparison of the
Chinese and the Indian case in order to generate initial hypotheses about how
transnational influences work. Comparison with a broader set of country cases
will then be employed to evaluate and refine the hypotheses. The project
utilizes in-depth interviews, document research, and limited participant
observation. The world conference on women is only one among many conferences
sponsored by international organizations to tackle a wide range of social
problems such as the environment, children's rights, human rights, social
development, and racial discrimination. Project results will contribute to
social scientists, policymakers, and women's rights groups by illuminating the
factors that make the world conferences more relevant to women and other
marginalized groups in different societies by providing information about the
effectiveness of various national programs as they are implemented in an
increasingly interconnected transnational, global organizational and legal
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;