* 0302166
* Collaborative Research:    SNEWS:    The SuperNova Neutrino Early Warning System
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Alec Habig, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 05/31/2007
* USD 43,797.00

The Supernova Neutrino Early Warning System (SNEWS) project involves an
international collaboration of researchers representing supernova neutrino
detectors (currently Super-K, SNO, LVD, AMANDA, KamLAND, Borexino and
MiniBooNE). The SNEWS system will be able to provide a completely automated
early warning of a supernova's occurrence to the globe-wide astronomical
community by exploiting the prompt neutrino signals that arrive several hours
before the shock breakout that produces the first optical signs of the
explosion. The warning will be based on a coincidence of neutrino signals from
detectors around the world. It may also be able to provide a trigger for other
detectors, such as LIGO. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative proposal is
from the MIT and University of Minnesota-Duluth groups and requests funding for
a program to build on the existing SNEWS inter-experiment network, to enhance
its robustness and to increase the confidence of the astronomical community in
this project. In particular, the groups wish to employ personnel to upgrade the
network system, to increase the redundancy of the network by adding servers and
to provide on-call physicists with communication
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the education/outreach area, SNEWS already
involves both graduate and undergraduate students. However, this proposal is
devoted to developing the amateur astronomer community as an integral part of
the early warning system, since it is very likely that the location of a new
supernova will be pinpointed first by an amateur. Specifically, the groups plan
to recruit members of the general public, including both experts and novices in
astronomy.