* 0302523
* Work-Ready Electronics: An Industry-Supported System for Synchronizing Curriculum to the Rapidly Changing Workplace
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Joseph Mattoon, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 04/30/2007
* USD 900,012.00

&lt;br/&gt;Work-Ready Electronics addresses the challenge of keeping the
curriculum used in two-year electronics programs current with the rapidly
changing nature of the industry. The project established a permanent industry
and education working group the Emerging Electronics Curriculum Task Force
(EECTF) to monitor and advise the project on industry advances in electronics.
Under the guidance of that task force, the project is develops, pilot testing,
and disseminating the first 25 modules in a new electronic library of classroom-
ready materials for teaching updated electronics technology. The modules take a
hybrid Web-and CD-ROM-delivered format developed by MATEC under a previous NSF
grant. The intended users of the modules are ultimately faculty who teach in
approximately 1,000 two-year degree programs. During the 36 months of the
project, MATEC is establishing the EECTF, developing 25 modules, field testing
the modules with at least 100 students in three locations, and achieving
adoption of the modules by faculty in 30% of targeted programs. Beyond the grant
period the EECTF will continue to assist MATEC in a continuous updating of the
modules. The modules are an instructional resource that faculty can integrate
with any commercially available textbook. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
intellectual merit of Work-Ready Electronics is that the project addresses a
fundamental challenge facing technician education. That is it attempts to close
gaps that exist between electronics teaching materials and workplace
requirements. MATEC made a preliminary identification of those gaps by 1)
conducting a literature review of the textbooks assigned in 90% of two-year
electronics programs and 2) surveying 10 major electronics companies and
manufacturers. Project leaders have relevant experience in both the electronics
industry and education. MATEC is the NSF's National Center of Excellence for
Education in Semiconductor Manufacturing. Industry partners are the American
Electronics Association, the Technician Performance Improvement Council of
Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International (SEMI), and 10 companies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project attains a number of broader impacts through
the following: 1) Industry's willingness to partner in the project, which
suggests that Work-Ready Electronics addresses industry's need for technicians
whose preparation is better targeted to the workplace; 2) The modernizing of
electronics curriculum at any 2-year college by continuously providing modules
of industry electronic updates; and 3) The pedagogical preparation of STEM
faculty and high school teachers through regional workshops. The project results
will be widely disseminated through the academic and industry networks of the
partners.&lt;br/&gt;