* 0302835
* Establishing an Information Science and Technology Learning Community for Tribal Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Scott Morgan, Sisseton Wahpeton Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 01/31/2007
* USD 710,881.00

A consortium of American Indian tribal colleges is creating an Information
Science and Technology Learning Community (ISTLC). The ISTLC provides a range of
education, training, and information-sharing services to the faculty, students,
and professional IT staff at the participating institutions. The activities of
the ISTLC are:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Strengthening the information science and
technology and STEM programs at each participating college;&lt;br/&gt;(2)
Establishing and maintaining a single community of information science practice
and learning that includes faculty, students and IT staff at all consortium
members;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Developing and disseminating successful practices,
materials and technologies throughout the community of tribal
colleges;&lt;br/&gt;(4) Creating linkages with industry, information/computer
science departments at regional universities.&lt;br/&gt;The ISTLC provides a
national model, making resource-challenged programs stronger through
collaborative program development and delivery. It provides an effective
approach for building coalitions that bring together key stakeholder groups as
members of a single learning organization. The project is a pilot that can be
expanded not only to all 32 Tribal Colleges, but also other community colleges
around the nation, in particular those located in rural areas.&lt;br/&gt;