* 0302603
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Tunica Miracle, Sin and Savior in America's Ethiopia: A Poverty &amp; Social Impact Analysis of Casino Gaming in Tunica, MS
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Amy Glasmeier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2005
* USD 10,600.00

Over the last decade, casino gaming development has been widely adopted in the
US as a means for fostering employment growth and generating tax revenue,
particularly in distressed areas. This trend has received widespread attention
with regard to its overall economic and social effects, yet its impacts on the
well-being of individuals living in persistently poor places remains unknown.
This doctoral dissertation research improvement project questions the extent to
which the benefits of casino development extend to resident poverty populations.
Specifically, the study will assess the character and distributional impacts of
the casino gaming industry on those residing in one of the nation's historically
most impoverished counties, Tunica County (MS), by way of a poverty and social
impact analysis (PSIA) methodology. PSIA represents a multi-faceted, contextual
approach to research in which mixed methods are employed to capture the
complexities of economic, social, cultural, and political relationships in the
manifestation and persistence of poverty. As such, multiple theoretical points
of departure will be taken, in relation to: (1) the economic and political
history of poverty in the Mississippi Delta, (2) the racial, cultural, and
spatial construction of poverty in Tunica County, (3) casino gaming as an
economic growth strategy and the embeddedness of the industry in Mississippi
over the last decade, and (4) the sectoral, fiscal, and distributional impacts
of casino development. In addition, alternative perspectives on the meaning of
poverty and well-being will be considered through individual accounts of living
conditions and casino impacts by the local poverty population. This research
will demonstrate that the analysis of casino gaming impacts at multiple scales,
using a variety of methods for data collection and examination, produces
divergent and contradictory results. Therefore, our understanding of the success
of gaming as an economic growth strategy is dependent on the unit of analysis,
the method or combination of methods applied, and the characteristics of the
place. Further, situating poverty and social impact analysis in the economic and
political geography of the casino development area will detail questionable
politics of class, congruent with the region's history of race relations, as the
primary factor in determining the poverty outcome. Thus, it is argued that the
"miracle" of casino gaming in Tunica County and its measure of effect in
ameliorating poverty is contextually and conceptually driven-the impact of
casino gaming on Tunica County poverty is socially constructed in place as well
as a social construction of place. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral
dissertation research will advance our understanding of the value of casino
gaming as an economic growth strategy by examining the actual economic effects
of an ongoing development activity. It will address the manner in which those
effects impact resident and vulnerable populations, an area of study where many
assumptions and anecdotal evidence exist, but where factual knowledge is
lacking. This research will provide community groups and policy-makers with
insight into the relationships between economic growth and development and their
ability to produce positive outcomes for society as a whole while also targeting
the needs of a specific segment of the population. Such information is essential
in devising more effective development strategies and ways of ensuring that the
benefits are distributed to underprivileged populations in a meaningful way.
Further, PSIA, as defined by the World Bank and piloted around the developing
world, has yet to be given serious consideration in the US case. Therefore, this
study will contribute to scientific research by extending the testing of an
integrated methodology for impact analysis to the poverty context of a developed
nation. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement grant, this award will
also provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;