* 0302401
* The structure of transformation group C*-algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2007
* N Phillips, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 11/30/2007
* USD 140,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Phillips&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator, N.
Christopher Phillips, proposes to follow up on his recent joint work with Qing
Lin on crossed products by minimal diffeomorphisms, and on his recent results on
crossed products by free minimal actions of finitely generated free abelian
groups on the Cantor set. These results, and particularly the methods of proof,
suggest that much stronger theorems should hold. Specifically, consider a
minimal and essentially free action of a countable amenable group on a compact
metric space with finite covering dimension. The ultimate goal is to prove that
the transformation group C*-algebra of such an action is a direct limit, with no
dimension growth, of recursive subhomogeneous C*-algebras. In particular, it
should have stable rank one, real rank zero or one, and cancellation of
projections. While the conjecture as stated is still far from being proved, the
Principal Investigator hopes to make substantial progress by analyzing various
aspects of it in isolation from each other; the idea is to put the pieces
together afterwards. The Principal Investigator also proposes to investigate,
where appropriate, the smooth counterparts of such algebras, to investigate the
isomorphism classification of the resulting C*-algebras, and to investigate
connections with orbit equivalence problems in topological
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A dynamical system consists of a space and a
collection of transformations of this space satisfying suitable mathematical
conditions. As an example, consider the set of possible states of a physical
system and its time evolution: the transformations specify for a given time and
initial state what state the system will be in after that much time has passed.
Another example would be a physical space and its underlying symmetries, such as
the Lorentz group acting on space-time in special relativity. If the relation
between the space and the transformations is simple, the dynamical system can be
studied directly. When this relation is complicated, it is often useful to
introduce additional objects; one natural such object is the transformation
group C*-algebra. An additional reason for studying this algebra is that
sometimes objects of physical interest are more closely related to it than to
the original dynamical system; an example is the Schroedinger operator for an
electron moving in a quasicrystal. The purpose of this project is to understand
the transformation group C*-algebras in cases in which the dynamical system is
complicated, but in which the C*-algebra seems likely to be amenable to
analysis. (This incluse the quasicrystal case.) It also seeks to better
understand the relation between the dynamical system and the C*-algebra, and to
begin the analysis, in appropriate cases, of objects that are related to the
C*-algebra but preserve more information about the original dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;