* 0302134
* Transforming Science and Mathematics Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Valerie Otero, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 04/30/2007
* USD 932,846.00

The University of Colorado at Boulder is attracting highly qualified students
into careers in K-12 math and science education through strategies that
integrate the transformation of undergraduate science and mathematics courses
with the recruitment and training of prospective teachers. Undergraduates who
have an interest in K-12 mathematics and science teaching are offered a Teaching
Fellowship program rich with incentives, including financial support, intensive
contact with faculty, opportunities for undergraduate research in science and
education, employment as learning assistants as part of an undergraduate course
transformation initiative, and K-12 teaching experience. The project pays
special attention to recruiting and retaining minority students. To optimize the
learning opportunities for these students, faculty participants in the project
are developing and evaluating transformed sections of introductory courses in
selected fields of science and mathematics in order to incorporate best
practices in inquiry-based and collaborative learning. Project participants
develop, employ, and assess information technology tools to enhance inquiry-
based and collaborative learning both at the undergraduate and K-12 levels.
These tools include web-based software for content delivery and communication
among students and faculty, simulations of mathematical, physical, and
biological phenomena, and database management tools embedded in the course
structure for formative and summative assessment of student learning and
attitudes. The Teaching Fellows participate in workshops for inservice teachers,
serve as learning assistants in transformed undergraduate courses, help
introduce IT-enhanced instructional modules into grade 6 -12 classrooms, and
assess the effectiveness of the tools. Introductory physics, astronomy,
calculus, and biology courses are targeted for revision to incorporate student-
centered, conceptual learning environments, the use of the learning assistants
as leaders of student learning teams, and the use of technology. The work is
being carried out through a close partnership between faculty of the School of
Education and the College of Arts and Sciences, school districts, and Sun
Microsystems. The goals of the project are to transform introductory
undergraduate mathematics and science classes, to develop an infrastructure to
recruit and support a substantial flow of students who will become leaders in
K-12 mathematics and science education, and to provide a network of support for
in-service teachers. The project expects to graduate 25 to 40 secondary
mathematics and science teachers per year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;