* 0302432
* SGER:  Metabolic Responses to Xenobiotic Chemical Stressors in Microbial Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Catherine Peters, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

0302432 Peters There are numerous examples of engineered and natural systems in
which the functioning of the system relies on a stable biological community of
microorganisms. An excellent example is the activated sludge in an engineered
biological treatment system. Perturbation of such systems by xenobiotic
chemicals may lead to biological stress and subsequent shifts in the structure
and function of the microbial community. Changes manifested at the population
level may include diversion of resources away from growth processes, and
physiological or evolutionary adaptation of the species. Changes at the
community level may include shifts in species diversity, shifts in catabolic
function, and alteration of the overall stress tolerance of the community. The
key to understanding the link between cellular-level responses to chemical
stressors and population- and community-level responses lies in the metabolic
responses of individual species. &lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to (i) establish
methodologies to measure metabolic responses to chemical stressors, and (ii)
test a critical hypothesis regarding growth kinetic responses to chemical
stressors. Recent work has shown that oxidative chemical stressors evoke the
glutathione-gated potassium efflux GGKE) stress response in Gram negative
bacteria. This mechanism is expected to impose energy requirements beyond those
normally required for cell maintenance and growth. It is hypothesized that this
response will manifest itself at the population level as a reduction in growth
for a given substrate utilization rate, i.e. a reduction in the apparent biomass
yield coefficient. Experimental systems will involve Pseudomonas stutzeri GM-1
as a target organism and two model chemical stressors, benzene and
N-ethylmalemide (NEM). Measurements of biomass growth, substrate utilization and
oxygen uptake will be interpreted using mathematical models to infer the extent
to which the chemical stressor places excess carbon and energy requirements on
the metabolic functions. A second type of experiment will explore the ability of
a population to adapt to chemical stressors thereby tolerating ongoing
perturbations. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The primary educational
component of this project is in the form of senior thesis topics envisioned to
be computational rather than experimental. These projects would involve
mathematical modeling to explore shifts in community structure and their
relation to cellular- and population-level stress response mechanisms. This
year-long SGER project will test new hypotheses and generate findings that are
critical to the further development of new research in microbial stress
responses. Further knowledge gained in this research area will lead to broad
insights about microbiological stress response mechanisms and their
manifestations at a variety of organizational scales. This information can
ultimately be useful in more accurate ecological risk assessments, effective
design and operation of biotreatment systems, and development of molecular
biosensors for detecting chemical stressors. &lt;br/&gt;