* 0302024
* Problems in Algebraic Coding Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Judy Walker, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2006
* USD 129,406.00

Abstract for award of Walker DMS-0302024&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whenever
information is transmitted across a channel, errors are bound&lt;br/&gt;to
occur. It is the goal of coding theory to find efficient ways
to&lt;br/&gt;encode the information so that these errors can be
corrected.&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic coding theory seeks to do this using techniques
from areas&lt;br/&gt;such as linear algebra, group theory, and algebraic
geometry. This&lt;br/&gt;project involves four main problems within algebraic
coding theory:&lt;br/&gt;the search for an efficient decoding algorithm for
algebraic geometric&lt;br/&gt;codes over certain rings, the study of exponential
sums over certain&lt;br/&gt;rings and their connections to coding theory, the
study of codes from&lt;br/&gt;a structural standpoint, and the construction of
quantum codes in&lt;br/&gt;characteristics greater than 2. Much of this project
involves work&lt;br/&gt;the PI will do with her graduate and postdoctoral
students. In&lt;br/&gt;addition, she will continue her history of being
extremely active in&lt;br/&gt;mathematical activities outside her research.
These activities&lt;br/&gt;include organizing a week-long summer math camp for
high school girls&lt;br/&gt;and a national research conference for undergraduate
women&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians. While previously supported by NSF, the PI was
the&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate lecturer at the IAS/Park City Mathematics
Institute&lt;br/&gt;Mentoring Program, and during the term of the current
project, she&lt;br/&gt;will be the principal lecturer at a "Reconnect" workshop
for faculty&lt;br/&gt;from primarily teaching-focused
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More precisely, the problems included in this
project are described as&lt;br/&gt;follows. In previous work, the PI introduced
algebraic geometric&lt;br/&gt;codes over local Artinian rings and proved several
foundational&lt;br/&gt;results about these codes. Two portions of this project
build on this&lt;br/&gt;prior work. First, in joint work with R. Koetter, the PI
intends to&lt;br/&gt;find an efficient decoding algorithm for these codes. This
algorithm&lt;br/&gt;will decode with respect to the squared Euclidean and
homogeneous&lt;br/&gt;weight measures. The design of the algorithm will depend
both upon&lt;br/&gt;Sudan's list decoding algorithm and the Koetter-Vardy soft-
decision&lt;br/&gt;version of Sudan's algorithm. Second, the PI will build upon
her past&lt;br/&gt;work with exponential sums along curves over rings and
their&lt;br/&gt;relationship to codes. While her previous work (joint
with&lt;br/&gt;J.-F. Voloch) has focused on Weil exponential sums and
their&lt;br/&gt;applications to homogeneous and squared Euclidean weights of
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;geometric codes over local Artinian rings, other types of
sums have&lt;br/&gt;proven valuable in the study of codes over finite fields and
the PI&lt;br/&gt;will now study the ring analogues of these other sums and
their&lt;br/&gt;applications. The third area of this project builds on the PI's
prior&lt;br/&gt;work on a structural approach to coding theory. She previously
used&lt;br/&gt;this approach to revisit the classification of binary self-dual
codes,&lt;br/&gt;and in addition to continuing this work, she will look at
ternary&lt;br/&gt;self-dual codes as well as additive GF(4)-codes from this
point of&lt;br/&gt;view. The fourth and final main area of this project is that
of&lt;br/&gt;quantum algebraic-geometric codes arising from algebraic
curves.&lt;br/&gt;Together with J.-L. Kim and T. Marley, the PI intends to
construct&lt;br/&gt;good algebraic geometric quantum codes in characteristics
greater than&lt;br/&gt;2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;