* 0302528
* PHOTON II: Web-based Collaborative Learning for Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Nicholas Massa, New England Board of Higher Education
* Continuing Grant
* Karen F. Zuga
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,126,273.00

PHOTON II: Web-based Collaborative Learning for Teachers is an adaptation and
implementation project built on Project PHOTON (DUE/ATE #0053284), a program of
the New England Board of Higher Education. This project is: 1) adapting the
successful PHOTON instructional materials, laboratory equipment kit and
"alliance" model to a web-based distance-learning environment, 2) disseminating
PHOTON instructional materials, laboratory equipment kit and "alliance" model,
(the inclusion of teachers/faculty and career counselors from consortia of
secondary and postsecondary institutions) to a national audience, and 3)
evaluating the effectiveness of a web-based distance-learning program that
methodically applies adult collaborative learning principles for future
replication.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;PHOTON II is utilizing 21st
century web-based technology to deliver a one- semester web-based professional
development course "Introduction to Photonics Technology", the content of which
has been implemented and field tested by teachers and faculty in middle,
secondary and postsecondary institutions in New England. In spite of a slowdown
in the technology sector, the applications of photonics technology are growing
rapidly in fields as diverse as national security, medicine, manufacturing,
aerospace, the environment, transportation and more. Demand for these
technicians continues to grow. Distance learning has proven to be a very useful
tool in bringing education to more learners in a time-efficient manner. Research
has shown that although there are many positive aspects to distance learning,
there are challenging pedagogical aspects to achieving successful learning
experience. PHOTON II addresses these challenges by applying collaborative and
adult learning principles in the design and development of the new web-
course.&lt;br/&gt;Collaborations established with photonics companies and
industry associations (OSA and&lt;br/&gt;SPIE) in Project PHOTON are being
continued and expanded from a New England to a national focus. Outreach is being
initiated with other NSF photonics programs and a number of colleges and high
schools are committed to participate in the project.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;The growing demand for photonics technicians requires that new
ways be tested to train technicians nationwide. This project is not only
adapting the tested technician-level "Introduction to Photonics Technology"
instructional materials, it is testing a pedagogically designed distance
learning model. Evaluation strategies are designed throughout the project and
results are informing what support components are the most critical in achieving
effective transfer of knowledge and program implementation. The field-tested
PHOTON II distance learning course can be offered as a regularly repeating
course, and field-test findings can inform other technological
fields.&lt;br/&gt;