* 0302624
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Urban Political Participation: Sources of Mobilization and Demobilization
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Edwin Amenta, New York University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 04/30/2005
* USD 7,492.00

Political activity by city residents geared towards local issues has shown
tremendous variation in recent times. Citizens in some cities have had high
levels of participation in both municipal elections and in social movements,
while residents of other cities are largely demobilized. In this project, I will
explore how levels and forms of political participation result from the
interaction of pushes and pulls from above and below, structured by the rules
and incentives that have been formally and informally institutionalized within a
city. Particular attention will be paid to the various ways that demobilized
groups become engaged in Central questions to be explored in this dissertation
are: How can we explain variation in levels of political participation across
cities? How can we explain political participation variation within cities
across time and across different racial, economic, and geographic groups? Why do
certain coalitions arise in some cities and not in others? How are groups
mobilized either in opposition to or in support of the dominant coalition? How
do mobilized groups become demobilized? Besides questions about the level of
participation, I will also examine questions about other types of political
behavior: What explains the variation in types of political behavior across
cities and across time within the same city? When is mobilization expressed in
partisan organizations as opposed to community or ethnic groups? What counts as
political participation? When do mobilized constituencies enter the electoral
arena? When do residents resort to more contentious means of participation, such
as rioting? This project will use two complementary methods to explore the
dynamics of political participation in cities. The first phase of the research
will consist of a time-series cross-sectional analysis of electoral
participation in 38 US cities over 40 years from 1960-2000. The second phase
comparative historical analysis using archival materials, newspaper accounts,
and exit poll interview data on four case study cities: New York, Chicago,
Atlanta, Houston. This project will make a contribution to sociology and the
study of urban electoral politics by expanding upon available electoral data for
these cities, by examining other types of political participation, including
community organizations, social movements, and incidents of contention, such as
riots, and by elaborating more fully on the processes and mechanisms shaping
citizen political participation in cities.