* 0302757
* N-ETEC: National Engineering Technology Education Clearinghouse (Resource Center)
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Jack Waintraub, Middlesex County College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/2007
* USD 1,519,000.00

The New Jersey Center for Advanced Technological Education (NJCATE) and its
partner colleges across the United States are establishing a National
Engineering Technology Education Clearinghouse (N-ETEC), which serves as a
resource center for broad dissemination of exemplary engineering technology
education program models, materials and pedagogical strategies. Primary
educational NJCATE partners in the N-ETEC are College of DuPage, San Diego City
College, St. Louis Community College, and the New Jersey Institute of
Technology. Industry and professional association partners include Johnson &
Johnson, ITT, PSE&G, IEEE and ABET.

N-ETEC is providing: 1. On-demand, 24-7 access to (a) engineering technology
education curricula, instructional materials, program models and structures, and
instructional strategies; and (b) career and employment information to business
and industry, engineering technology students and potential students, secondary
and postsecondary educators, government and professional associations. 2. A
mechanism and means by which institutions wishing to develop and/or implement
curricula from existing exemplary programs can be matched with consultants
and/or mentors. 3. Face to face technical assistance via institutes, workshops
and seminars.

The primary N-ETEC goals are to: 1. Increase the national impact of the reform
and improvement of technician education through the dissemination of model
programs, educational strategies and instructional curricula and materials via
an electronic clearinghouse and organized professional development 2. Broaden
the involvement of the engineering technology education community in reform and
improvement by linking institutions desiring to adopt or adapt successful
engineering technology education innovations with appropriate consultants and/or
mentors. 3. Create a technical assistance communication network of engineering
technology educators nationwide. 4. Serve as a national resource on educational
programs, careers and skill sets in engineering technology for students and
potential students, secondary and post- secondary educators, and employers.

NJCATE and its partners are well positioned as leaders in technological
education, to create, implement, and sustain N-ETEC. The Clearinghouse operates
electronically with a full scale database, internet access to abstracts of
papers and project information, and a fee to cover cost of reproduction of full
documents. Each partner specializes in the solicitation, review and
recommendation of projects, and materials in a discipline or cluster of
disciplines.

An editorial board is establishing critieria for the selection of materials for
inclusion in the Clearinghouse and reviewing and selecting materials and
products to be disseminated by N-ETEC. The composition of the Board include
members from ATE projects, professional societies, two-year and four-year
college faculty, and representatives from businesses and industry. Evaluation of
the effectiveness of N-ETEC is continuous, with an emphasis on the qualitative
judgment of clearinghouse services by participants. The ultimate success of the
project is measured by the wide use and adaptation of products and instructional
strategies disseminated via N-ETEC and the contributions made by N-ETEC to the
comprehensive reform of engineering technology education.

