* 0302111
* South Florida Secondary Teacher Equity in Mathematics and Science
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* C. Edwin McClintock, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 05/31/2007
* USD 721,150.00

Florida International University (FIU), in collaboration with Miami-Dade County
Public Schools (M-DCPS) are developing the SF-STEMS program to promote equity in
preparing quality secondary teachers in mathematics, science, and technology for
hard-to-staff urban schools. The target population is students with low socio-
economic status and above average academic abilities. Selected students are
provided financial and academic support, mentoring during their college years,
and a sufficient induction period in the form of internships. These students,
upon graduation, return to teach in secondary schools in their community for a
period of at least two years. While teaching, these educators maintain their
connections to the university to gain new skills through professional
development activities and/or pursue advanced degrees in mathematics and
science. The key elements of this project are: 1) create opportunities for
talented students, 2) provide financial (work-study, scholarships) and academic
(tutoring, mentoring) support to enable students to concentrate on their
studies, 3) increase the number of mathematics and science teachers, 4) empower
underrepresented communities using a, grow-your-own approach, 5) produce a model
that can be adapted to other urban settings, and 6) promote learning as a life-
long journey by maintaining connections between the K-12 and post-secondary
environments. The SF-STEMS strategies are based on 1) the use of rigorous math
and science content to prepare pre-service teachers to effectively teach the
K-12 curriculum as specified by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
(NCTM), National Science Education Standards (NSES), and the Florida Sunshine
State Standards, 2) the use of the Treisman-model that promotes study groups and
encourages collaboration between students inside and outside the classroom to
work on challenging problems and projects, 3) innovative instructional
strategies such as mathematical modeling and inquiry-based science as seen in
Modeling Instruction, COMAP, and Pacesetter, 4) the implementation of early
career immersion to better prepare pre-service students for the teaching
profession, and 5) ensuring a continuous supply of mathematics and science
education graduates starting with the graduation in Spring, 2005.