* 0302146
* Planet Embryos in Vortex Wombs: Protoplanetary Disks and the Formation of Planetesimals
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Joseph Barranco, Barranco                Joseph         A
* Fellowship Award
* Edward Ajhar
* 08/31/2007
* USD 194,000.00

AST-0302146 Barranco, Joseph

Dr. Barranco is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the Kavli
Institute for Theoretical Physics at the University of California, Santa
Barbara, and then at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. He will
pursue an integrated theoretical, computational, observational, and experimental
program to study the dynamics of protoplanetary disks and the process of planet
formation within them. High-resolution radio (millimeter and submillimeter)
observations of dust emission can be used to construct detailed maps of non-
axisymmetric features such as vortices, clumps, ring arcs and warps. Dr.
Barranco will use three-dimensional, two-fluid simulations to model the gas and
dust dynamics of the observed non-axisymmetric phenomena. The goal is to
determine whether coherent structures in the gas flow can generate coherent
structures in the particle concentration, and to elucidate what role this plays
in the formation of the first generation of planetesimals.

In addition to his research, Dr. Barranco will collaborate with the Algebra
Project, a national mathematics literacy program. The Algebra Project focuses on
helping low-income students and students of color (particularly African-American
and Latino students) master algebra in middle school/junior high school, far
earlier than the expectations of most urban/rural school districts. He will
develop an algebra-based physics and astronomy curriculum that complements the
goals of their program, namely math literacy, yet at the same time develops
interest, intuition, appreciation, and perhaps passion, for the physical
sciences. ***