* 0302815
* Preparing Tomorrow's Science & Mathematics Teachers at Community Colleges: Round II
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Patricia Cunniff, Phi Theta Kappa Headquarters
* Continuing grant
* Joan T Prival
* 04/30/2007
* USD 585,844.00

Phi Theta Kappa, the honor society for two-year colleges, in cooperation with
the American Association of Community Colleges (AACC), is conducting a three-
year multi-disciplinary, nationwide mentoring project to expand and enhance
community college teacher preparation programs for future K-12 science and
mathematics teachers, and to identify "best practices" within these programs.
The project employs the same conceptual and implementation format used by Phi
Theta Kappa in its recent NSF/DUE/ATE-supported projects, Preparing Tomorrow's
Science & Mathematics Teachers: The Community College Response; and Improving
Science & Technology Education at Community Colleges: Rounds I & II. A set of
proven mentoring activities is being used to share the knowledge base,
experience, practices and materials achieved by six exemplary community college
teacher preparation programs with 18 competitively-selected community colleges.
These exemplary practices and materials also are being disseminated widely to
other community, technical, and junior colleges nationwide. The 18 selected
community colleges each work with one of six two-member mentoring teams. The six
community colleges are Green River Community College, WA; William Rainey Harper
College, IL; Tulsa Community College, OK; Cerritos College, CA; J. Sargeant
Reynolds Community College, VA; and Delaware Technical & Community College, DE.
Mentors represent disciplines of mathematics, chemistry, biology, physics and
education. Project activities include: national competition to select 18
colleges; two National Teacher Preparation Conferences, at which six teams of
mentors, from two and four-year colleges, work with assigned four-member college
teams to develop action plans; mentor services, including site visits over a one
year period; networking newsletter available electronically and in print; case
study monograph for distribution to presidents, academic deans, education chairs
and STEM chairs; a Best Practices Competition; a Best Practices Conference to
recognize and share "best practices" in mathematics and science teacher
preparation programs at two-year colleges; Best Practices Conference proceedings
and recommendations report; and a broad range of other dissemination activities
through Phi Theta Kappa and AACC websites, conferences, and publications.