* 0302598
* The Kinetics of First Order Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2003,12/31/2006
* James Gunton, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2006
* USD 318,000.00

This award supports theoretical research that deals with the kinetics of phase
separation for several closely related problems. The first problem is a study of
protein crystallization, in which compact protein nanoparticles self-assemble
from solution to form crystal droplets. Understanding protein function is a
major field of activity; determining the structure of protein molecules is
essential to an understanding of the structure-function relationships. The
primary tool for protein structure remains the diffraction of X-rays by protein
crystals. Therefore the objective is to determine the conditions necessary to
obtain high quality protein crystals from solution. Renormalization group
techniques will be used to determine accurately the thermodynamic properties and
phase boundaries of current models of proteins in solution, particularly in the
vicinity of the metastable critical points where nucleation is enhanced. Density
functional methods will be used to calculate the nucleation rate and growth of
the protein crystal droplets. The second topic is the crystallization of
Lennard-Jones fluids; the objective is to obtain a better theoretical
understanding of this important kinetic process. Finite size scaling methods
will be used to determine the free energy landscape for the liquid -solid phase
transition, which is a prerequisite to understanding the kinetics of phase
separation. This study will also link microscopic and mesoscopic length scales
for Lennard-Jones fluids. The dynamics of crystal growth will also be
investigated, based on a model with an order parameter that continuously
distorts a crystal with fcc symmetry to one with bcc symmetry. These symmetries
are important in the crystallization process. A smaller part of the research
will involve a study of a generalized model for the kinetics of three-phase
coexistence in complex fluids, which has recently been the subject of
investigation. The objective is to gain a better understanding of the kinetic
pathways to three-phase coexistence. %%% This award supports theoretical
research that deals with the kinetics of phase separation for several closely
related problems. The research will improve our understanding of common phase
changes in a number of materials. One system of interest will be the
crystallization of protein crystals from solution. This may lead to better
crystals and, subsequently, a better understanding of the properties of
proteins. ***