* 0303411
* Inter-American Materials Collaboration:     Molecular Solar Cell Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Gerald Meyer, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 12/31/2006
* USD 298,000.00

This Inter-American Materials Collaboration project in materials chemistry is
carried out by groups led by Gerald Meyer at Johns Hopkins University, Barbara
Loeb at Pontificia Universidad Catolica in Santiago, Chile, and Sergio Moya,
University of Santiago, Chile. The collaboration aims to improve the efficiency
and fundamental understanding of molecular level events occurring in dye-
sensitized solar cells based on inorganic coordination compounds covalently
bound to mesoporous nanocrystalline semiconductors thin films. This
collaborative project takes advantage of complimentary expertise in the
synthesis and design of molecular components (Chile) and in quantifying the
photoelectrochemical and optical properties of functionalized semiconductor
materials (USA). The project proposes novel studies that probe critical aspects
of molecular semiconductor interfacial energetics and electron transfer with new
molecular components that promote vectorial energy and/or charge transfer on
nanocrystalline and 'quantum dot' semiconductor
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is directly aimed at improving
energy conversion efficiencies of solar cells and can thus have an enormous
economic and environmental impact. The focus of the research is on interfacial
materials chemistry and the importance of the results gained extend beyond solar
energy conversion to other applications that utilize molecular-semiconductor
interfaces such as sensors, displays, and light emitting diodes. Mechanistic and
materials insights gained from the research proposed herein will be critically
important for the next generation of devices that operate on a molecular level.
The international and collaborative nature of this project will also increase
the breadth of knowledge and enhance education opportunities of the junior and
senior scientists involved. More specifically, this project will bring a new
materials aspect to the Chilean research and a toolkit of new molecular
components to the US research. Scientists will work in each other's laboratories
to share and teach experimental techniques. This award is supported by the
Division of Materials Research, the Office of International Science and
Engineering, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;