* 0303997
* NER:     Exploring Thermoelectric Energy Conversion in Nanostructure Assemblies
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Pulickel Ajayan, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 12/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

NER: Exploring Thermoelectric Energy Conversion in Nanostructured
Assemblies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are: (1) the
enhancement of the thermoelectric figure of merit using a new concept of
nanostructured materials, and (2) the development of strategies for fabrication
and testing of low-dimensional thermoelectric energy-conversion devices. The
influence of zero-dimensional nanostructures on the thermoelectric figure of
merit in nanocluster assemblies grown by a versatile technique applicable to a
wide variety of material systems and configurations is studied. The
nanoclustered assemblies are 0-D systems based on monodisperse elemental and
compound nanoclusters between 1-10 nm in size capped with self-assembled
monolayers (SAMs) and assembled in layered configurations using SAMs of
different lengths and functionalities. The enhanced quantum confinement and the
acoustic mismatch effects between the nanoclusters and the molecular connectors
are employed to maximize the thermoelectric figure of merit. To address the
second objective, thermoelectric energy-conversion devices are fabricated
comprised of junctions between dissimilar nanostructured materials. Planar
junctions are formed between films of p-type and n-type nanocluster assemblies.
Junctions are formed between carbon nanotubes and metal nanowires using a
recently devised selective nanotube growth process. Alternatively, alumina
templates and metal electrodeposition are used to create these junctions.
Scanning probe and electrical self-heating and thermometry techniquesare
developed and used to assess the Peltier effect of the fabricated
junctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This multidisciplinary approach
leads to an understanding of key aspects of dimensional confinement that impact
thermoelectric properties, and paves the way for use of nanoclusters in this
area. The project will also provides fabrication and testing strategies for
future nanoscale energy-conversion devices. CNT-metal hetero-junctions could be
employed as nanoscale temperature/radiation sensors and nano-heat pumps,
presenting a whole new range of applications for carbon-nanotube-based devices
and electronics. The project actively involves undergraduate researchers funded
through a NSF-REU summer program and the Rensselaer URP
program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;