* 0303992
* NUE:     Introduction of Nanotechnology Into the Undergraduate Curriculum
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Joshua Diamond, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award, funded by the
Division of Materials Research, the Division of Undergraduate Education and the
Division of Chemistry, supports Dr. Karen Quaal, Chemistry Department, and Dr.
Joshua Diamond, Physics Department, at Siena College in collaboration with
Evident Technologies, an Albany-based nanotechnology company, to develop two
5-week laboratory modules coupled with a summer research experience to introduce
Siena undergraduate science students to nanotechnology and the science of
advanced quantum devices. The NUE project will allow students to become
acquainted with the field of nanotechnology, and to possibly pursue entry-level
positions or further training in related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
5-week laboratory module is designed for second semester Chemistry juniors. The
module will be inserted into a newly developed Chemistry course entitled
"Integrated Laboratory II." This course introduces modern synthetic methods of
inorganic chemistry and the study of kinetics, quantum mechanics, and
spectroscopy related to these synthesized compounds. The course will be team
taught by one Chemistry Department faculty and a scientist from Evident
Technologies. The second 5-week laboratory module is designed for second
semester junior or senior physics majors. This module will be part of a Physics
course entitled "Special Topics in Physics- Experimental Analysis of Solids and
Nanocrystals." This course will cover the analysis of the nanocrystalline
materials synthesized in the first module using techniques typically encountered
in an upper level physics laboratory including absorption measurements,
fluorescence measurements, X-ray diffraction, modeling based on particle-in-a-
box calculations, and the effect of photo-oxidation on the integrity of the
these materials. Upon completion of these modules, four (4) students and a
faculty member will do research in nanotechnology with Evident Technologies.
&lt;br/&gt; In an effort to support participation of historically
underrepresented students, Drs. Quaal and Diamond will work cooperatively with
Siena's Higher Education Opportunity Program (HEOP), a New York State college
program for economically and academically disadvantaged students, to recruit
physics and chemistry students to participate in the laboratory modules and
summer research experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;