* 0303552
* NER:  Synthesis and Characterization of Self-Assembled Nanoscale Magnetic Particles
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2003,11/30/2004
* Jagannathan Sankar, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 11/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

The grant explores development of pulsed laser deposition (PLD) assisted self-
organized growth of uniform magnetic nanoparticles (islands) of ideal shape,
dimension, and concentration in different thin film matrices. The magnetic
nanoparticle materials will be constituted of both single elements (such as Fe,
Co, Ni, etc.) and multielemental alloys (such as Fe-Pt, Sm-Fe-Ti, etc.). The
matrix materials will be constituted of nonmagnetic oxide (such as Al2O3 and
SiO2) and nitride (such as TiN, AlN). The substrate temperature, laser energy
density determining the number density of arriving adatoms on substrate surface,
and pressure of the gas ambient will be varied to control the size, shape and
volume fraction of magnetic nanoparticles. The self-assembled nanocomposites
developed in this project will provide a range of materials for magnetic
properties measurements and analyses. The goal is to use advanced
microstructural techniques such as scanning transmission electron microscopy
with atomic number contrast (STEM-Z) and electron energy loss spectroscopy
(EELS) with atomic size probe to determine the structures of the interfaces as
well as the local chemistries and the effects of segregation and interaction
between the nanoscale building blocks and their
surroundings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed activity
will be the development of (i) a new method for selfassembly of nanomagnetic
particles with narrow particle size distribution, (ii) a fundamental
understanding on magnetic properties at the nanoscale, (iii) new techniques for
three-dimensional reconstruction of nanoparticle shape from atomic resolution
Z-contrast images, and (iv) research and education programs for graduate and
undergraduate students in the area of nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;