* 0303174
* Inter-American Materials Collaboration:  Large Scale Synthesis of N-doped Carbon Nanotubes for the Fabrication of Novel Polymer Composites and Related Low Dimensional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,04/30/2008
* Pulickel Ajayan, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 04/30/2008
* USD 246,000.00

This Inter-American Materials Collaboration research project is carried out by
research groups led by Pulickel Ajayan at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI)
and Mauricio Terrones at the Instituto Potosino de Investigacion Cientifica y
Tecnologica (IPICYT) in San Luis Potosi, Mexico. The research addresses the
large scale synthesis of N-doped carbon nanotubes for the fabrication of novel
polymer composites and related low-dimensional materials. The aim of the
synergistic experimental research effort performed by RPI and IPICYT is
primarily focused on the bulk production of CNx nanotubes using self-assembly
(pyrolytic) processes involving Fe, C and N precursors. State-of-the-art
structural characterization, and the determination of the mechanical, thermal
and conducting properties of CNx nanotubes is carried out in collaboration. In
addition, the researchers produce and characterize various types of conducting
polymers, thermoplastics, shock absorber polymers etc., all containing CNx
nanotubes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project actively targets the exchange of
students and researchers between both institutions, and motivates young
generations through collaborative education initiatives and through the
organization of various workshops in Troy, NY, and San Luis Potosi. This award
is supported by the Division of Materials Research, the Office of International
Science and Engineering, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;