* 0303429
* Inter-American Materials Collaboration in Synthesis, Processing and Atomic-Scale Characterization of Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2008
* David Smith, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 01/31/2008
* USD 162,000.00

This Inter-American Materials Collaboration brings together three groups led by
David Smith at Arizona State University (ASU), Humberto Terrones at the
Instituto Potosino de Investigacion Cientifica y Tecnologica (IPICyT), San Luis
Potosi, Mexico, and Guillermo Solorzano at the Pontificia Universidade Catolica-
Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio), Brazil. The overall focus of the highly complementary
research efforts is the synthesis, processing and atomic-scale characterization
of nanostructured materials. These activities include the synthesis of nanoscale
nitride particles based on Al, Ga, B and Si, as well as metal-matrix ceramic-
reinforced nanocomposites (PUC-Rio), the growth of carbon nanotubes filled with
magnetic metallic alloys (IPICyT-Mexico) and the study of magnetotactic bacteria
containing chains of magnetite crystals known as magnetosomes (Universidade
Federal de Rio de Janeiro). These various nanostructured materials are
characterized using the advanced transmission electron microscope (TEM)
facilities available at ASU. High-resolution electron microscopy and small-probe
microanalysis are used to determine microstructure and elemental composition at
the atomic scale, and electron holography is used to study the magnetic response
and microstructure of the magnetic nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exchange
students and postdoctoral workers from Brazil and Mexico spend extended periods
of time at ASU participating in the TEM experiments and gaining invaluable
experience in advanced characterization methods. The ASU participants travel to
the partner institutions in Brazil and Mexico to observe and participate in the
materials synthesis and processing efforts, and also to conduct workshops on TEM
characterization. All participants cooperate in organizing a symposium on the
topic of "Atomic-Scale Control and Characterization of Nanostructured Systems"
as part of the Brazilian Materials Research Society meeting to be held in Rio de
Janeiro during 2005. Overall, this collaborative project serves to promote
international exchange and cooperation and enable enhanced education and
training opportunities. This award is supported by the Division of Materials
Research, the Office of International Science and Engineering, and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;