* 0303587
* RI:  An Infrastructure for Wide Area Pervasive Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Atul Prakash, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 08/31/2008
* USD 550,000.00

This project is to create the pilot for a pervasive computing facility through
all areas of a building, including offices, lecture rooms, hallways, and common
areas. The pilot will include a heterogeneous space comprising a significant
fraction of a building. In this area, there will be a sensor network, capable of
tracking hundreds of mobile clients to a granularity of less than 10 feet as
they move freely through the building. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed facility will be used to advance
research at a number of levels, from low-level system building to human-oriented
applications. There are three main avenues through which this facility will
advance research. First, it will be used to understand issues of scale and
heterogeneity in the deployment of novel technologies that have been developed
at the University of Michigan, ranging from nano-sensors to cognitive orthotics.
Second, the mobility traces collected from the consistent use of this facility
will lead both to the creation of new benchmarks for mobile system/algorithm
designers as well as to superior building design. Third, given that the system
requires the tracking of many building occupants, there will be an opportunity
to study interesting issues of privacy and the manner in which individuals
exercise choice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At
the University of Michigan, there are a number of on-going and planned research
efforts that leverage sensor technology and/or mobile environments. Access to a
large pervasive computing facility will be crucial to testing these technologies
at scale and taking them to the next stage towards commercialization. More
important, the pervasive computing facility will be deployed in the building in
which the project team works everyday, along with many colleagues and students.
This gives rise to a unique "living laboratory" experience through which to
appreciate both the technological and social effects of the pervasive computing
facility.&lt;br/&gt;