* 0303636
* Evolving Better Biofilms: The Dynamics of Community-Level Natural Selection in Bacteria
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Lauren Meyers, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2005
* USD 50,000.00

This project addresses the evolution of multi-species communities using both
bacterial and computational model systems. Biofilms are assemblages of bacteria
that adhere to surfaces, both living and nonliving, and to each other. They are
often composed of multiple species and cause human diseases, contaminate medical
and food production equipment, corrode pipes, purify polluted waters, and
protect materials from degradation. In this project, communities of species will
be selected both in vitro and in silico to produce biofilms that are stronger
and more resistant to parasites, antibiotics and/or caustic chemicals. These
experiments will illuminate the effects of species composition and diversity on
the evolution of a successful community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural selection
not only favors fit organisms but also can act at a higher level, favoring
entire populations over others, a process known as group selection. In multi-
species bacterial infections, combinations of species that form stable,
transmissible infections will successfully proliferate to new hosts, and will
thereby be favored as an entire assemblage for further evolution. In cheese
production and wastewater decontamination, dairy producers and environmental
engineers artificially select among mixed communities of bacteria for those that
perform these tasks best. What allows mixed communities to solve some ecological
problems better that homogeneous communities? Does community-level evolution
follow the same principles as individual-level evolution? Although mixed
microbial communities underlie many health and environmental concerns, virtually
nothing is known about their evolution. Because biofilms thrive in nature as
both monocultures and mixed cultures, they offer an ideal test bed for exploring
the fundamentals of community-level selection.&lt;br/&gt;