* 0303100
* Variational and Topological Approaches to the Three-body Problem
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Richard Montgomery, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 163,999.00

Abstract. VARIATIONAL AND TOPOLOGICAL APPROACHES TO THE THREE-BODY PROBLEM.

The proposer will investigate several aspects of the Newtonian three-body
problems using techniques from geometric analysis and classical ODEs. The main
new direction proposed is to understand scattering in the Newtonian three-body
problem using the technique of ``gluing'' borrowed from geometric PDE. An
unbounded solution with negative energy consist of two ``bound masses'' orbiting
each other in a nearly Keplerian orbit while the third mass sails away,
asymptoting to a Keplerian hypebolic orbit. Each of the two Jacobi vectors
asymptotes to a solution to a Kepler two-body problems -- an elliptic one for
the bound pair, and a hyperbolic one for the vector joining the receding mass to
the center of mass of the bound pair. If the solution is unbounded in both the
past and future, there can, and typically will, be different Keplerian orbits in
the past and the future -- indeed the pair which is bound in the distant past
might be different from the pair bound in the future. Which Kepler parameters
can be connected to which by an unbounded three-body orbit? This scattering
problem is one of the central questions we will investigate. Other problems to
be investigated follow past lines of investigation initiated by the proposer. We
give two examples. Planar three body solutions can be partially encoded by their
syzygy sequence. Is every syzygy sequence possible? Initial computer
investigations suggest not. Is it true that every zero-angular momentum negative
energy solution which tends to the Lagrange homothety orbit either is the
Lagrange homothety orbit, or suffers a syzygy? The Newtonian three-body problem
concerns the dynamics of three bodies, modelled as point masses, attracting each
other by Newton's $1/r^2$ gravitational force. Think of the bodies as the earth,
moon, and sun, or as three stars. The ``problem'' is not a single problem, but
rather a large collection of problems concering the long-term qualitative
behavior of such a system of masses. A solution is called ``bounded'' if the
three interbody distances remain finite and bounded by some fixed distance for
all time. A central open question is: how big is the set of bounded solutions?
Is it true that arbitrarily close to a bound solution there is an unbounded one?
The traditional approach to this question has involved ``Arnol'd diffusion'' --
a mechanism discovered by V.I. Arnol'd through which seemingly stable regions
and orbits become unstable and perhaps eventually unbounded. The Arnol'd
diffusion method or mechanism is in essence perturbative: one tries to perturb
away from an apparently stable situation. As an alternative, we propose to start
at infinity and sweep in from infinity to see what parts of phase space are
swept out. ``Starting at infinity'' means thinking of the scattering problem --
the situation of one body infinitely distant from the other two. The most
interesting case is that in which two of the masses remain bounded, orbiting
each other in a nearly Keplerian orbit as the third mass recedes. Imagine
beginning in such a manner in the infinite past, and ending up in such a manner
in the infinite future, but with the past and future bound pairs perhaps
different, or their Keplerian ellipse having different eccentricities, energies,
etc. In this way we get a kind of ``scattering map'' from Kepler orbits (or
parameters) to Kepler orbits. What does this scattering map look like? This
``scattering problem'' is one of the main new directions we propose to
investigate. In addition, we propose several questions more in line with our
past investigations. Here is one example. A ``syzygy'' is an instant at which
all three masses lie on a line. At such an instant one mass ``eclipses'' (lies
between) the other two. Label the syzygies by the mass doing the eclipsing. List
the labelled syzygies in order of appearance, thus associating to each solution
a syzygy sequence. In the planar three-body problem, are all syzygy sequences
possible? This is an open problem. The proposer has made partial progress.
Initial computer investigations with the help of an undergraduate researcher
suggest that the answer might be ``no''.

