* 0303406
* The small-scale structure of the fluctuating passive scalar field in a turbulent boundary layer
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Donald Webster, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 05/31/2006
* USD 98,857.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0303406&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TYPE:
INVESTIGATOR INITIATED&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: DONALD R.
WEBSTER&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: GEORGIA TECH. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;THE SMALL-
SCALE STRUCTURE OF FLUCTUATING PASSIVE SCALAR FIELD IN A TURBULENT BOUNDARY
LAYER&lt;br/&gt;Mixing and transport of passive scalars in turbulent flows are
important processes occurring in many natural and engineered environments.
Common examples include contaminant discharges in water bodies, chemical plumes
in the atmosphere, and chemical mixing in reactors. Despite decades of research
aimed at understanding the dynamics of turbulent transport, scalar fields
continue to defy accurate theoretical predictions. The lack of a general theory
to predict the statistical nature of turbulent transport ultimately requires
experimental tests to predict and optimize mixing efficiency for many practical
situations. This procedure is inefficient and costly, thus a universal theory
for turbulent fluctuations of scalar quantities continues to be highly
desirable. This study of a turbulent shear flow has the following objectives:
(1) examine the dynamics of the scalar variance dissipation rate, and (2) study
the behavior and usefulness of multi-point correlators as a tool to represent
small-scale turbulence structure and its relation to the traditional structure
functions. We additionally propose to examine the isotropic and anisotropic
components of structure functions and their respective scaling behavior.
Experiments will be performed for a chemical plume in a turbulent boundary layer
of an open channel flow. The planar laser induced fluorescence (PLIF) technique
will be used to record time series of the high Schmidt number concentration
fields. The measurements resolve the Batchelor length scale of the scalar field.
Variation among three Reynolds numbers and three mean scalar gradient cases will
be examined. The proposed experimental results will impact both modeling
strategies and our fundamental understanding of the coupling between small-scale
and large-scale behavior in turbulent shear flows. One graduate student (Ph.D.
level) and one undergraduate student will be trained in advanced experimental
techniques and fundamental turbulence research. Georgia Tech is a national
leader in graduate education of underrepresented groups, and every effort will
be made to attract such a student to this
project.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;