* 0303790
* NIRT: Nano-Pantography
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Demetre Economou, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,000,000.00

Current focused ion beam techniques are capable of writing nanometer-sized
features, but are inherently very slow. The aim of this project is a novel,
radically different approach to high-throughput and versatile fabrication of
nanometer scale complex patterns over large areas (tens of sq. cm). A broad area
collimated beam of ions will be directed at a silicon wafer, and focused as an
orderly array of nanometer size spots with the use of sub-micron sized
electrostatic lenses. Simulations indicate that regardless of the achievable
resolution of current lithography, this method can improve resolution by a
factor of up to 100. When the wafer is tilted off normal (with respect to the
ion beam axis), the focal point is laterally displaced, allowing the focused
beams to be rastered, thus forming any arbitrary pattern. This is the essence of
nano-pantography. The desired pattern is replicated simultaneously in billions
of spots over tens of sq. cm. The plan is to apply this method to deposit small
metal particles that will nucleate the growth of an ordered array of isolated,
vertically aligned carbon nanotubes, for field emission
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to provide challenging
projects for graduate and undergraduate students, with rich scientific and
educational merit, as well as technological advances, not the least of which
would be a clear path to large scale manufacturing of nano-devices. It is
expected the latter will lead to a high level of interest from, and partnerships
with, developing nano-technology companies and consortia. Diversity in
undergraduate involvement will be facilitated by several programs at the
University of Houston (a designated Minority Status University) and the
University of California-San Diego. Outreach activities at the local public
schools will help introduce the importance and excitement of nano-science and
technology to students at an early age. Besides field emission devices,
applications in quantum dot devices and ultra-small transistors will be
investigated. The ability to deposit nanoparticles with a variety of size and/or
composition could advance combinatorial approaches in fields such as catalysis
or sensor development.&lt;br/&gt;