* 0303808
* NER:  Continuous Flow Induced Phase Inversion: a New Method for Manufacturing Drug Delivery Biopolymer Nanoparticles
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Fernando Muzzio, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 07/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This project proposes to explore the feasibility of using a recently developed
technique, Flow Induced Phase Inversion (FIPI), for continuous manufacturing of
nanoparticles made of poly(DL-lactic-co-glycolic acid) containing bovine serum
albumin as a model drug. The specific aims of this project are (i) to examine
systematically the phase inversion properties of combinations of biocompatible
polymers, surfactant, and solvents. (ii) To implement an experimental continuous
flow system where the effects of material properties, mixing geometry, and
operating conditions on FIPI can be examined. (iii) to develop a theoretical
understanding of the effects of hydrodynamics, surface tension, and rheology on
the fundamental FIPI physics. An experimental apparatus will be implemented to
examine phase-inversion behavior. The polymer will be dispersed in a solvent and
then mixed with predetermined amounts of a non-solvent to form a dispersion
where the polymer solution is the continuous phase. Subsequently, very high
rates of hydrodynamic deformation will be applied to elicit phase inversion,
transforming the viscous polymer solution into a nanodispersed phase. The
resulting droplets will be hardened by solvent extraction. After the process has
been characterized in a customized rheometer, this information will be used to
develop continuous in-line process equipment. Success will be determined based
on the size, the amount, and the ease of manufacturing of bioparticles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the understanding of phase
inversion phenomena in general and of FIPI in particular. The main intellectual
merit will be to confirm the working hypothesis that FIPI can be used to make
biodegradable drug nanoparticles. The proposed work is expected to have
substantial impact. Since many drugs currently fail during development due to
poor dissolution properties, the development of suitable approaches for
enhancing dissolution and bioavailability can breathe new life into many "dead"
compounds, i.e., initially promising molecules that have been discarded by
pharmaceutical companies. In addition, educational components will include
laboratory demonstrations and outreach to industry.&lt;br/&gt;