* 0303914
* U.S.-Romania Engineering Research on New Methods for Computing Electromagnetic Fields Generated by Transducers of Arbitrary Shapes
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Satish Udpa, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/29/2008
* USD 44,465.00

This U.S.-Romanian research project between Lalita Udpa of Michigan State
University and Raimond Grimberg of the Romanian National Institute of Research
Development for Technical Physics will examine the effect of rotating magnetic
fields in a layered cylindrical media with the goal of conducting nondestructive
evaluations of cylindrical tubes and pipes in the field. Their approach has two
major components: 1) development of a new nondestructive evaluation method based
on the creation of a rotating magnetic field in a pipe wall under test
conditions and 2) development of an analytical model for the operation based on
the dyadic Green's functions in cylindrical
coordinates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US-Romanian team plans to use the
resulting simulation model to solve the forward problem for different material
discontinuities that are specific for both nuclear and gas transportation
pipelines. Their theoretical models and signals predicted by numerical
simulations will be validated by experimental measurements. Finally, an
experimental system including rotating magnetic field probes and associated
control instrumentation will be designed and built, then tested at the Romanian
Cernadova nuclear power plant. Results are expected to lead systems and
components such as a transducer, control equipment and numerical codes and
algorithms, that can be combined to conduct un-invasive nondestructive
evaluations capable of diagnosing conditions in many critical elements of the
power and energy industrial infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
engineering research project fulfills the program objective of advancing
scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe
to combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong
mutual interest and competence. Broader impacts include the introduction of U.S.
junior researchers to the international research community through work at the
partner institution and direct involvement in the project's advanced modeling
techniques and experimental design.