* 0303970
* NUE:  Nano-Scale Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Robert Vallance, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) program entitled, "Nano-Scale
Engineering," at the University of Kentucky, under the direction of Dr. M. Pinar
Menguc, is funded by the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems (CTS) and
the Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) in the Directorate for
Engineering (ENG). The objective of this project is to establish a novel "Nano-
Scale Engineering Certificate Program," (NECP) for undergraduate engineering
students at the University of Kentucky (UK). This will be the first time that a
certificate program will be offered in a comprehensive way to educate
undergraduate engineering students about nanotechnology. It is expected that the
NECP will enhance not only the level of nano-scale education in the College
Engineering, but also foster a series of new interdisciplinary research programs
around the Campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students enrolling the the NECP will be
required to take a total of six courses on nanotechnology and attend two
semenster-long seminar courses. Four of the required six courses will be lecture
courses addressing both theoretical and fabrication fundamentals as related to
nano-scale processes. The other two courses will be hands-on laboratory courses,
and will be in addition o the minimum required courses which are counted towards
graduation. In addition, the students will be given the opportunity to
participate in the research activities within the laboratories of five core
faculty members as well as those carrying out cutting-edge research in other UK
departments. Finally, the students will be exposed to the novel ideas presented
during the seminar courses.