* 0303838
* Workshop:  Support for Conference entitled "Green Engineering: Defining the Principles", held May 18-22, 2003, in Destin, Florida.
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Martin Abraham, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 03/31/2004
* USD 35,000.00

This award is to support the new international, multidisciplinary conference on
Green Engineering to be held May 18 - 22, 2003 in Destin, Florida. Participants
will include engineering researchers and practioners from several engineering
disciplines and industrial sectors who will meet to benchmark the current status
of green engineering and to start defining the Green Engineering principles
common across engineering. The focus will be on product and process design
within a systems framework, with four themes: 1) What are the drivers for green
engineering and how consistent are they across various engineering disciplines?
2) How do we measure progress and evaluate performance? What are the metrics to
determine the "greenness" of a product or process? 3) What are the tools that
are unique to green engineering? How can they be applied across various
disciplines? What are their limitations? 4) What are the connections between the
process / product design and improvements to the environment (systems
approaches)? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that this activity will have
significant broader impacts upon the engineering community as a whole in the
provision of a set of guiding principles for Green Engineering and also upon
society through the establishment of a basis for the design and realization of
products that positively impact materials use and total life cycle&lt;br/&gt;