* 0303622
* RI:  FWGrid: A Research Infrastructure with Fast Wireless, Wired, Compute, and Data Infrastructure for Next Generation Systems and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2011
* Joseph Pasquale, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Baker
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,800,000.00

In the future, in the digital fabric, computing elements will be distinguished
by their networked bandwidth, compute and data capabilities, and of course their
particular input/output capabilities (e.g. graphical displays, cameras, GPS,
laser range-finding, etc.). These elements will be knit into large scale
distributed applications and resource pools - together an entity increasingly
known as the "computational grid". The key capabilities of a "Grid" element will
be determined largely by their communication and input/output
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose a research infrastructure (FWGrid)
that enables research in innovative and radically new applications, systems and
system architectures, and the emerging technical and even social use of systems
and services built for technology environment of the future. The key aspects of
this infrastructure are:&lt;br/&gt;o highly capable mobile image/video capture
and display devices (to interact with the world)&lt;br/&gt;o high bandwidth
wireless 100-500 Mbps (to tightly couple mobile elements to high capability
resources),&lt;br/&gt;o rich wired networks of 10-100Gbps (move and aggregate
data and computation without limit), and&lt;br/&gt;o distributed clusters with
large compute (teraflops) and data (10's of terabytes) capabilities (to power
the infrastructure). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: FWGrid will enable us
to explore with real systems and users, radical new applications, novel
application structures, system architecture, resource management policies,
innovative algorithms, as well as system management. It will fundamentally
enhance undergraduate and graduate education and all activities of the
department. Because FWGrid will be a "living laboratory", we will gain access to
real users and actual workloads. FWGrid models the world of five years hence,
where widespread high bandwidth wireless, extreme wired (fiber) bandwidth, and
plentiful wired computing and data resource are the norm. FWGrid will be used to
support a wide variety of research, ranging from low-level network measurement
and analysis, to grid middleware and modeling, to application-oriented
middleware and new distributed application architecture and finally to higher
level applications using rich image and video - both off and on
line.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FWGrid will have a transformative impact on the
department, accelerating our growth into experimental computer science,
continuing the transform and broaden both undergraduate and graduate education,
providing a modern Grid infrastructure on which to perform research experiments,
but one that also extends to wireless and peer-to-peer computing/storage.
Because of the fortuitous timing with respect to our new CSE building, the
infrastructure will have a deep impact on the department's educational,
research, and social environment. It will support experimental research, multi-
faculty and multi-disciplinary collaborative research and education. FWGrid will
form a nexus for systems research within the department, and couple all of us to
researchers on the campus, to SDSC and CalIT2, the metropolitan area, and wide
area at high bandwidth. This will enable innumerable shared experiments and
collaboration. In short, it will couple us to the future at high
speed.&lt;br/&gt;