* 0303950
* NIRT: Bio-Nano-Robotic Systems Using Viral Protein Nano Motors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,05/31/2004
* Martin Yarmush, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Julie Chen
* 05/31/2004
* USD 1,050,017.00

This project will study the development of protein-based nano-motors and nano-
robots. The goal is to develop novel and revolutionary biomolecular machine
components that can be assembled and form multi-degree of freedom nanodevices
that will be able to apply forces and manipulate objects in the nanoworld,
transfer information from the nano to the macro world and also be able to travel
in the nanoenvironment. These machines are expected to be highly efficient,
economical in mass production, work under little supervision and be
controllable. The vision is that such ultra-miniature robotic systems and nano-
mechanical devices will be the biomolecular electro-mechanical hardware of
future manufacturing, biomedical and planetary applications. Some proteins, due
to their structural characteristics and physicochemical properties constitute
potential candidates for this role. The specific aims of this project are: (1)
To identify proteins that can be used as motors in nano/micro machines and
mechanisms. The focus of the study will be on the mechanical properties of viral
proteins to open or close depending on the pH level of environment. Thus, a new,
powerful, linear biomolecular actuator type is obtained,Viral Protein Linear
(VPL) motor. Various viral proteins will be studied and from them different VPL
motors will be produced. (2) To develop dynamic models and realistic
simulations/animations to accurately predict the performance of the proposed VPL
motors. (3) To perform a series of biomolecular experiments to demonstrate the
validity of the proposed concept of VPL motors. (4) To study the interface of
the proposed protein motors with other biomolecular components such as DNA
joints and carbon-nanotube rigid links so that complex, multi-degree of freedom
machines and robots powered by the VPL motors are
formed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational, broader impact and outreach
activities of this project are: (1) The development of a new, inter-departmental
course on the design of nano-machines; (2) The initiation of undergraduate
students in research; (3) The establishment of collaborative projects on nano-
technology with the science and technology high schools of New Jersey with the
objective to attract new students in this field; (4) The organization of
symposia and journal special issues on bio-nano-robotics; (5) The development
and maintenance of a webpage on bio-nano-robotic systems; and (6) The
establishment of international collaborative activities in the area of nano-
technology.&lt;br/&gt;