* 0303696
* NER:    Nano-Composites Derived from Melt Blending an Ionomer and a Thermotropic Liquid  Crystalline Polymer
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Robert Weiss, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2004
* USD 90,000.00

The proposal was received in response to the nanoscale science and engineering
initiative (NSF 01-157), category: NER. This research project is directed at
developing an understanding of the formation of nanocomposite during melt
compounding of blend of a thermotropic liquid crystalline polymer (TLCP) and a
sulfonated polystyrene ionomer. Self-assembly of uniform, rectangular prism-
shaped TLCP nano-crystals randomly dispersed in the ionomer matrix occurs when
the zinc salt of the ionomer and the TLCP are mixed at elevated temperatures in
an intensive melt mixer. These materials represent a potential commodity, melt
processable nanocomposite alternative to short fiber-reinforced thermoplastics
or silicate-clay nanocomposites. Although the formation of the nano-crystals is
robust and reproducible, the origin and composition of the nano-crystals are not
known. The proposed research has the following four objectives: l) determine the
origin of the nano-crystals, including their composition and structure; 2)
determine the extent of reinforcement offered by the nano-crystals in TLCP/SPS
ionomer nanocomposites; 3) assess whether similar nanocomposites may be created
with other sulfonated polymers, e.g., sulfonated poly(ether ketone ketone) or
poly(etherimide ionomers; and 4) assess whether TLCP/SPS nanocomposites may be
blended with a third polymer to produce a nanocomposite with the third polymer
as the majority component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the post-doctoral
research associate included in the budget, graduate and undergraduate students
will also be involved with this research. The results will be published in
scientific journals and presented at national scientific meetings. Undergraduate
students will participate either through independent studies during the academic
year or as REU students. An IGERT on "Engineering of Macromolecules" has been
submitted to NSF, and this research project fits within the scope of the IGERT
program being proposed. Under-represented minority students will be especially
targeted for involvement in the project. A lecture and demonstrations teaching
module about polymer science, including nanotechnology, will be developed. That
will be offered to students and faculty at high schools and primarily
undergraduate colleges. The teaching material developed will be made available
to the faculty at those institutions. Research collaborations will also be
established with science and engineering faculty at primarily undergraduate
institutions. Industry will be exposed to the results of the research through
the Associates Program, an industrial outreach program in the Institute of
Materials Science at the University of Connecticut.&lt;br/&gt;