* 0303322
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Economy, Society,  and the Use of Domestic Space at Classic Period Chunchucmil, Yucatan, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2004
* Rosemary Joyce, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2004
* USD 11,842.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Rosemary A. Joyce, Scott Hutson will analyze data
gathered during his archaeological excavations at the Maya site of Chunchucmil.
Chunchucmil is located in Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula and thrived as a
metropolitan center between 300 A.D. and 600 A.D. Chunchucmil is notable for its
dense residential zones, which contain fenced-off houselots and a network of
alleyways connecting these houselots to the rest of the city. Houselots consist
of small buildings, such as sleeping structures, shrines, and kitchens, embedded
within much larger open-air patios, yards, and activity areas. Hutson's
excavations focused on the recovery of data that will help determine how these
buildings and open areas were used.

Research focusing on individual houselots and the kin that occupied them is
important because it targets a very basic level of social organization: the
familial bedrock upon which society exists. Generalized anthropological
processes such as trade, urbanization and social inequality cannot be understood
without documenting how the everyday needs and choices of individual families
and their members contribute to and are affected by such processes. This project
examines three specific houselots and compares the activities performed within
them. Detecting variation in the activities (craftwork, gardening, crop
processing, consumption of resources, etc.) performed among these houselots will
contribute to an explanation of the relations between economic strategies,
social inequality, settlement density, and the use of space. Likewise,
documenting patterns in the location of activities across space will contribute
to an understanding of the variety of ways in which waste management, privacy
and other issues are resolved in a densely populated urban setting. Because the
byproducts of many activities are often not preserved in the form of large
durable artifacts (broken pottery, stone tools) or because such durables may
have been removed from their original context in antiquity, this project is
geared toward the recovery and analysis of micro-residues, such as phytoliths,
charred plant remains, and chemical signatures of ancient activities
(Phosphates, heavy metals).

Beyond research questions of interest to social scientists, this project will
have a broader impact by enhancing the level of public understanding of science
both in the communities in Yucatan near the ancient site, and at various
locations in the United States. In Yucatan, public outreach associated with the
project has focused on two villages: modern-day Chunchucmil and neighboring
Kochol. These outreach efforts (posters, school visits, town meetings) will
continue when the analyses mentioned above are completed. In the US, outreach
efforts include ongoing visits to the ASCEND charter school in Oakland. The
preparation of a website will enhance public visibility of the project, while
publication in both refereed journals and professional newsletters will
communicate the results to the scientific community. Furthermore, both the
author as well as undergraduate assistants at various institutions will gain
training in the methods of analysis mentioned above.



