* 0303813
* Lecture Modules in Materials Science
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Martin Glicksman, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2006
* USD 255,000.00

This grant is focused primarily on developing a series of educational electronic
modules for graduate and undergraduate course offerings in materials science and
engineering. Modules will be developed using the popular electronic PowerPoint
format for the subject of kinetics in materials processing. This particular
subject comprises an upper-divisional course in materials science and
engineering, and explores the fundamental aspects of kinetic processes in
materials, including diffusion-based processes, defect-mediated processes,
surface processes, phase transformations, precipitation and coarsening, etc. The
content of these modules, presented in a highly quantifiable manner, provides a
study and lecture aid to students, and form the basis of approximately 20
lectures for the instructor. The modules can be used in conjunction with a
textbook or as a stand-alone instructional framework. Approximately new 20
modules will be developed for the topics of crystal growth and solidification-
comprising important subjects for a graduate-level education in materials
science and engineering course. Areas such as phase transformations, nucleation,
heat and mass transport, chemical segregation, crystal texture, dendritic and
eutectic growth, will be developed sequentially and logically connected. These
subjects have matured dramatically over the past twenty years, and now can be
taught on a highly quantitative basis, for which few suitable texts exist. %%%
The modules being developed under the subject NSF grant will be offered to all
interested parties via a cost-free down-load via the Rensselaer WEB-site, or as
a CD. The new modules should rectify the lack of tutorial support by providing a
new robust pedagogical framework. In addition, original exercises, instructional
programs, Java applets, etc. will be added to strengthen the existing modules,
as feedback is received from students upon their use in a real classroom
setting. These modalities for distribution will effectively publish the
educational research and form a meaningful deliverable. In this manner, as wide
an audience as possible in materials science and engineering, and in allied
fields of science and engineering, will be served through the teaching tools.
***

