* 0303442
* NER:  Directed Microelectronic Interfacing with Living Cells via Nanocrystal Quantum Dots
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Christine Schmidt, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

0303442&lt;br/&gt;Schmidt&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to
Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 02-148, category NER. The
objectives of this proposal are to develop and characterize an exploratory
system integrating microelectronic device technology and semiconductor quantum
dots interfaced with living neurons via specific receptors on the cell surface.
These nanometer-scale devices could be used to treat receptor and
neurotransmitter based diseases (e.g., Parkinson's), as well as to produce
entirely new kinds of bio-electronic devices (e.g., neural memory circuits).
Semiconductor quantum dots (qdots) typically range between 2 and 10 nm in
diameter and when surface-passivated, they can be dispersed in a variety of
solvents, including aqueous environments. These electronic materials possess
unique optical and electrical properties due to their small size. When excited,
they display increased dipole moments, electron transfer, and thermal
interactions, as compared to bulk materials. The qdots can be surface-
functionalized with various molecular recognition molecules (e.g., peptides and
antibodies) and their high fluorescence quantum yield (brightness) facilitates
the investigation of qdot-cell receptor attachment. The qdot-cell device will
serve as a first generation receptor-scale prosthetic. Subsequent devices will
be designed to interact with specific ion channels. In the future, receptor-
based devices could provide local treatment to individual ion channels causing
them to increase or decrease productivity, thus providing another treatment
option for receptor-based diseases.