* 0303789
* NER: NanoCAD - Computer-Aided Design Algorithms and Tools for Nanotechnologies
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Niraj Jha, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

Proposal No: 303789&lt;br/&gt;Title: NER: NanoCAD - Computer-Aided Design
Algorithms and Tools for&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnologies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
has been a huge surge of research activity in recent years in the
area&lt;br/&gt;of nanoelectronic device design and fabrication. Such
``nanodevices'' &lt;br/&gt;include solid-state quantum-effect devices and
molecular devices. &lt;br/&gt;In terms of work at the logic and architecture
levels, quantum cellular &lt;br/&gt;automata (QCA) based on quantum dot cells,
and resonant tunelling diode &lt;br/&gt;(RTD) based implementations seem ahead
of others, and chips based on &lt;br/&gt;these devices are likely to be feasible
within this decade. While working &lt;br/&gt;devices and logic gates, and even
some small circuits, have been &lt;br/&gt;demonstrated for various
nanotechnologies, no logic synthesis methodology &lt;br/&gt;has evolved yet for
automatically synthesizing large logic circuits in these
&lt;br/&gt;technologies. The aim of this proposal is to develop automatic logic
&lt;br/&gt;synthesis algorithms and implement them as software tools to bridge
this &lt;br/&gt;gap. In this exploratory phase of research, we will target QCA
and RTD &lt;br/&gt;based logic circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, we
will develop a general multi-level logic synthesis&lt;br/&gt;algorithm and
software tool using threshold gates and majority gates&lt;br/&gt;as primitive
gates. We will derive bit-level pipelined versions &lt;br/&gt;of different
arithmetic units to exploit the concept of nanopipelining. &lt;br/&gt;We will
also derive physical synthesis rules for QCA to ensure its
correct&lt;br/&gt;functionality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software tools
developed in this research will be made available on the&lt;br/&gt;world-wide
web for wide dissemination. The material will be included in &lt;br/&gt;a new
graduate-level course on Computer-Aided Design for Emerging
&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnologies. Undergraduates will also be involved in this
research. &lt;br/&gt;Princeton encourages applications from women and minority
students through &lt;br/&gt;special fellowships. Such students will be specially
welcome to join this &lt;br/&gt;research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;