* 0303884
* NER: Exploration of Nanoscale Plasmonic Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Shanhui Fan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

Exploration of Nanoscale Plasmonic Circuits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For future
developments in nano-technology, it is essential to provide connecting
mechanisms that allow controlled information and energy transport at the
nanometer-level. Because of the higher operating frequency, optical
interconnects provide a much higher information carrying capacity than
electronic interconnects. Unfortunately, conventional dielectric optical
interconnects cannot be scaled down to the nanometer regime due to the
diffraction limit of light. We propose to take advantage of plasmon-polariton
excitations in metallic nanostructures to route information at optical
frequencies, at approximately the speed of light, and in the nanometer scale
that have been not been accessible through optical means. In particular, we will
design, fabricate, and characterize a set of basic building blocks, such as
nanowires, ordered arrays of nanoparticles, etc., that can be utilized to build
interconnecting structures of complex architecture and
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this exploratory program could
provide a fundamental breakthrough in establishing the basic feasibility of a
new optical information exchange mechanism at nano-scale. This program will
provide a wonderful training opportunity for graduate students in an exciting
emerging field of study. We will take advantage of the existing Research
Experience for Undergraduate program at Stanford University, which provides
support for undergraduate students participating in research in the summer. In
addition, Fan and Brongersma are currently collaborating to develop a course in
micro and nanoscale photonics to be taught regularly starting this upcoming
winter quarter. The course promises to bring the excitement of nano-scale
photonics, from both theoretical and experimental perspectives, to students from
a wide range of disciplines including Physics, Applied Physics, Chemistry,
Electrical Engineering, and Material
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;