* 0304149
* NER: Nanoliter Biocalorimetry on a Chip for Ultrafast Combinatorial Analysis of Proteins
* BIO,EF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Leslie Allen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 06/30/2006
* USD 99,999.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoliter Biocalorimetry on a Chip for Ultrafast
Combinatorial Analysis of Proteins&lt;br/&gt;L. H. Allen&lt;br/&gt; The goal of
this project is to develop a new protein calorimetry technology (MEMS), and thus
generating new infrastructure for investigations of Biosystems at the Nanoscale.
The unique aspects of this project include (1) an ultra-small (nanoliters)
sample volume and (2) an ultrafast scan rate. The extremely small sample size,
which is a thousand times smaller than conventional calorimetric DSC systems, is
needed for characterization of new proteins that are typically synthesized in
limited quantities. The increased scan rate, which is a thousand times faster
than conventional DSC systems, is more than just a way to provide a quick turn-
around of results. These high rates will allow us to capture the intermediate
steps of protein folding that occur on the time scale of milliseconds - a
capability not available with conventional DSC. The small sample size and
compatibility with conventional IC systems will allow the technology to be
extended to an array of calorimeters on a chip. This allows for combinatorial
studies allowing us to use only a small amount of protein to measure
interactions with hundreds of molecules simultaneously. This project will have a
broad impact in boosting the infrastructure of thermal characterization
instrumentation for the country. The dissemination of our research results by
graduate and undergraduate students will extend well beyond the usual materials
conferences to the core Thermal Analysis and Chemical Thermodynamics societies.
Our results will serve as an example of the benefits of using multidisciplinary
approach in investigations: MEMS (electronic materials), proteins (chemistry and
biology), and folding/crystallization dynamics (thermodynamics). This project
provides a broad educational experience for our students, both graduate and
undergraduate, for hands-on processing of the devices and includes design and
construction to of electronic and MEMS devices, and material analysis of
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;