* 0304105
* NUE:  Frontiers of Nanotechnology - An Interdisciplinary Introductory Course for Science and Engineering Majors
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Seyfollah Maleki, Union College
* Standard Grant
* C.  Caldwell
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,550.00

This NUE proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF 02-148. The heart of the
project is to develop an interdisciplinary undergraduate course in
nanotechnology and nanostructured materials aimed at sophomore engineering and
science majors. The course is being built from the primary literature, as well
as recent books and articles aimed at a more general audience, supplemented with
the mathematical and quantitative details appropriate for undergraduate science
and engineering majors. The interdisciplinary nature of the material is
reflected by the faculty involvement; a physicist with research interests in
laser optics and extensive experience in the development of undergraduate course
materials, a chemical engineer with many years of industrial research
experience, and an inorganic materials chemist with research interests in
nanocomposites, all of whom have worked together to develop the course outline
and syllabus. The end result of the project should be a fully integrated lecture
and laboratory course in nanotechnology, complete with a web-based text and
laboratory exercises, designed as stand-alone modules that can be exported to
other courses within the science and engineering disciplines, or as an entire
course to provide a model for adoption or adaptation in any undergraduate
setting.project is jointly supported by the Division of Physics in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and the Engineering Education and
Centers Division in the Directorate for Engineering.