* 0304124
* NER:     Lab on a Tip-Bioconjugate Silica Nanoparticle Probes on Atomic Force Microscope Cantilever Tips
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* William King, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,999.00

The proposed research aims to develop a new scientific instrument for nanometer
scale biochemical measurement based on the integration of nanoparticle
bioconjugate chemistry and atomic force microscopy (AFM). The marriage of AFM
and nanoparticle chemistry brings together the most widely used tool for
nanotechnology (AFM) and one of the most promising techniques for nanoscience
(nanoparticle chemistry). Within the one-year NER framework, the team (comprised
of researchers in nanoparticle chemistry and atomic force microscopy) will
demonstrate the fabrication and operation of AFM cantilevers with integrated,
chemically active nanoparticle tips to probe ligand-receptor interactions.
Receptor driven cellular behavior represents an important and diverse class of
functional structures in biological systems. Receptors are uniquely suited to
direct such processes due to their ability to sense the environment through
ligand binding and their ability to transmit this signal to the cell interior
via signal cascades. The goal of this proposal is quantitatively measure the
interactions between ligands and their biological receptors. Currently, the
study of these fundamental biological components is limited by available
ensemble imaging tools such as radiolabeled ligands or indirect detection via
antibodies.&lt;br/&gt;This particular measurement holds the promise of providing
heretofore unobtainable resolution of ligands binding to cellular receptors. It
is anticipated that the developed technique will offer new opportunities to
probe fundamental aspects of receptor function, develop novel approaches to drug
screening and implement new technologies for the interrogation of biochemical
systems. Specifically, we will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop methods for the
functionalization of an Atomic Force Microscope cantilever tip with silica
nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Design, synthesize, and characterize
novel nanoconjugate silica nanoparticles in situ on the cantilever
tip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Investigate the forces in receptor-ligand
interactions through adhesion, tapping and lateral&lt;br/&gt;force microscopy
measurements, with the goal of measuring single-molecule
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;