* 0304340
* NIRT:  Enhancing the Sensitivity and Stability of Biosensors by Novel Nanostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Yiping Zhao, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,012,000.00

In this project, we propose to develop nanoscale 3D structures and use the
nanostructures as 3D substrates to address problems in biosensing. To achieve
this objective, we will expand our newly developed nanofabrication technique -
glancing angle deposition (GLAD) - to fabricating nanoscale 3D pillars such that
the size, height, spacing, shape and location of the nanopillars (or nanorods)
will be controlled, and multiple layers of nanorods will be realized. This
development will provide several unique features to suit the needs for
biosensing applications. We will derive nanoscale glucose sensors by
functionalizing the nanorods through enzyme
immobilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this proposed project, we aim to
achieve the following specific objectives: (1) to fabricate nanostructures with
controlled parameters, such as size, spacing, height, shape and location, for
developing nanoelectrodes; (2) to immobilize enzymes onto well-prepared
nanostructures to achieve high sensitivity and activity; (3) to control the size
and separation of the top layer nanorods to be within 20 nm, so that a
mechanical filtration can be realized for antifouling; (4) to passivate the top
layer nanorods using self-assembly monolayer (SAM) technique to further improve
antifouling; and (5) to fabricate prototype glucose sensors and assess their
sensitivity, stability and antifouling behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) The
intellectual merit of the proposed activity: The novelty of this project lies in
the following areas: (1) with the multilayer and vertically aligned and high
aspect-ratio metallic nanorods serving as 3D electrodes, the sensitivity and
response time of the glucose sensors will be significantly improved; (2) with
the size and spacing of the top-layer nanorods controlled less than 20 nm, a
mechanical filtration to prevent protein penetration will be achieved; (3) with
selective passivation (using a specific SAM, such as Oligo(ethylene
glycol)-terminated alkanethiols) of the top-layer nanorods, further protein
adsorption will be prevented; and (4) the entire development process is
compatible with mass microfabrication procedures. Thus, we anticipate that by
integrating the novel nanostructures into biosensing applications, we will be
able to address concerns of sensitivity, biofouling (via both the chemical
passivation and mechanical filtration), and miniaturization. The proposed
project is feasible because it is well within the expertise of all
PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) The broader impacts resulting from the proposed
activity: This proposed project seeks to integrate biotechnology and
nanotechnology for advancing fundamental knowledge in this nascent frontier, and
for deriving useful applications to benefit the general public and humankind.
The success of this project will not only lead to a new technique for developing
high performance glucose sensors, but also serve as a knowledge base,
groundwork, and technical foundation for developing nanoscale structures for
other types of chemical and biological sensors. It will also open new
opportunities for incorporating multilayer nanostructures (as nano-membranes)
into realization of multifunctional and multi-specie chemical and biological
sensing. This project will also provide unique opportunities for both graduate
and undergraduate students to gain precious hands-on experience and training in
the multidisciplinary fields of materials science, nanotechnology, and
biological engineering.&lt;br/&gt;