* 0304180
* NER:  Nanowire and Nanopattern Fabrication by the Sintering of Self-Assembled Nanoparticle Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Martin Harmer, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 12/31/2004
* USD 90,000.00

The objective of this exploratory research project is to carry out a basic
assessment of the potential usefulness of a new nanomanufacturing method;
namely, the deliberate sintering of self-assembled arrays of ligand stabilized
metal nanoparticles to form nanowires and complex 2-D nanopatterns. To date, the
most successful approaches to materials manipulation and patterning on the
nanoscale have been based on electron beam lithography and scanning probe
microscopy techniques. Unfortunately these methods are relatively expensive,
serial in nature, and are not readily applicable to mass production of
nanopatterns and nanowires. The ability to reproducibly manufacture such
nanostructures on a larger scale by simple and inexpensive chemical methods is
therefore of great practical importance, especially if the promised potential
benefits of nanotechnology are to be taken up by industry and exploited in the
next generation of consumer electronics. The new nanofabrication technique under
investigation in this program has the potential to fulfill these latter criteria
provided that the sintering processes occurring between individual nanoparticles
in the self-assembled arrays can be controlled and understood. The aim of this
research program is to establish a basic understanding of how (i) particle size,
(ii) particle array configuration, (iii) particle composition, (iv) substrate
identity, and (v) ligand destabilization method affect the nature of the
nanowire or nanopattern formed. In-situ observations of dynamic nanoparticle
sintering processes in a transmission electron microscope, along with critical
comparisons to the well-known sintering phenomena that occur between micron-
scale particles, will form the cornerstones of our analytical approach to this
problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project include
international collaboration with the University of Liverpool and integration of
this work into course taught through the state-of-the-art interactive classroom
at Lehigh University. This facility enables connection to other Pennsylvania
universities, as well as future expansion to several minority-serving
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;