* 0304523
* NIRT: Developing a Nanoscale Sensing Device for Measuring the Supply of Iron to Phytoplankton in Marine Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* D. Whitney King, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Clark C. K. Liu
* 07/31/2007
* USD 903,840.00

0304523&lt;br/&gt;Wells&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activity:
&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to NSE
NSF-02-148.&lt;br/&gt;There is increasing evidence that Fe has a singularly
unique role in marine ecosystems, both regulating total phytoplankton production
in high nitrate, low chlorophyll regions of the world, and influencing the
predominant composition of the phytoplankton assemblages found in others. It is
remarkable then that there is no agreement about how to define biologically
available Fe, in contrast to the macronutrients nitrogen, phosphorous or
silicon. Current attempts to attain predictive insights to how ocean ecosystems
will influence the magnitude of climate change are blocked in large part by this
question, along with an extreme shortage of data on Fe distributions in the
oceans. There is recent evidence that Fe availability can be regulated in bulk
seawater incubations by small additions of the fungal siderophore
desferrioximine B (DFB). The Fe-DFB complex is not readily available to
eukaryotic phytoplankton, so that if the quantity of Fe complexed by DFB were
measured and calibrated to Fe uptake by phytoplankton it could yield a novel
first order measure of Fe availability. Building from our current research we
have developed liposomes that specifically acquire DFB-bound Fe from solution.
These devices, 100 nm in diameter, open the way to applying nanotechnology to
create a new breed of Fe biosensors in marine waters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project goals are to 1) optimize these nanodevices by improving their physical
robustness, identifying the size/functionality relationship, and examining the
efficacy of other DFB-Fe transporter molecules, 2) develop self-reporting
capabilities for quantifying Fe uptake by these nanodevices, and 3) to calibrate
the capture of Fe by these nanodevices to the Fe uptake by various phytoplankton
species. The anticipated final product will be a calibrated nanoscale biosensor
for laboratory-scale use that could then be adapted for deploying on remote
vehicles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Resulting from the Proposed
Activity: The two institutions involved in this project (U. Maine and Colby
College) have a strong track record for involving undergraduate and graduate
students in cutting edge research in marine science and chemistry, and this
project will continue this process.