* 0304380
* NER:     Interplay of Magnetism and Superconductivity at the Nanometer Scale
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Carlos Sa de Melo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This is a Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) award for a proposal submitted
through the Nanoscale Science and Engineering solicitation. A theoretical
program will be initiated to explore the interplay of magnetism and
superconductivity in complex oxide nanostructures. The research is highly
exploratory due to the complexity of the materials involved. Until very
recently, conventional wisdom in any engineered nanostructure dictated that
magnetism should completely destroy superconductivity at the nanometer scale.
However, experimental efforts in the past year have shown that coexistence of
magnetism and superconductivity is possible in Manganese-oxide/Cuprate-oxide
nanometer scale heterostructures with characteristic length scales less than
sixty nanometers. This is in sharp contrast to many heterostructures made of
conventional magnets and conventional superconductors, where the interplay of
superconductivity and magnetism has been studied. In this case the conclusion
was that superconductivity and magnetism could not coexist at the nanometer
scale , and certainly not at temperatures above forty Kelvin. The discovery of
the coexistence in Manganses-oxide/Cuprate-oxide nanostructures leads to several
important intellectual issues that need to be addressed at the nanometer scale.
These issues include understanding of fundamental aspects like the magnetic
proximity effect on d-wave superconductivity, the superconducting (d-wave)
proximity effect on half-metallic ferromagnets, the stabilization of long-range
superconducting and magnetic order in multilayers (experimentally available for
complex oxides), and lateral wires and quantum dot arrays (not experimentally
available for complex oxides).

Nanoscale device concepts will also be proposed which rely on the interplay of
Cuprate-oxide superconductivity and Manganese-oxide magnetism at the nanometer
scale. One such device concept is called the super-colossal magneto-resistance
switch . Work on ultra-thin heterostructures will lead to better understanding
of nanostructures currently available. %%% This is a Nanoscale Exploratory
Research (NER) award for a proposal submitted through the Nanoscale Science and
Engineering solicitation. A theoretical program will be initiated to explore the
interplay of magnetism and superconductivity in complex oxide nanostructures.
The research is highly exploratory due to the complexity of the materials
involved. Until very recently, conventional wisdom in any engineered
nanostructure dictated that magnetism should completely destroy
superconductivity at the nanometer scale. However, experimental efforts in the
past year have shown that coexistence of magnetism and superconductivity is
possible in Manganese-oxide/Cuprate-oxide nanometer scale heterostructures with
characteristic length scales less than sixty nanometers.

Nanoscale device concepts will also be proposed which rely on the interplay of
Cuprate-oxide superconductivity and Manganese-oxide magnetism at the nanometer
scale. One such device concept is called the super-colossal magneto-resistance
switch . Work on ultra-thin heterostructures will lead to better understanding
of nanostructures currently available. ***

