* 0304971
* RUI:     Applications of Symbolic and Algebraic Dynamics to Knot Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Susan Williams, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2008
* USD 253,150.00

The investigators will combine their two areas of expertise,&lt;br/&gt;topology
and dynamical systems, to investigate open questions&lt;br/&gt;in knot theory.
In particular, they will investigate Lehmer's&lt;br/&gt;Question. Seventy years
ago D.H. Lehmer began constructing large prime&lt;br/&gt;numbers using
polynomials that are small in a precise sense:&lt;br/&gt;integral polynomials
with Mahler measure close to but&lt;br/&gt;different from 1. Lehmer could do no
better than 1.17628...,&lt;br/&gt;a value that he achieved with a remarkable
polynomial of&lt;br/&gt;degree 10. He then asked if that value could
improved.&lt;br/&gt;Lehmer's Question remains open despite the best efforts
of&lt;br/&gt;many. Lehmer's polynomial continues to appear in
surprisingly&lt;br/&gt;separated fields. The investigators will attack Lehmer's
Question from the&lt;br/&gt;perspective of topology and geometry. They will
investigate&lt;br/&gt;applications of Mahler measure to the study of knots
and&lt;br/&gt;links. Their methods will include traditional ones
from&lt;br/&gt;commutative algebra, group theory, geometry and topology,
as&lt;br/&gt;well as new techniques, many from dynamical systems.
Computer&lt;br/&gt;methods will be used to develop
examples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical theory of knots arose
from&lt;br/&gt;physical theories of the nineteenth century. Since
then,&lt;br/&gt;the field has expanded greatly, attracting the
interests&lt;br/&gt;of scientists in many fields, including biology,
chemistry&lt;br/&gt;and physics. Some reasons for the attraction are not hard
to&lt;br/&gt;see. DNA, solar plasma filaments and fluid flow, for
example,&lt;br/&gt;all exhibit knotting or linking behaviour. The
investigators&lt;br/&gt;will combine their two areas of expertise, topology
and&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems, to investigate open questions in
knot&lt;br/&gt;theory. The proposed research will provide new
understanding&lt;br/&gt;of knots and links by using techniques from
symbolic&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems, a mathematical branch of
information&lt;br/&gt;theory. It will promote and strengthen interaction
between&lt;br/&gt;researchers in different fields. Undergraduate and
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students will participate in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;