* 0304445
* Homotopy Theory Conference in Kinosaki, Japan
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Stewart Priddy, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2004
* USD 21,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0304445 Principal Investigator: W. Stephen Wilson

A major international conference on homotopy theory and algebraic topology will
be held July 28 - August 1 in Kinosaki, Japan. The conference will honor
Professor Goro Nishida of Kyoto University on the occasion of his 60th birthday.
Professor Nishida has been the dominant force in algebraic topology in Japan for
the last 10 years. With his name associated with the conference, participants
will be attracted from all over the world. It will be a major meeting place for
mathematicians who do not normally manage to get together. The conference will
focus on the broad range of subjects which Professor Nishida has influenced
which are still critical to today's research agenda in the field: localization,
periodicity in homotopy theory, Morava K-theory, infinite loop spaces, homology
and cohomology operations, modular forms, group cohomology and classifying
spaces.

This proposal is for funding to supply transportation for researchers from the
U.S.A. to attend the conference. The conference itself is funded by Japan
including the local support of our participants. This conference will be the
major international conference in the field for the year 2003. Distance and cost
makes it difficult for Japanese and American mathematicians to mix on a scale
like this with any frequency. This will be the biggest opportunity in over a
decade (since Professor Toda's 60th birthday conference) for many non-Japanese
to attend a conference in this field in Japan. Such an opportunity may not come
again for another decade. This grant will allow several graduate students and
recent Ph.D.s to attend. It will also fund the largest contingent of U.S. women
to ever attend a conference in our field in Japan. In addition, it will fund
some researchers who have regular contact with Japan through previous visits and
graduate students. This contact will have a much broader impact on research than
just the conference. Participants will establish research relationships which
will last for many years and help stimulate more interaction. We would also
expect to recruit numerous Japanese graduate students to come to the U.S.A.
Bringing such students abroad is difficult to arrange, and the kind of personal
interactions that occur at such conferences speed up the process enormously. The
presence of a cadre of Japanese students with research experience in the USA is
enormously important for scientific exchange in the long run.