* 0304026
* NIRT: Spatially Ordered Self-Assembled Quantum Dot Gate Low Voltage/Power, High Speed Nanoscale Flash Memories
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2003,02/29/2008
* Bruce White, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/29/2008
* USD 1,250,000.00

This NIRT proposal focuses on the technology and underlying science for high-
speed, low power, high-density Si-Ge-C planar and vertical Flash Electrically
Erasable and Programmable Read Only Memories (EEPROMs) using high-k dielectrics
and Si-Ge-C or metal Self Assembled Quantum Dot (SAQD) floating gates.
Conventional flash EEPROMs have several serious drawbacks and this research
investigates new memory cell structures with the goal of providing a compact,
low-power, high-speed (programming, erase and read operation) semiconductor
memory technology for future integrated circuit devices. The research will
experimentally and theoretically explore: (1) the growth of ordered arrays of
Si-Ge-C and metal nanoparticles on dielectric surfaces, employing
chemical/physical vapor deposition (CVD or PVD) techniques that uncouple
nucleation from growth. We will try to achieve high densities, spatial control
and narrow particle size distributions, in concert with imprint lithography
techniques; (2) development of high-k-based flash memory to allow for physically
thicker, but electrically thinner "equivalent" oxides; (3) low band gap, high
mobility Si-Ge-C heterolayers in the channel of planar flash cells to act as
"cold cathodes"; (4) vertical nanoscale flash EEPROMs, which will allow bandgap
engineering using Si-Ge-C along the channel; 5) first-principles modeling of
nanoparticle structure evolution, including nucleation, growth, crystallization,
and encapsulation within the dielectric to support experimental growth studies;
and 6) theoretical modeling of hot carrier transport by hydrodynamic and Monte
Carlo simulation, tunneling transport using transfer matrix methods, and quantum
transport calculations of Coulomb blockade effects in the SAQDs. &lt;br/&gt;
SAQDs enhance charge retention and VT stability, as well as possibly allow
multi-level storage based on Coulomb blockade. High-k-based dielectrics should
provide high capacitive coupling, without sacrificing non-volatility, and allow
for lower-voltage and/or higher-speed operation through the potential-reduction
in barrier height to channel hot electron (CHE) injection and tunneling, and
increased device lifetime because of the thicker tunneling barriers under low
field storage conditions. Si-Ge-C planar flash cells should enhance impact
ionization and CHE, for reduction of operating voltages/powers and increasing
programming speed. Vertical cell structures will allow the highest possible
densities in a so-called cross-point architecture where the cell is located at
the intersection of the wordline and bitline. &lt;br/&gt;The collaborative
nature of the research will enhance the graduate student experience and develop
team-building skills. The four graduate students will benefit from the joint
supervision of the four co-PIs. Through this experience they will learn more
about the areas outside their major area of study, and gain an appreciation of
how other disciplines define problems and approach their solution. They will
also get a chance to mentor under-grad students and get them excited with
cutting-edge nanotechnology research. To bring the excitement of nanoscale
objects and devices to the general public and to pre-college students, the co-
investigators and their students will develop, produce and display exhibits that
explain these revolutionary devices and their fabrication. The exhibits will be:
used at local and regional science fun days and fairs; made available for
display at regional K-12 schools and museums; and used in a traveling exhibit
trailer that brings engineering awareness to underrepresented constituencies in
Texas. We will have a strong industrial linkage with Dr. Bruce White, Manager of
"Advanced Materials and Memories" at Motorola, Austin. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;