* 0304657
* NER:  Ultrasonic Standing Wave Manipulation of Retroviral Gene Delivery to Hematopoietic Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Ching-An Peng, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

0304657&lt;br/&gt;Peng&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to
Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 02-148, category NER.
Retrovirus-mediated gene therapy is one of the most commonly used methods to
deliver and express the gene of interest in clinical and research area, because
of its capability of stable gene integration to the chromosomes of target cells.
In order to elevate the efficiency of retroviral transduction, several
restrictions such as low virus-cell encounters and the necessity of cell
division have to be overcome. The objective of this study is to harness
ultrasonic standing waves generated by piezoelectric transducer and reflector to
bring hematopoietic cells and retroviruses into close membrane contacts at the
pressure nodal planes, and therefore enhance the gene delivery efficiency. The
development of an acoustic chamber and innovative operation of the device will
decrease the undesired acoustic streaming and thermal convection which may
prevent the aggregation of particulates with diameter around 100 nanometer such
as retroviruses. The success of this proposed study will provide an innovative
method to the field of gene therapy. In addition to training graduate students,
the undergraduate students will actively participate in the development of new
technology.