* 0304178
* NIRT:  Semiconducting Nanowires:  Novel Phenomenon and Nanoscale Sensors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Srinivas Tadigadapa, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,546,000.00

This NIRT (nanoscale interdisciplinary research team) project resulted from a
proposal submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and
Engineering" (NSF 02-148). The project pursues the growth and study of highly
pure, defect-free elemental and compound semiconductor nanowires (SNWs) with
diameters as small as 2nm. Fundamental knowledge of the growth and
nanofrabication of SNW devices and sensors, as well as the development of
generalized nano-workbenches to study electronic and thermal transport in
nanowires is sought. The approach to nanowire growth includes "Electric Field
Oriented growth from Nanoscale Tips (EFONT)". Nano-etching and -doping using a
focused ion beam (FIB) will be explored. The project aims to acquire the
fundamental knowledge and techniques needed to make state-of-the-art electronic
devices and sensors. In the 2-10 nm wire-diameter regime, strong quantum
confinement effects in electronic and phonon states are anticipated, but are yet
to be studied in detail and theoretically modeled. Raman scattering and
photoconductivity measurements will be carried out on individual wires to
investigate confinement effects on the electronic and phonon states. Fundamental
studies of electrical, optical, phonon and thermal transport properties in
nanowires as a function of temperature and doping will be conducted. Detailed,
"on-chip" studies of the transport of heat and charge in isolated small-diameter
SNWs will be facilitated by "nano-workbenches" developed as part of this
project. Similarly, SNWs will be investigated as photo-detectors, fast
bolometric infrared detectors, gas sensors, high-performance thermoelectric
materials, heat sensors, and as heat pipes. A challenging goal of this project
is the demonstration of room temperature, single-electron devices from crossed
SNWs. SNW n-p junctions and heterojunctions and their electrical and electro-
optical properties will also be addressed. The project expects to establish
requirements for observation of strong quantum confinement effects in nanowires,
and to reduce the size limits of device fabrication with these
filaments.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic research issues
in a topical area of materials science and engineering with high technological
relevance. An important feature of the program is the integration of research
and education through the training of graduate and undergraduate students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant area. The project also fosters
mentoring between undergraduate students and young people of Pennsylvania
communities. A program is in place whereby university faculty, researchers,
graduate students and undergraduates participate in hands-on teaching, science-
based labs and activities to 5th-8th grade students. This activity is based on
weeklong sessions (camps) in several basic science topical areas. A special unit
on "Quantum Wires and Sensors" will be constructed and taught for this summer
camp. Undergrads in science and engineering will be employed as camp mentors and
also receive a summer research internship with co-PIs. The project is co-
supported by the MPS/DMR/EM ENG/ECS/EPDT, ENG/BES, ENG/CTS/TTTP, and MPS/DMR/SSC
Divisions/Programs.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;