* 0304284
* NER: Y-Junction Nanotube-based Computer Devices and Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Joseph Mundy, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

Proposal Number: 304284&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigators: R. Iris Bahar, Jie
Chen, Joseph Mundy&lt;br/&gt;Inst: Brown University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title:
NER: Y-Junction Nanotube-based Computer Devices and
Architectures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on exploratory research
in nano-scale &lt;br/&gt;computation. These new forms of computation will allow
for more&lt;br/&gt;efficient means of exploiting nano-scale electronics and
devices than&lt;br/&gt;those based on traditional silicon-based computation. In
particular,&lt;br/&gt;this research focuses on finding an effective means of
dealing with&lt;br/&gt;high defect rates found in nano-scale devices and
developing an&lt;br/&gt;architecture that is dynamically defect
tolerant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three areas are being developed: (1) Device
models are being defined&lt;br/&gt;based on Y-junction carbon nanotubes (CNTs).
This work may include&lt;br/&gt;use of self-assembly capabilities to program
interconnections of CNT&lt;br/&gt;devices and build I/O interfaces. (2) A
probabilistic-based design&lt;br/&gt;methodology for nano-scale computer devices
will be proposed based on&lt;br/&gt;the Markov random network and brief
propagation. This methodology&lt;br/&gt;allows for an architecture that adapts
to errors as a natural&lt;br/&gt;consequence of probability maximization,
thereby removing the need to&lt;br/&gt;actually detect faults. (3) A new course
in nano-computing will be&lt;br/&gt;introduced in fall 2003. The course will
offer a unique opportunity&lt;br/&gt;to expose students to the wide range of
disciplines that influence&lt;br/&gt;nano-computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;