* 0304470
* Space-Time Coding for Wireless Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Michael Fitz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 06/30/2005
* USD 269,652.00

Space-Time Coding for Wireless Communications&lt;br/&gt;Michael P. Fitz and
Urbashi Mitra&lt;br/&gt;Proposal 9980616,&lt;br/&gt;The Ohio State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research will extend the state of the art
in channel coding for&lt;br/&gt;multi-antenna communication systems. It has
recently been shown that&lt;br/&gt;the capacity of a wireless communications
system can be greatly&lt;br/&gt;increased if multiple antennae are used both at
the transmitter and the&lt;br/&gt;receiver. Furthermore, a method for achieving
such gains is to&lt;br/&gt;introduce controlled redundancy (coding) in the
transmitted data&lt;br/&gt;sequence spatially as well as temporally, which is
the conventional&lt;br/&gt;scheme. This area of research is still quite new and
several key&lt;br/&gt;problem areas need to be addressed. For example,
computationally&lt;br/&gt;efficient methods for finding space-time codes are
necessary. &lt;br/&gt;Typically, the wireless channel is time-varying and it is
not always&lt;br/&gt;possible to achieve good estimates of the channel
conditions; thus&lt;br/&gt;evaluating the robustness of space-time codes is of
value. A related&lt;br/&gt;project is to consider the interplay of space-time
coding and decoding&lt;br/&gt;methods with algorithms designed to estimate the
channel and other key&lt;br/&gt;communication parameters. Turbo codes have
recently emerged as&lt;br/&gt;powerful codes for achieving near Shannon
capacity, thus space-time&lt;br/&gt;generalizations of such codes will be
studied. Finally, much of the&lt;br/&gt;current work on space-time coding is for
narrowband time division&lt;br/&gt;multiple access systems, thus we shall
consider space-time code design&lt;br/&gt;and decoder design for wideband code-
division multiple-access systems&lt;br/&gt;as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
first research thrust will focus on the development and analysis&lt;br/&gt;of
improved search techniques for space-time trellis codes. Current
&lt;br/&gt;methods for searching the distance spectrum of space-time trellis
codes &lt;br/&gt;can be computationally expensive. Methods for reducing the size
of the &lt;br/&gt;error state trellis coupled with reduced complexity trellis
search schemes&lt;br/&gt;will be explored. The next focus is on evaluating the
robustness of space-time&lt;br/&gt;codes under realistic channel conditions. In
addition, space-time coding &lt;br/&gt;for parametric channels will be
considered. Thus, constrained channel &lt;br/&gt;uncertainty will exist and code
designs for such scenarios will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;The third research focus
will be on space-time turbo codes as one method to &lt;br/&gt;achieve robustness
to a variety of channel conditions. The random--like &lt;br/&gt;structure of
turbo coded schemes hold some promise of mitigating the possible
&lt;br/&gt;interactions between the code structure and the channel
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;Space-time code designs for CDMA channels will be
investigated in the &lt;br/&gt;fourth research thrust. CDMA signals have a
larger dimensionality and&lt;br/&gt;thus the space-time code design is different
from that for single-user &lt;br/&gt;systems. In addition, CDMA signals in a
multipath channel will result &lt;br/&gt;in different optimal code designs. The
final research topic will consider &lt;br/&gt;receiver designs in the context of
space-time coding. That is, channel &lt;br/&gt;estimation and synchronization
for space-time coding and modulation will&lt;br/&gt;be investigated. Algorithms
which exploit the properties of space-time&lt;br/&gt;codes will be designed. In
addition, the performance dependence on accurate&lt;br/&gt;channel estimates and
synchronization will be analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;