* 0304682
* NIRT:  Silicide Nanowires for Nanoelectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Peter Bennett, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,406,000.00

Scientific Impact:&lt;br/&gt;This NIRT proposal focuses on an exciting new
materials system: self-assembled epitaxial silicide nanowires (NWs). These
structures have many potential applications, including: low-resistance
interconnects; non-linear circuit elements; nano-electrodes for an "on-chip
molecular switch"; and chemical sensors. The scientific objectives are to:
understand and control the self-assembly process; control the placement of NWs
at desired locations; identify novel transport properties specific to NWs;
attach/grow molecules at the junctions between NWs. Complementary experimental
tools to be used include: scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), Low Energy
Electron Microscopy (LEEM), transmission electron microscopy (UHV-TEM) and
surface X-ray diffraction. Experimental work will be closely coupled with first-
principles calculations to help understand the electronic, transport and
material properties of the NWs.&lt;br/&gt;Achieving these goals would constitute
a fundamental advance in silicon nano-fabrication and circuit functionality. The
project involves exploratory interdisciplinary work that combines clean-room
fabrication methods with UHV-based crystal growth and surface chemistry on
nanoscale patterned structures. Demonstration of self-assembling metallic nano-
electrodes and interconnects would comprise a fundamental enabling technology
for a variety of research applications with silicon-based nanoscale
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt; An important goal of
this project is the integration of research, education, and industrial outlook.
Collaboration with an industrial partner, IBM, will assure that the research
program reflects contemporary issues in silicon nano-technology, and, at the
same time, allow high-risk, long term exploratory projects originating at the
university. Graduate students will learn interdisciplinary teamwork at the
boundary between the host departments of physics, electrical engineering and
materials science. Some will be directly involved in collaborations with
Motorola, IBM and Brookhaven National Lab, and they will gain the experience of
working in industrial setting. Undergraduates will participate through REU or
individual sponsors. Structural characterization on the nanoscale has a strongly
visual component that lends itself to public outreach. This will be coordinated
through a research experience for teachers (RET) program, a mobile "Patterns in
Nature" van, and a web-based visualization program, with self-guided
modules.&lt;br/&gt;