* 0304413
* NER:     Directed-Assembly of Microscopic Wires from Semiconductor Nanoparticles
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Bret Flanders, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 05/31/2005
* USD 47,255.00

Employing spontaneous assembly in the formation of targeted nanostructures holds
promise as a revolutionary approach to shrinking the dimensions of electronic
components down to (as low as) the diameter of the building block (~3nm). The
objective of this particular application is to manipulate the phase behavior of
2D populations of semiconductor nanoparticles in order to form microscopic
interconnects between arbitrarily chosen points in a circuit. This objective
will be attained through the successful pursuit of the following aims: (1) To
determine the dependence of the phase behavior on the experimental parameters
(capping layer thickness and particle diameter), such that the degree to which
dipolar interparticle interactions drive the spontaneous organization of these
populations will be determined. (2) To dielectrophoretically induce the
formation of microscopic wires of semiconductor nanoparticles between designated
points in a simple circuit. As an outcome of the proposed investigations, we
expect to have demonstrated that the experimental parameters can be adjusted so
that microscopic interconnects spontaneously form between arbitrarily chosen
points in a circuit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research proposed in this
application has the potential to solve the problem of interfacing a self-
assembled, microscopic component with macroscopic electronics, thereby allowing
for experimental evaluation of the electrical properties of the component. This
characterization will be necessary in order to identify practical tasks to which
the component can be fruitfully applied. It is also expected that determining
the dependence of the phase behavior on the experimental parameters will
generate quantitative insight into the interparticle potential-insight that will
provide further guidance in designing, implementing, and improving methods for
assembling targeted structures.&lt;br/&gt;