* 0304181
* SGER: Fossil Bone as a Paleoclimate Indicator
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Matthew Kohn, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 01/31/2005
* USD 24,570.00

Funding is requested to test the hypothesis that the d18O of the CO3 component
of fossil bone apatite can be used as a paleoclimate proxy analogously to
paleosol carbonate. Trace element, crystallinity, and sparse isotopic data
suggest that (a) bone recrystallizes significantly during fossilization, (b) the
d18O of the CO3 component of bone may correlate with local carbonates, and (c)
recrystallization occurs on a similar time scale as pedogenesis. That is,
alteration of bone, including isotopic alteration of bone CO3, appears to be a
pedogenic process.&lt;br/&gt;If so, then the isotopic compositions of bone CO3
and paleosol carbonate should correlate, and fossil bone could be used as a
paleoclimate proxy as an alternative to paleosol carbonate. Key to this proposal
is comparison of coexisting paleosol carbonate and the CO3 component of fossil
bone fragments. A collection of several hundred paleosols from the Oligocene
John Day Formation, central Oregon, now housed at John Day Fossil Beds National
Monument, uniquely provides the raw materials. Paleosol carbonate from each
paleosol has already been analyzed by Retallack and coworkers, and data show
isotope shifts that are both short-term (thousands of years) and long-term
(millions of years). Outstanding age dating and stratigraphic contexts permit
resolution of isotope shifts to tens of thousands of years (meters,
stratigraphically). Most importantly, an estimated 50 of these paleosols also
contain fossil bone fragments. Thus analysis of bone fragment compositions will
readily permit comparison with coexisting paleosol carbonate. It is additionally
important to identify the degree to which bone fragments adopt paleosol
compositions. Compositional profiling will first be conducted with select (5-10)
large bone fragments from the paleosol sequence to evaluate what portions of the
bone are altered (e.g., the entire bone irrespective of bone type and location,
cortical vs.&lt;br/&gt;cancellous bone, outer iuexposedlv vs. inner
inprotectedll portions, etc.). These data will help define a sampling protocol
that will then be applied to bone from the remaining paleosols. If bones are in
fact isotopically altered, compositional comparison with paleosol carbonate will
reveal whether bones are partially or completely altered to paleosol conditions.
Preservation of short-term (thousands of years) variations vs. only longer-term
trends will help define whether the time scale for alteration is indeed
thousands of years, as suggested by trace element and crystallinity studies, or
instead millions of years.&lt;br/&gt;Successful use of the CO3 component of
fossil bone as a paleoclimate indicator would be especially beneficial in areas
that are fossiliferous but lack paleosol carbonates (e.g., the Miocene of
central Oregon). Other areas of the world that are fossiliferous, but perhaps
not abundantly so, would become amenable to paleoclimate and tectonic research.
A positive outcome would also foster greater synergy between stable isotope
geochemists and paleontologists, as paleontological field prospecting crews are
well trained to identify and collect fossil bone, but not paleosols or paleosol
carbonates.&lt;br/&gt;