* 0304089
* NUE:  A Freshman-Level Introduction to Nanotechnology based on Scanning-Probe Instruments
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Wolfgang Porod, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2006
* USD 112,000.00

NUE Abstract&lt;br/&gt;NUE: A Freshman-Level Introduction to Nanotechnology
based on Scanning- probe Instrument&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is part of
Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 02-148, category NUE and is
supported by the CISE/CCR and ENG/EEC programs. This award supports a team led
by Wolfgang Porod at the University of Notre Dame to develop a freshman-level
course module which provides an introduction to nanotechnology based on content
and activities centered around scanning-probe instruments. This module, which
also serves as a vehicle to introduce general principles in multidisciplinary
engineering systems design, will consist of lectures, hand-on experimental
activities, and web-based tutorials. Assessment will be put at the heart of
module development. A key component of this module will be a model version of a
scanning-probe instrument, and we plan to use LEGO pieces and software since the
use of standard LEGO components will facilitate module dissemination. While this
module will be developed within the context of Notre Dame's existing EG 111/112
freshman course, it itself will be modular in nature, and it will be designed
that the different components can be used in different combinations, as deemed
appropriate for a given environment at another institution. Upon completion of
this project, a workshop will be held at Notre Dame where the finished module
will be introduced to interested educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;