* 0305465
* Ordered Phases of Solid and Liquid 3He in Defined Geometries
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Douglas Osheroff, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2007
* USD 390,000.00

This research focuses on the response of superfluid 3He B to the presence of
structures much smaller than the superfluid coherence length, x. These results
can serve as a paradigm for understanding how other unconventional BCS states,
such as the oxide superconductors, will respond to the presence of impurities.
In this work, the bending stiffness of the order parameter will be measured for
the first time by growing aerogel within an array of parallel plates. Here the
magnetic field competes with surface effects to orient the order parameter. In a
separate collaboration with Frank Gasparini of the University of Buffalo, the
superfluid 3He density will be studied in channels accurately etched in silicon
substrates. This will allow the first accurate measurements of the superfluid
gap suppression in well-defined confining geometries. Another experiment will
study the mobility of domain walls in U2D2 nuclear spin ordered solid 3He, to
see if this system might be a candidate for studying macroscopic quantum
tunneling. Graduate students involved in these projects will receive training in
ultra-low temperature refrigeration techniques, NMR spectroscopy, and the design
of sophisticated apparatus. This training has allowed previous students to go on
to successful careers in academia, national laboratories, and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This work will study how the scattering of superfluid
3He by strands just 5 nm in diameter in silica aerogels alter the properties of
the superfluid. This is a macroscopic quantum state, directly analogous to that
in superconductors, particularly the high temperature oxide superconductors. In
both cases impurity scattering can destroy the ordered state. By studying how
the superfluid is oriented in an aerogel sample grown in the gaps between
parallel plates using NMR techniques, it will be possible to measure how this
scattering affects the stiffness of the ordered state to bending for the first
time. In a separate collaborative study with Frank Gasparini, University of
Buffalo, superfluid 3He will be studied in well-defined narrow channels etched
in silicon substrates. This will allow an accurate first measurement of the
suppression of superfluidity by well defined, highly confining geometries. These
results should be useful in understanding how a broad class of superfluids and
superconductors will be affected by impurity scattering and confinement, from
the high Tc superconductors to the dense matter in neutron stars. Students in
this program learn techniques and materials physics that allow them to pursue
careers in academe government, and industrial settings.&lt;br/&gt;