* 0305407
* Dynamics,Disorder and Drive in Condensed Matter and Biological Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Cristina Marchetti, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2008
* USD 480,000.00

This grant funds theoretical research in condensed matter physics. Many of the
challenging problems in physics and biology involve understanding how
macroscopic organization on large scales arises in the presence of noise. The
noise may be thermal in nature or non-thermal, arising from quenched impurities
in real materials or activity (as from molecular motor, proton pumps, etc.) in
biological systems. The goal of this project is to build up a description of the
macroscopic nonequilibrium behavior of these systems from microscopic models.
The research will use a combination of analytical and numerical methods to study
examples from condensed matter physics and biology that are of direct
experimental relevance and will lead to significant scientific advances in each
of them. These examples include: new coarse-grained models of driven extended
media that are plastically deformed by the interplay between disorder and drive;
driven dynamics of periodic media with periodic pinning at finite temperature;
and rheological properties and self-organization of active gels and membranes
such as cytoskeleton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary research will
provide broad training for graduate students and postdoctoral associates.
Research results will be incorporated into coursework.&lt;br/&gt; %%%&lt;br/&gt;
This grant funds theoretical research in condensed matter physics. Many of the
challenging problems in physics and biology involve understanding how
macroscopic organization on large scales arises in the presence of noise. The
noise may be thermal in nature or non-thermal, arising from quenched impurities
in real materials or activity (as from molecular motor, proton pumps, etc.) in
biological systems. The goal of this project is to build up a description of the
macroscopic nonequilibrium behavior of these systems from microscopic models.
The research will use a combination of analytical and numerical methods to study
examples from condensed matter physics and biology that are of direct
experimental relevance and will lead to significant scientific advances in each
of them. This interdisciplinary research will provide broad training for
graduate students and postdoctoral associates. Research results will be
incorporated into
coursework.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;