* 0305634
* Collaborative Research:     Analytic and Geometric Aspects of Convergence Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Martin Bridgeman, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 107,374.00

DMS-0305634&lt;br/&gt;Martin Bridgeman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
proposal details a program that the&lt;br/&gt;researchers are pursuing to
extract geometric, analytic and&lt;br/&gt;dynamic information concerning
discrete groups of quasiconformal&lt;br/&gt;mappings acting on a compact metric
space. The researchers'&lt;br/&gt;program consists of three ``themes'': The
first theme concerns&lt;br/&gt;certain geometric properties of Kleinian groups
that are induced&lt;br/&gt;from the existence of the ergodic Liouville measure
on the unit&lt;br/&gt;tangent bundle of a geometrically finite hyperbolic
manifold. A&lt;br/&gt;primary goal is to pair Liouville theory with
quasiconformal&lt;br/&gt;deformation theory to the extent that it is revealing
of the&lt;br/&gt;geometry of the deformation space of hyperbolic
structures&lt;br/&gt;uniformizing a compact co-infinite hyperbolizable three-
manifold.&lt;br/&gt;The second theme details an ongoing program to show that
various&lt;br/&gt;analytical, dynamical and topological properties of
Kleinian&lt;br/&gt;groups (e.g. the exponent of convergence, Hausdorff
dimension,&lt;br/&gt;porosity, etc.) illuminate the action of the group when the
group&lt;br/&gt;in question is generalized to a discrete convergence group.
In&lt;br/&gt;this setting the researchers are primarily concerned
with&lt;br/&gt;discrete quasiconformal groups. The third theme centers
around&lt;br/&gt;certain non-equivariant interactions between complex analysis
and&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic geometry; it generalizes the first two themes.
The&lt;br/&gt;motivating question is: How does the asymptotic geometry of
the&lt;br/&gt;convex hull boundary of a Jordan curve reflect the
conformal&lt;br/&gt;geometry of the curve? Under various stronger assumptions
the&lt;br/&gt;researchers are investigating aspects of this question from
both&lt;br/&gt;a geometric and analytic perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research described in this proposal resides at the&lt;br/&gt;intersection
between hyperbolic geometry and conformal analysis.&lt;br/&gt;These topics form
a vast and fundamental area of study in&lt;br/&gt;mathematics which dates back
to the 18th century, when it was&lt;br/&gt;developed by such mathematicians as
Gauss, Lobachevsky, Klein,&lt;br/&gt;and Poincare. Though this proposal does not
directly address&lt;br/&gt;physics, we note that both hyperbolic geometry and
conformal&lt;br/&gt;analysis (especially in the guise of Teichmuller theory)
have&lt;br/&gt;found recent spectacular application in theoretical physics
and&lt;br/&gt;cosmology. The proposers are dedicated researchers and
educators,&lt;br/&gt;and Boston College and Wesleyan University both have strong
dual&lt;br/&gt;identities as teaching and research institutions. An
innovative&lt;br/&gt;component of the proposal is to use its multi disciplinary
nature&lt;br/&gt;to introduce motivated undergraduates to areas of
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;that are currently not well represented (e.g. geometry
and&lt;br/&gt;analysis) in the undergraduate degree programs at the
proposers'&lt;br/&gt;respective institutions. The researchers propose to
initiate and&lt;br/&gt;maintain a ``Joint Boston College - Wesleyan University
Working&lt;br/&gt;Groups for Undergraduates and Beginning Graduate Students,''
in&lt;br/&gt;part to entice talented undergraduates into consideration of
a&lt;br/&gt;career in mathematical research.