* 0305502
* International Research Fellowship Program: Evaluating Sustainable Development on Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Thomas Abel, Abel                    Thomas         D
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 01/31/2005
* USD 67,190.00

0305502 Abel

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twelve month research fellowship by Dr. Thomas D. Abel to
work with Dr. Shu-Li Huang at the National Taipei University if Taipei, Taiwan.

This project will evaluate the impacts of the new and growing "sustainable
tourism" industry on Taiwan. It will involve the use of ecological economics to
evaluate the sustainability, carrying capacity, and linked natural and human
transformations that result from tourism development. Expected results will be
the production of ecological footprint measurements of large and small tourism
development sites. Other indices will be produced to judge the carrying capacity
and intensity of existing and proposed tourism developments. Ethnographic
research will measure transformations in political-economic hierarchy and
economic strategies of households adjacent to existing tourism centers. With the
assistance of Dr. Huang, this study will use computer modeling to produce
scenarios of possible Taiwan futures. This research will provide policymakers
and researchers with quantitative indicators. It will demonstrate the usefulness
of linked human-ecological research for understanding the consequences and
benefits of economic development in an interdependent global community.