* 0305644
* NGS:Montage: An Integrated End-to-End Design and Development Framework for Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* James Browne, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2007
* USD 946,000.00

As today's wireless networks transition from circuit-switched voice to internet
protocol (IP) based traffic, there is a critical need to accurately and rapidly
model the performance of emerging end-to-end user applications. Surprisingly,
today's wireless systems treat all the higher layer protocols of the network
stack as invisible and irrelevant in the development of wireless standards
(e.g., WCDMA, EDGE, and IEEE 802.11a). Future wireless networks must abandon
this archaic viewpoint of separation, and must use cross-layer knowledge to
enable the next generations of ubiquitous wireless applications. In fact, one of
the major stumbling blocks to designing and deploying the new generation of
wireless network services is the lack of sophisticated computational tools for
end-to-end systems modeling and simulation. Next generation simulation
environments must address both the fidelity of modeling needed for the channel
and physical levels of the protocol hierarchy and, at the same time,
interactively exploit these features&lt;br/&gt;in software protocols employed at
the higher layers. When such an approach is used, it becomes possible to create
a powerful, accurate, end-to-end modeling environment for the development of the
next generation of wireless data networks. This proposal will develop the first
academic end-to-end multi-layer simulator and emulator for wireless networks.
Montage -an integrated protocol development environment -will support the
evolutionary design, development, and test of wireless network protocols. It
will enable wireless and ad-hoc mobile network researchers and system operators
across the country to design, develop, and analyze wireless hardware, network
protocols, middleware algorithms, and network applications in a single
integrated public-domain environment. Key research issues addressed in this
proposal include a unified multi-modeling methodology (simulation + emulation +
direct code execution), algorithms for smart scheduling, building a dynamic
compositional environment, and incorporating sophisticated performance models of
various network protocol layers. Montage thus addresses both the TPES
(Technology for Performance Engineered Systems) and the CADDS (Complex
Application Design and Support Systems) goals of the NSF Next Generation
Software (NGS) program. Development of Montage drives development of new methods
and techniques for integration of complex systems. It is simply not possible to
create an integrated system from several existing and semantically complex
systems on an ad hoc basis. The research tasks of this project derive from
interfacing and integration of systems, which have quite different semantic
bases, varied execution models, and span multiple levels of abstraction. One
task is to design interface specification languages that will enable
representation of the translations across the multiple semantics, execution
models and levels of abstraction. Applying the interface language to interface
and integrate the software systems, which together implement the Montage
methodology, will be a major component of this research. As application case
studies, this project will address key validation and design problems for large-
scale ad-hoc wireless networks, as well as large commercial cellular networks
that are transitioning from 2.5G to 3G. Today, these computational capabilities
do not exist. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Montage will be made available as a
public domain web portal with customized design scenario interfaces for network
researchers, educators, and commercial carriers. Montage shall also serve as a
national archive for measured network performance and as a repository of designs
selected by the user community. Montage will enable researchers to setup virtual
testbeds, validate their modeling, and design and test middleware algorithms for
wireless networks of the future. The principal investigators have an excellent
track record for creating valuable research products and learning materials for
education and training purposes. Furthermore, the investigators have proven
records for fostering economic growth by creating high-tech spinout companies.
Montage already has the support of key industrial constituencies (see supporting
letters), and will emerge as a valuable resource for researchers and
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;