* 0305114
* Analysis of Equations in the Physical, Material, and Life Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Yuxi Zheng, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 127,446.00

Abstract for NSF Proposal DMS-0305114&lt;br/&gt;PI: Yuxi Zheng&lt;br/&gt;(Title:
Analysis of Equations in the Physical, Material, and Life
Sciences)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yuxi Zheng proposes to study the Euler
equations modeling inviscid fluids, &lt;br/&gt;Cahn-Hilliard and Ginzburg-Landau
equations in phase-field modeling of alloys, &lt;br/&gt;nonlinear variational
wave equations modeling liquid crystals, &lt;br/&gt;Schrodinger-Poisson and
Vlasov-Poisson equations in plasma physics, &lt;br/&gt;and the protein folding
problem in molecular biology. His objectives are &lt;br/&gt;to gain both better
understanding and simplifications of complexity, which &lt;br/&gt;include
complexity reduction for the protein folding problem, effect of
&lt;br/&gt;solutes on the enhancement of strength of alloys, and mechanism of
singularity &lt;br/&gt;formation in air, water, and liquid crystals. The methods
include hard, soft, &lt;br/&gt;and asymptotic analysis, numerical computation,
and techniques of mathematical &lt;br/&gt;modeling. The mathematical issues
proposed to study are all fundamental for &lt;br/&gt;the understanding of the
respective subject areas. For instance, the search &lt;br/&gt;for a measurement
of distance between three points in the protein folding &lt;br/&gt;problem is to
reduce drastically the huge number of local minima of the energy
&lt;br/&gt;potential and thus bring the complexity to a comprehensible level.
The issues &lt;br/&gt;proposed in the phase-field model of alloys is to provide
the quantitative as &lt;br/&gt;well as qualitative foundation for manipulating
the effect of solutes in &lt;br/&gt;strengthening the alloys. The theoretical
issue regarding the limit from &lt;br/&gt;Schrodinger-Poisson to Vlasov-Poisson
equations is a consistency issue of &lt;br/&gt;great importance in the overall
understanding of matter and mathematical &lt;br/&gt;modeling. The investigation
of these mathematical issues will&lt;br/&gt;(1) yield new understanding
regarding alloys, liquid, gases, plasmas, &lt;br/&gt;liquid crystals, and bio-
materials, which are critical for the advancement &lt;br/&gt;of many engineering
sciences such as protein-engineering, drug designing, &lt;br/&gt;solid solution
hardening, aerospace engineering, robot designing, energy &lt;br/&gt;efficient
devices, etc.; (2) provide advanced training for graduate students &lt;br/&gt;or
postdoctoral researchers; (3) enhance collaboration and cross training
&lt;br/&gt;of faculties between mathematics, material research, physics,
biochemistry, &lt;br/&gt;molecular biology, and other life sciences, thereby
establish a foundation &lt;br/&gt;for training students in this broad area while
promoting research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yuxi Zheng proposes to study some
applied mathematical problems in fluid &lt;br/&gt;dynamics (which includes the
motion of air and water), modeling of alloys, &lt;br/&gt;plasma physics, protein
folding in molecular biology, and liquid crystal &lt;br/&gt;physics in material
science. Scientists and engineers have used mathematical &lt;br/&gt;equations,
called partial differential equations, to model motions or &lt;br/&gt;evolution.
The turbulent nature and/or defects in the materials and the
&lt;br/&gt;complexity of life show up in the form of singularities and
instabilities &lt;br/&gt;in the solutions of the equations or in the complexity
of the equations &lt;br/&gt;themselves. In the protein folding problem, the
equations themselves need &lt;br/&gt;to be mathematically simplified for a
computer to do real time numerical &lt;br/&gt;simulation. In all the other
cases, where the equations are quite simple, &lt;br/&gt;it is these
singularities and instabilities that often spoil accurate &lt;br/&gt;numerical
computations of the solutions. Yuxi Zheng plans to use the state &lt;br/&gt;of
the art analytical tools to study the structures of the singular solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;In the case of a compressible gas such as air, for example, Yuxi
Zheng plans &lt;br/&gt;to isolate typical singularities (hurricanes, tornadoes,
shocks, etc.) &lt;br/&gt;and investigate their individual structures. The result
of the investigation &lt;br/&gt;will be a clear understanding of the worst
possible solutions, or drastic &lt;br/&gt;reduction of complexity, and thereby
quantify our knowledge of the physics &lt;br/&gt;and offer guidance in high-
performance numerical computations of general &lt;br/&gt;solutions. The success
here will influence scientific areas such as &lt;br/&gt;alloys, liquid, gases,
plasmas, liquid crystals, and bio-materials, and &lt;br/&gt;provide critical
knowledge for the advancement of many engineering sciences &lt;br/&gt;such as
protein-engineering, drug designing, solid solution hardening,
&lt;br/&gt;aerospace engineering, robot designing, energy efficient devices,
etc. &lt;br/&gt;In addition, the success here will provide advanced training for
graduate &lt;br/&gt;students and postdoctoral researchers and enhance
collaboration and cross &lt;br/&gt;training of faculties between mathematics,
material research, physics, &lt;br/&gt;biochemistry, molecular biology, and
other life sciences, thereby establish a &lt;br/&gt;foundation for training
students in this broad area while promoting research.&lt;br/&gt;