* 0305254
* Controlling the Morphology and Electronic Properties of Conjugated Polymer/Metal Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Benjamin Schwartz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 539,488.00

This project addresses how molecular-level structure of polymer/electrode
interfaces is related to optoelectronic device performance. When a metal is
evaporated onto a conjugated polymer, car-bon-carbon bonds may be broken, metal-
carbon bonds may be formed, and the polymer may be-come electrically doped.
Additionally, the way charge is injected into polymer-based devices is
determined by details of the chemistry at polymer/metal interfaces. The approach
pursued takes advantage of surface-specific non-linear optical spectroscopies,
second harmonic and sum fre-quency generation, to directly probe the chemical
structure of conjugated polymer interfaces. Ini-tial experiments focus on
polymer/vacuum interfaces, relating non-linear optical signals with
morphological information from microscopic (AFM) studies. Additional experiments
will ex-plore the existence of metal-carbon bonds and the extent of doping of
the polymer at poly-mer/metal interfaces. Additionally, interfacial carrier
dynamics will be probed in operating de-vices, allowing device performance to be
correlated with specific changes in polymer/metal inter-facial structure. The
overall goal is to relate interfacial properties and morphology with device
performance, so that the interfaces can be optimized for desired applications.
&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research issues
associated with electronic/photonic materials having technological relevance.
The broader impacts of this proposal are several-fold. The pro-posed experiments
will educate students at the undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral levels in
the subject areas of lasers, optics, advanced spectroscopies, nanometer-scale
structural measure-ments, semiconductor physics, and optoelectronic device
fabrication. Moreover, these educa-tional opportunities will be provided to
students traditionally under-represented in the physical sciences. Because metal
electrodes are necessary for the operation of any type of polymer-based device,
the methods and measurements developed in this project will enhance areas of
research outside the immediate focus of the project. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;