* 0305966
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,11/30/2005
* Michael Hickerson, Hickerson, Michael J
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 11/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary
Informatics for fiscal year 2003. The fellowship supports research and training
at the postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational,
computational, mathematical, and statistical sciences. The goal of the
fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a
career in biological informatics in which research and education will be
integrated. These fellowships provide opportunities for interdisciplinary
research and educational activities in biology and informatics to a wide range
of recent doctoral recipients. There is an increasing need for training in
biological informatics at all occupational levels, and it is expected that
Fellows trained through these fellowships will play important roles in training
the future workforce.

The research and training plan is entitled "Combining genetic and fossil data to
reconstruct the ecological, evolutionary and climatic past." This research
provides a new way to reconstruct the history of coexisting species by combining
population genetic and fossil data into a single Bayesian analysis. This
synergistic methodology is being applied to the current range of different types
of globally accessible information and will benefit the fields of paleoecology
and phylogeography.