* 0305916
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Joshua Akey, Akey                    Joshua         M
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others). It is expected that the Fellows trained through these
fellowships will play an important role in training the future workforce.
Postdoctoral research and training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.

The research and training plan is entitled "Delineating the genetic and
molecular architecture of quantitative traits through gene expression
profiling." The goal of this project is to characterize the genetic architecture
of gene expression levels in yeast using functional genomic, bioinformatic, and
statistical tools. Particular emphasis is being given to multivariate and
informatics based approaches that move beyond identifying marginal gene effects
to efficiently explore, model, and identify epistatic and pleiotropic
quantitative trait loci.