* 0305472
* Epitaxial Growth of Uniaxially and Biaxially Mismatched Silicide Films on Silicon
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Martin Crimp, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2007
* USD 433,268.00

The goal of this project is greater understanding of epitaxial growth of
strained layers when the mismatch between overlayer and substrate is
anisotropic. Focus is on the epitaxial growth of rare earth silicides on the
silicon (001) surface. Rare earth silicides are ideal test systems, since they
provide a wide range of both anisotropic and isotropic mismatches with respect
to the Si(001) substrate. The structural and compositional similarity between
the silicide phases formed, and the ability to vary the silicide lattice
constants by judicious choice of rare earth metal, provide a unique opportunity
to study growth behavior as a function of both biaxial and uniaxial lattice
mismatch in epitaxially grown films, with other parameters such as surface
energy held constant. Another feature in these systems is the fact that silicide
nanowires form in the initial stages of growth. Therefore, the research will
also test the relative importance of different mechanisms that have been
proposed for nanowire formation in diverse materials systems. These issues have
rele-vance to the general understanding of strained layer epitaxy, and the
specific extension of this understanding to cases where the strain is
anisotropic. The results of this research may also help develop ways of growing
both better quality nanowires, and better quality metal silicide films in
general. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;This project addresses basic research issues
in a topical area of materials science with significant technological relevance.
An important feature of the project is the training of graduate students as
researchers with skills in several different atomic resolution characterization
techniques. Much of the data produced will be visual in nature, which makes it
particularly suitable for presentation to a wide range of age groups with a
general interest in science and engineering. Material will be developed and
integrated into outreach and educational activities in a variety of venues, with
the goal of informing the widest possible public about basic research in
materials and its relevance to both scientific knowledge and future
technological applications.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;