* 0305647
* "US- Spain Cooperative Research:  From Source to Target: A Collaborative Search for the Signal"
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* David Hannapel, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 05/31/2005
* USD 29,321.00

0305647&lt;br/&gt;Hannapel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year award for US-
Spanish collaboration in plant molecular genetics involves David Hannapel of
Iowa State University and Salome Prat-Monguio at the National Center of
Biotechnology at the CSIC Campus of the University of Madrid, Spain. The
objectives of the project are to study the molecular controls for vegetative
growth of plants using tuberization of potato as a model. The project will
identify potential connections between source and target in this signaling
pathway, and the mechanism for signal transmission from leaf to the target
apical meristem. The project will focus on microarray analysis in both source
and target organs exposed to inductive conditions over discrete developmental
stages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US researcher brings to the collaboration
expertise in the role of transcription factors and their interacting partners in
regulating cell growth in target organs of a signaling pathway. This is
complemented by the Spanish researcher's expertise in the mechanism of light
perception, signal production, and transport inherent in the source organ. The
Spanish group has leading expertise in photoperiodic regulation and the role of
phytohormones in development. The results of the collaboration are expected to
an improved understanding of signaling mechanisms that would optimize growth in
a significant world food crop. &lt;br/&gt;