* 0305048
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in Geometry and General Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Daniel Pollack, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 120,512.00

This proposal presents a broad array of projects within three
distinct&lt;br/&gt;areas of geometric analysis. The first area concerns the
application of&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear gluing techniques to the Cauchy problem in
General Relativity.&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear gluing techniques have played a central
role in geometric&lt;br/&gt;analysis over the last 20 years. It is only recently
that they have been&lt;br/&gt;introduced as a useful tool in General Relativity.
Applications have&lt;br/&gt;included the existence of asymptotically flat vacuum
spacetimes with&lt;br/&gt;arbitrary spacial topology and those with no maximal
slices. The PI will&lt;br/&gt;extend and apply these powerful tools in a number
of important ways. The&lt;br/&gt;second set of projects studies the existence
and behavior of smooth&lt;br/&gt;Schr\"odinger maps. From a geometric point of
view the Schr\"odinger flow&lt;br/&gt;is the most natural dispersive equation as
it arises as the Hamiltonian&lt;br/&gt;flow of the Dirichlet energy for maps
between manifolds. This work will&lt;br/&gt;establish a bridge between the well-
developed theory of dispersive&lt;br/&gt;equations and important techniques from
geometric analysis. The third area&lt;br/&gt;is a continuation of the PI's work
on surfaces of constant mean curvature&lt;br/&gt;(CMC) in Euclidean 3-space. The
local structure of the moduli space of&lt;br/&gt;all such surfaces with a fixed
topology was previously worked out by the&lt;br/&gt;PI and his co-authors. The
development and application of new gluing&lt;br/&gt;techniques for CMC surfaces
has led to important advances in our ability&lt;br/&gt;to describe the global
structure of these moduli spaces. The PI will&lt;br/&gt;carry this work
significantly forward so that we may begin to obtain a&lt;br/&gt;more thorough
understanding of these basic geometric objects.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;General
Relativity is the physical theory which forms the cornerstone to&lt;br/&gt;our
understanding of the large scale structure of the Universe, and
has&lt;br/&gt;been intimately intertwined with differential geometry and
partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations since its inception at the beginning of
the 20th&lt;br/&gt;century. As with any physical theory, its dynamical
formulation (the&lt;br/&gt;Cauchy problem) is of central concern. The PI's
research on the Cauchy&lt;br/&gt;problem will develop and apply new analytic
techniques to General&lt;br/&gt;Relativity. The resolution of these problems
will bring us further in the&lt;br/&gt;long term goal of understanding how to
model physical phenomena via the&lt;br/&gt;mathematics of the initial data sets.
Analytically, the Schroedinger flow&lt;br/&gt;is a generalization of the
classical nonlinear Schroedinger equation,&lt;br/&gt;which has been intensively
studied. The proposed program concerning the&lt;br/&gt;Schroedinger flow will
foster the development of a new area of geometric&lt;br/&gt;dispersive systems.
Surfaces of constant mean curvature arise naturally&lt;br/&gt;as the surfaces
which locally minimize their surface area while&lt;br/&gt;maintaining a fixed
enclosed volume. Soap bubbles form a familiar and&lt;br/&gt;important class of
examples of surfaces of constant mean curvature. The&lt;br/&gt;significance of
these research projects lies both in the importance of the&lt;br/&gt;particular
results which the PI will obtain and also in the continual&lt;br/&gt;development
of sophisticated techniques which enable one to approach
and&lt;br/&gt;understand problems which exhibit increasingly complex phenomena.
Much of&lt;br/&gt;this research is interdisciplinary both between distinct areas
within&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics and between Mathematics and Physics. While
important results&lt;br/&gt;have already been obtained, there is great potential
for expansion in&lt;br/&gt;these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;