* 0305798
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Joshua Weitz, Weitz, Joshua S
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others) who seek to conduct research on biological questions
using informatics tools and methods. It is expected that the Fellows trained
through these fellowships will play an important role in training the future
workforce. Postdoctoral training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research and
training plan for this fellowship is entitled "Multi-scale modeling of the
structure and dynamics of vascular plant networks." This study of vascular
plants has 3 primary aims: to develop a three-dimensional spatial model of
network growth in vascular plants; to implement mesoscopic computational models
of water transport coupled to the transportation network itself, and to scale up
individual models of vascular plant dynamics to carbon exchange at the ecosystem
level. &lt;br/&gt;