* 0305907
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Paul Higgins, Higgins                 Paul           A
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 10/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary
Informatics for fiscal year 2003. The fellowship supports research and training
at the postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational,
computational, mathematical, and statistical sciences. The goal of the
fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a
career in biological informatics in which research and education will be
integrated. These fellowships provide opportunities for interdisciplinary
research and educational activities in biology and informatics to a wide range
of recent doctoral recipients. There is an increasing need for training in
biological informatics at all occupational levels, and it is expected that
Fellows trained through these fellowships will play important roles in training
the future workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and training plan is
entitled "Biological responses and feedbacks to abrupt climate change."
Biological systems both depend on climate and control critical elements of the
climate system. Prediction of climate change and the impacts that result
therefore depends on better understanding of this two-way interaction. This
research examines the biosphere's role in the climate system by using
computational models that represent global scale processes of the earth
system.&lt;br/&gt;