* 0305397
* RUI:    Magnetic and Superconducting Properties of Nickel Borocarbides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* George Schmiedeshoff, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2007
* USD 160,406.00

This individual investigator award provides support to a researcher at an
undergraduate institution for a project that seeks a better understanding of the
competition between the low temperature states of novel metals and the ways in
which these states coexist with each other. The primary focus is on the
interplay between superconductivity, magnetism, and heavy fermion behavior in
the rare-earth nickel-borocarbides. The competition between superconductivity
and the charge density wave state of alpha-uranium will also be studied. Thermal
expansion and magnetostriction measurements will be the primary techniques used
to probe this competition. Resistivity and magnetoresistance measurements will
provide additional information. The results of these new measurements will be
combined with existing specific heat measurements in a Gruneisen analysis
characterizing the energy scales of these materials and their origins. This
research will advance our understanding of metals while training students drawn
from a diverse pool of talented undergraduates at Occidental College, a liberal
arts college in metropolitan Los Angeles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the broadest
sense, the goal of this individual investigator project is to discover how to
design materials with specific, pre-determined properties, such as powerful
magnets for motors and generators, or high-temperature superconductors for
efficient, economical power transmission. The immediate goal is to better
understand how superconductivity interacts with magnetism and other metallic
states. The project will focus on a series of compounds in which
superconductivity and magnetism co-exist. Superconductivity and magnetism are
usually mutually exclusive so the study of such materials can provide important
information about these phenomena. This research will advance our understanding
of metals while training undergraduates drawn from a diverse pool of talented
undergraduate students at Occidental College, a liberal arts college in
metropolitan Los Angeles. These students will be well-prepared for graduate
school and for joining the technical workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;