* 0305354
* The Effect of Long-range Dumbbell Ordering on the Properties and Microstructures of Rare Earth Permanent Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Jeffrey Shield, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2008
* USD 340,000.00

This grant explores the interrelationship between transition metal dumbbell
concentration, ordering, microstructure, and magnetic behavior of rare earth
permanent magnet systems based on structural derivatives of the CaCu5-type
structure. A major objective is to investigate various aspects associated with
transformations between the disordered TbCu7-type and ordered Th2Zn17-type
structures in Sm-Co, Pr-Co and Sm-Fe. The influences of the transition metal
dumbbell concentration and configuration, including the degree of long-range
order and the order pattern will be studied on the microstructure/magnetic
properties relationship. In addition, the effect of the overall microstructure
will be investigated on the reversal mechanism in magnets designed to have grain
structures ranging from the nanoscale to the microscale. A goal of the project
is to develop magnetic metrology techniques to tie the magnetic behavior to
microstructural features. Ultimately, the results will provide details of the
various atomic structure/microstructure/magnetic property relationships in rare
earth permanent magnets over length scales ranging from sub-nanometer to
micrometer.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Rare earth permanent magnets are integral to
technological advancements. Further miniaturization of devices, more electric
vehicles, more energy-efficient motors, and improved medical imaging technology
all require permanent magnets with higher energy densities and improved
performance in demanding environments. A complete understanding of the
interrelationships between structure and properties and an understanding of the
magnetization reversal process are critical to developing advanced permanent
magnet technology. Broader impacts include teaching and training of graduate and
undergraduate students, involvement of underrepresented groups in science and
engineering, and development of infrastructure through use of facilities at
Brookhaven, Argonne and Oak Ridge National
Laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;