* 0305313
* Laminations, Foliations and Flows in 3-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Sergio Fenley, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2008
* USD 289,695.00

Abstract.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Laminations, foliations and flows in
3-manifolds"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Essential laminations and Reebless
foliations are &lt;br/&gt;a basic and fundamental tool in the study of
3-manifolds. &lt;br/&gt;Their use yields deep results concerning 3-manifold
topology&lt;br/&gt;and they are also related to the geometrization
conjecture&lt;br/&gt;for 3-manifolds. One goal is to analyse the
existence&lt;br/&gt;question for laminations in 3-manifolds, particulary
for&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic 3-manifolds. The PI has recently shown
there&lt;br/&gt;are infinitely many hyperbolic 3-manifolds which do not
&lt;br/&gt;admit essential laminations. A natural question is how
&lt;br/&gt;common are essential laminations. The project will
&lt;br/&gt;investigate Dehn surgery on torus bundles over the
circle&lt;br/&gt;and general surface bundles and also special types
of&lt;br/&gt;laminations/foliations. The project will also
consider&lt;br/&gt;more general structures, such as loosesse laminations
and&lt;br/&gt;which properties they have. Another part of the project
is&lt;br/&gt;to understand the geometric behavior of foliations
and&lt;br/&gt;transverse pseudo-Anosov flows in hyperbolic 3-manifolds
&lt;br/&gt;- which is a very large class of manifolds. The focus will
&lt;br/&gt;be on the large scale geometric behavior in the universal
&lt;br/&gt;cover, which is fundamental for such manifolds. An important
&lt;br/&gt;question is whether such flows are quasigeodesic - this is
&lt;br/&gt;true in certain cases by previous work of the PI and Lee
&lt;br/&gt;Mosher. One goal is to use the quasigeodesic property for
&lt;br/&gt;the flows to derive information about the asymptotic behavior
&lt;br/&gt;of the foliation transverse to the flow. This is
specially&lt;br/&gt;promising in the case of general finite depth
foliations.&lt;br/&gt;Another goal is to connect these properties with the
universal&lt;br/&gt;circle of the foliation - establishing a link between the
global &lt;br/&gt;structure of the foliation and the global geometry of
the&lt;br/&gt;universal cover. Another project is to study properties
of&lt;br/&gt;limit sets of leaves of foliations in hyperbolic
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project aims to better
understand 3-manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds are widely used in the sciences:
for example&lt;br/&gt;knots and their properties are very relevant to
DNA&lt;br/&gt;research. 3-manifolds are also used to get mappings of
the&lt;br/&gt;brain and in other visualization techniques.
Understanding&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds can lead to progres in these other
areas.&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on laminations and foliations,
which&lt;br/&gt;are an essential and currently extremely dynamic area
in&lt;br/&gt;low dimensional topology. The proposed projects will have
&lt;br/&gt;an effect on some main research directions in the area.&lt;br/&gt;One
important goal is to attract students and postdoctoral &lt;br/&gt;researchers in
this exciting area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;