* 0305191
* Convexity and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Elisabeth Werner, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2006
* USD 120,000.00

ProposalDMS-0305910 PI: Elisabeth Werner (Case Western) TITLE: CONVEXIT AND
APPLICATIONS

ABSTRACT

The PI's research is in classical convexity theory and convex geometric
analysis. A primary goal is to get a better understanding of the structure of
convex bodies. To do so she uses techniques from different areas of mathematics:
analysis, differential geometry, convexity theory, probability theory. She
investigates isoperimetric inequalities and affine isoperimetric inequalities.
These provide powerful tools in characterizing and classifying convex sets.
Through her investigation of the affine surface area -originally a concept of
affine differential geometry and occurring in the affine isoperimetric
inequality- she was lately led to an extensive study of questions of
approximation of convex bodies by polytopes.The affine surface area appears
naturally in this context as it is related to the boundary structure of a convex
body. The PI has investigated and still is investigating different aspects of
approximation of convex bodies by polytopes. In one paper, for instance, she
-together with her collaborator- proved the surprising result that random
approximation by polytopes (choosing the vertices of the approximating polytope
randomly on the boundary of the body) is as good as best approximation. Besides
convexity tools, probabilistic tools,like concentration of measure, have proved
to be very efficient in convexity. The PI continues her investigation of such
probabilistic results for advancing her research in structural results in
convexity and its applications to local Banach space theory.

Past experience has led the PI to believe that purely theoretical concepts are
also useful in applications. She has experienced that the methods and results
from these areas find applications in other fields of mathematics and in applied
areas: Geometric tomography, a tool having its origins in classical convexity
theory, gives a method to recover convex shapes from its sections or
projections. This is used in computer vision and image analysis, in biology and
medicine where convex shapes(organs) occur naturally. Geometric algorithms find
applications in computer science.Tools from classical convexity theory and
geometric analysis have proved useful inquantum information theory. Convexity
theory has mutually beneficial interactions with probability theory, Banach
space theory,operator theory, the new quickly developing theory of random
matrices,some directions of discrete mathematicsincluding problems in complexity
theory, problems of statistical physics, PDEs,including non-linear PDEs arising
from problems in convex analysis. The PI finds it very stimulating to interact
with researchers not only from other areas of mathematics but also from applied
areas. She has already worked with mathematical physicists and continues to do
so. In particular, she has recently started to work on problems in quantum
information theory where methods from convexity theory are very effective.



