* 0305253
* Investigating the Phase Diagram of the High Temperature Superconductors by Angle-Resolved Photoemission (ARPES)
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2006
* Juan Carlos Campuzano, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2006
* USD 327,734.00

The superconducting phase transition in the underdoped high temperature
superconductors is rather unusual, in that it is not a mean-field transition as
other superconducting transitions are. Instead, it has been observed that a
pseudo-gap in the electronic excitation spectrum appears at a temperature T*
higher than Tc, while phase coherence, and superconductivity, are established at
Tc. This individual investigator project will probe the relationship of the
pseudogap to the superconducting gap. As doping is increased, the project will
investigate if T* continues to decrease below the superconducting transition
temperature Tc - making the pseudogap independent of the superconducting gap -
or whether T* becomes Tc beyond optimal doping. Determining the behavior of the
pseudogap will provide experimental evidence for which of several theories apply
to these materials. It is very difficult to determine whether there are two gaps
of different origin below Tc if the gaps have the same magnitude. This project
will use angle resolved photoemission with circularly polarized light. The PI
recently showed that this technique provides evidence that the state below T* is
rather unusual, it appears to break time reversal symmetry. Therefore, using
this technique it would be possible to separate the two gaps, and help determine
their origin. The students involved with this project will be exposed to
international collaborations and to performing research at national facilities.
They will receive training that will prepare them for future scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High temperature superconductors (HTSCs) were
discovered in 1987. They loose all resistance to electrical current at
temperatures near that of liquid air. It is still not understood how they work.
Superconducting materials discovered earlier are understood, and when they
superconduct, a gap appears in the energies available to the electrons. This gap
suppresses the energy loss mechanism in current transport. However, in the
HTSCs, the gap appears before the material becomes a superconductor, and
understanding this phenomenon is essential to understanding how the new HTSCs
work. This gap, called a pseudogap, since it is not yet a superconducting gap,
changes size according to how many charge carriers have been put in the
material. Two of the most significant theories for the HTSCs propose different
roles for the pseudogap. In one, the pseudogap is a direct manifestation of the
superconducting gap that will appear at lower temperatures, while in the other
it is a manifestation of a change in some unusual order, which indirectly leads
to superconductivity. This work aims to determine which point of view applies.
In this new order, time reversal symmetry is broken, which can be explained in
terms of a movie: normally, when a movie of the electrons moving in the solid is
played backwards, the electrons will return to their starting position. But when
time reversal is broken and the movie is played backwards, the electrons will
not return to the starting position, but will end at a different place. This
very strange behavior appears to be found in the pseudogap state, and its study
will allow the researchers to determine the origin of the pseudogap. The
students involved with this project will be exposed to international
collaborations and to performing research at national facilities. They will
receive training that will prepare them for future scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;