* 0305674
* 8th International Congress on Combustion By-Products, -Origin, Control and Health Impacts
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2003
* Barry Dellinger, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 09/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
cost of travel for 10 or more US students to the 8th International Congress on
Combustion By-Products to be held in Umea, Sweden in June of 2003 is supported.
This meeting brings academic, government, and industrial representatives
together to present research findings, update international policy, and discuss
critical issues concerning emissions of toxic by-products from combustion
processes. Meeting every two years since 1990, this meeting attracts between 150
and 200 delegates from all over the world. The students are selected based on
the quality of abstracts submitted for presentation and need by the standing
organizing committee for the conference. Up to $1000 can be received by each
student to help defray travel costs for attending the conference. The
availability of the travel cash awards is advertised on the conference website
and in the call for papers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research, and especially environmental research, is
becoming increasingly interdisciplinary. This meeting is especially designed to
bring together engineers, scientists, and health effects researchers to discuss
the environmental issues surrounding combustion. Our next generation of
researchers must be familiar with these interdisciplinary issues to be
successful. Encouraging the participation of students with partial travel
support develops and trains the next generation of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;