* 0305594
* CAREER: An Integration of Research and Education on Ferroelectric Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Jacqueline Li, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 08/31/2007
* USD 342,815.00

0093808 Li A CAREER development award will support the integration of research
and education on ferroelectric composites into undergraduate and master graduate
levels at Cooper Union. The research plan includes the analytical and
experimental investigations on electromechanical coupling behavior of
ferroelectric composites by considering the microstructure of the systems. The
outcome of the proposed study will give a solid fundamental basis and guidance
to the design of smart materials using ferroelectric composites. The education
plan involves the development of a new senior course on smart materials and
integration of the proposed research into senior design projects. The
undergraduate materials science curriculum will be upgraded to include the
concepts of ferroelectrics and ferroelectric composites, and hands-on
experiences on the fabrication of PZT samples and measurement of
electromechanical coupling behavior of ferroelectrics.

The PI will develop her academic career around analytical and experimental
methods to advance the basic understanding of nonlinear electromechanical
coupling of ferroelectrics and ferroelectric composites. In particular, the
analytical prediction will involve micromechanics of heterogeneous materials,
evolution of microstructures, irreversible thermodynamics, and physics of domain
switch. The experiments will start with the fabrication of PZT samples and PZT
composites, and the electromechanical testing of such samples. This work will
lead to the development of a robust predictive methodology of nonlinear
electromechanical coupling behavior of ferroelectric composite materials.
Understanding and accurately describing the nonlinear behavior of a
ferroelectric material due to the domain switch will lead to the improvement of
design methodologies in smart materials and structures using ferroelectrics.

Since the PI's research endeavors and educational program are closely
integrated, the educational goals are: 1) to increase the undergraduate student
involvement in the ongoing research projects through out the engineering school
by promoting research transfer into classroom, 2) to establish summer research
programs for undergraduate students and research internship for pre-college
students in materials science through outreach program, 3) to develop a new
upper-level undergraduate/graduate course in smart materials, 4) to update the
current materials science curricula by including the new concepts and research
discoveries in the area of smart materials, and 5) to modernize the materials
engineering laboratory and course curriculum.

A career development grant will be a significant factor not only in boosting the
prospect of PI's contributing significantly to her research field, but in
expanding at Cooper Union the involvement of undergraduates in research and its
applications to significant new technologies. ***