* 0305152
* Coarse Topology of Metric Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Alexander Dranishnikov, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2006
* USD 83,401.00

DMS-0305152 Alexander Dranishnikov

The project is dedicated to the asymptotic (coarse) topology. There is a macro-
micro analogy which helps to explore and navigate the relatively new world of
coarse topology. The P.I. is planning to work in the asymptotic counterparts of
the following classic topics of topology: Dimension Theory, Cohomology Theory,
Theory of Embeddings. One of the main goals of his research is potential
applications to the Novikov Higher Signature Conjecture and some other related
conjectures.

Asymptotic topology is a relatively new subject which studies the large scale
properties of a space. The classical topology is a science of a very small
scale, since it is based on the notion of a continuous transformation which is
local. The classical topology has the century long history and now it is
substantially developed in all directions. Its long and painful birth at the end
of 19th and beginning of 20th centuries was inspired and pushed by the progress
in natural sciences and mathematics, in particular in analysis. By the end of
the 20th century in many areas of mathematics the necessity appeared for a
discipline which would be similar to topology and which describe behavior of the
large scale world. Such a discipline started to hatch in a last decade or so.
This proposal is a further push for rising of such science.