* 0305941
* Architecture Design Methodologies for Embedded Communications Terminals
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Keshab Parhi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

Demand for broadband access anytime anywhere continues to grow. While it is
important to reduce to power consumption in personal terminals, it is equally
important to reduce silicon cost in applications such as settop boxes, DSL
modems in central office or a wireless base stations. This proposal addresses
low-power and/or low-cost implementations of a number of key building blocks
which are common to many personal or central embedded communications terminals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iterative decoders have found wide applications in
wireless terminals, wireless infrastructure, satellite communications, etc.
Recently, low-density parity check (LDPC) coders are receiving much attention
due to their computation simplicity in every iteration, and ability to
parallelize. These codes do not suffer from the error floor problem and are well
suited for applications such as optical transmission and disk drives. Earlier
work on parallel turbo decoder architectures will be extended to address
efficient memory arbitration and memory management issues, and to reduce power
consumption by appropriate parallelism level and memory selections. There is
also interest in design of a new class of parallel turbo coders which can lend
itself well for parallel implementations. In earlier work on LDPC coders, a new
(3,k)-regular LDPC code which lends itself well for a partly-parallel
implementations was demonstrated. The proposed effort will build upon this past
work to generate more general LDPC coders. The desire to accommodate varying
rates, varying frame sizes demands the generalization or construction otherwise
of (j,k)-regular LDPC coders which can be implemented in partly-parallel manner.
Placement and routing issues in these coders and memory size reduction issues
will be addressed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal
lies in the unique ability to jointly consider algorithm and architectural
issues to reduce power consumption of many components of broadband systems.
Algorithm and architectural level power reduction can result in dramatic cost
and power savings. The proposed effort will have an impact in various
applications such as satellite communications, optical communications, storage
devices, personal video recorders, settop boxes, wireless base stations and cell
phones. The broader impacts will be far reaching. This research will pave the
way for use of these technologies in industrial products. It will make an impact
through research training of students working on this project, but the impact
will be even greater through graduate education by transferring these research
results to new or existing graduate classes.&lt;br/&gt;