* 0305072
* Mathematical Problems in Compressible Fluid Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* David Hoff, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2009
* USD 285,000.00

This project investigates questions relating to the existence, stability,
regularity, and qualitative features of certain systems of partial differential
equations. These systems are closely related mathematically, all sharing common
features with the Navier-Stokes equations of compressible fluid flow, and all
serving as models for physical phenomena arising in concrete applications,
including the flow of compressible fluids and gases, shallow water theory,
magnetohydrodynamics, combustion theory, and semiconductor modeling. The primary
goal is to develop precise, mathematically certain statements about these models
by applying techniques from the fields of analysis and partial differential
equations. This research is related to the underlying physical science in
several ways: first, it can validate, determine limits on the range of
applicability, or in some cases invalidate the models; second, rigorous
mathematical analysis of the models can lead to deeper understanding of the
physical phenomena; finally, by determining topologies in which the models are
well-posed and elucidating underlying reasons for this structure, the work can
set the stage for the development of computer procedures for the effective
computation of approximate solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposer will
study mathematical questions concerning important models of compressible fluids
and materials. These models arise in a broad range of applications, including
supersonic flight, dynamic meteorology, semiconductor theory, and combustion
processes. While the main goal in constructing these models is to achieve a
predictive capability, they are far too complicated to be solved in any explicit
sense. On the other hand, adequate approximate solutions can frequently be
generated by computational methods. However, the intelligent design of such
methods depends crucially on understanding of why solutions do exist, in what
sense, and in what ways they are sensitive to noise in the data. The project
will provide such a rigorous mathematical analysis for these models and
determine possible limits on their range of applicability, thereby setting the
stage for the development of computer procedures for the effective computation
of approximate solutions. &lt;br/&gt;