* 0305289
* UMEB:  Undergraduate Training in Ecological and Evolutionary Analyses of Micro and Macrobiotic Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2011
* Richard Inouye, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Anderson
* 02/28/2011
* USD 390,800.00

The UMEB program at Idaho State University (ISU) is entitled "Undergraduate
Training in Ecological and Evolutionary Analyses of Micro and Macrobiotic
Systems" and will mentor six undergraduate students each year in projects
designed to address the relationship between ecosystem health and environmental
complexity in the Intermountain West. Environmental health has been
deteriorating rapidly in many rural communities of the Intermountain West,
adversely impacting the sustainable economic and social well being of these
communities. The ISU UMEB will respond to this complex set of problems by
focusing research efforts on several key environmental issues, including
agricultural runoff treatment by constructed wetland technology, soil and
groundwater contamination and remediation, and detection and tracking of
environmental pathogens. Undergraduate students in the UMEB will participate in
data collection, gain hands-on experience with molecular techniques, interpret
experimental results, and serve as informational links between the scientific
and lay communities. Three existing research projects will be focal points for
mentoring students in environmental biology: 1) Portneuf River Watershed
Assessment Project, 2) Fairview Constructed Treatment Wetland System, and 3)
Biogeography and Land Use Pattern Impacts On Snake River Plain Populations. Each
project has demonstrable relevance to the Intermountain West, multiple
investigators in various disciplines are involved in each project, and all three
efforts will provide increased opportunities for one-on-one mentoring of
students and for students to be exposed to a variety of scientific
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate objective is to increase enthusiasm and
appreciation for environmental research by providing stimulating research
experiences for promising undergraduate students. Students will have significant
experience in conducting research, a solid grounding in appropriate techniques,
and communication skills that enable them to convey the results of their
research to other scientists and to the general public. Contact Joseph Cook
(cookjose@isu.edu) or Richard Inouye (inourich@isu.edu) for further information.
&lt;br/&gt;