* 0305009
* Generalized Linear Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Peter McCullagh, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2009
* USD 539,443.00

PI: Peter McCullagh&lt;br/&gt;Title: Generalized Linear
Models&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together with students
and colleagues, the PI investigates various topics, all bearing directly or
indirectly on parametric statistical models. The main theme is the development
of a framework for constructing logically consistent statistical models, whose
hallmark is extendibility or scope. The PI proposes to develop this notion to a
variety of settings, such as cluster-analysis models, where the objects that
arise are not vector spaces but partitions in the sense of clusters, or trees in
the sense of recursive partitions. A second application is to spatial variation
in agricultural field trials. Conformal invariance in agriculture is a radical
hypothesis with specific testable consequences. The available evidence to date
seems to favor conformal invariance, but spatial parameters are not easy to
estimate accurately, so the case is not firmly established. The PI aims to study
the implications of conformal invariance and to test the hypothesis on as wide a
range of agricultural data as possible. Software capable of fitting these models
in routine agricultural applications is an important by-product. Monte Carlo
integration is a venerable topic, but the interplay between statistical models
and Monte Carlo integration is a relatively new development with promise of
substantial payoff for statistical computation. Standard Monte-Carlo designs for
the estimation of integrals achieve the standard rate of convergence, but super-
efficient designs can achieve faster rates for specific integrals. The PI and
his colleagues study the phenomenon of super-efficiency, when and how it occurs,
to see whether it can be exploited in routine statistical applications. As an
example, eigenvalue processes have the potential to be used as quadrature points
for integration in suitable circumstances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The over-riding
goal is to achieve a better understanding of statistical models as processes,
initially in the mathematical sense and if possible in a mechanistic or physical
sense. The notion in agricultural field experiments that "only local spatial
properties matter" is translated into mathematics, emerging as a specific
hypothesis with testable consequences. Conformal invariance is unlikely to have
economic or agricultural implications, but if confirmed it demands a re-thinking
of current ideas concerning the nature and causes of spatial variation in
terrestrial processes. The work on conformal invariance is aimed specifically at
agricultural field trials, but might well be applicable elsewhere, for example
processes on the celestial sphere (sky). As a by-product, statistical methods
and software are produced specifically for fitting and testing conformal models.
The last topic concerns Monte-Carlo integration, which has already had a big
impact in statistical computation. The present proposal indicates ways in which
those methods might be extended and made more effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;