* 0305278
* Functional Organic Solid State Materials Derived from Designer Host Frameworks
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Michael Ward, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 03/31/2007
* USD 580,000.00

This project focuses on the design and synthesis of molecular-based functional
materials. Inclusion compounds based on lamellar guanidinium-organodisulfonate
host frameworks, in which organodisulfonate "pillars" connect opposing hydrogen-
bonded sheets of guanidinium cations (G) and sulfonate moieties (S) to generate
inclusion cavities, exhibit a extraordinary capacity in this regard owing to the
structural robustness of the GS sheet, which serves as a "supramolecular
building block." The project will emphasize the synthesis of customized GS host
frameworks endowed with inclusion cavities designed for specific recognition of
select guest molecules and controlled ordering of functional guest molecules.
The work will also capitalize on our recent discovery of lamellar GS inclusion
compounds based on organomonosulfonates, and our even more surprising discovery
of cylindrical inclusion compounds, wherein quasihexagonal guanidinium-
organomonosulfonate sheets wrap around templating guest molecules to form
hydrogen bonded "nanotubes." Specific objectives of this work include: (i) the
synthesis of chiral GS hosts derived from a diverse library of chiral
organodisulfonate pillars, with the aim of developing hosts for enantioselective
separations of chiral compounds and probing the transmission of chirality in the
solid state; (ii) the synthesis of polar host frameworks through assembly guided
by asymmetric and banana-shaped pillars and examination of the effect of host
structure on guest ordering; (iii) elucidation of the factors responsible for
lamellae-cylinder isomerism in guanidinium organomonosulfonates, including the
role of packing frustration, a concept often used in surfactant and block
copolymer microstructures; (iv) the synthesis of robust hydrogen-bonded
cylinders through tessellation with trisulfonates; and (v) completion of work
aimed at elucidating the structure and properties of new thermotropic liquid
crystal phases derived from guanidinium organomonosulfonates. Several mechanisms
exist to ensure broad impact of this project, including (i) through the UMN
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center, summer research experiences
for undergraduates and teachers, many from minority-serving institutions, and
the development of curriculum tools for high school teachers revolving around
crystal structure, (ii) mentoring opportunities for graduate students and
postdocs, (iii) several collaborations with scientists from other U.S. and
international institutions, including visiting graduate students from Korean
institutions sponsored by the Brain Korea-21 (BK-21) program, (iv) seminar
visits to four-year colleges in the Midwest Association of Chemistry Teachers in
Liberal Arts Colleges (MACTLAC), (vi) dissemination of outcomes to the
scientific community through publications, conferences, and postings on our
group web site, and (vii) anticipated publication of a manuscript (invited) in
the Journal of Chemical Education on the topic of "designer crystals,"
accompanied by electronic media for visualizing self-assembly and crystal
structures.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;One of the foremost challenges in solid
state chemistry is the design and synthesis of organic crystals - molecules
assembled in lattices - with prescribed architectures, a discipline often
referred to as "crystal engineering." This research employs molecules as
"tinkertoys" that are designed to form open crystal frameworks that in many ways
resemble prefabricated buildings containing empty offices equipped for
occupation by functional items, in our case "guest" molecules having some useful
property or function. In addition to exploring the fundamental principles
underlying the guided assembly of molecules into crystal lattices, particular
targets of this research include frameworks able to separate chiral isomers,
which constitute a $100 billion component of the U.S. pharmaceutical industry,
organic materials capable of doubling the frequency of light that may find
potential applications in telecommunication technologies, and new composites of
designer crystals and polymers that can provide lightweight but mechanically
strong plastics with possible applications in the automotive and food packaging
industries. The molecular nature of these materials offers substantial
advantages in each of these applications with respect to either more improved
properties or reduced processing costs. The achievement of these aims can have
substantial impact on public health and key technologies that are vital to the
U.S. economy. The research is also designed to equip emerging young scientists
and engineers with the skills required to tackle new challenges in materials
research while enhancing international interactions, particularly with key
institutions and students from notable academic institutions in South Korea.
This project is co-funded by the Division of Materials Research and the
Chemistry Division.&lt;br/&gt;