* 0305110
* Computational and Theoretical Problems in Fluid Mechanics, Meteorology and Oceanography
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Roger Temam, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2006
* USD 329,769.00

Some fundamental problems of meteorology, oceanography, and
fluid&lt;br/&gt;mechanics will be addressed. The areas to be covered include a)
The open&lt;br/&gt;boundary conditions for limited domains simulations, b) The
study of&lt;br/&gt;balanced and unbalanced models in atmosphere sciences, c)
Statistical&lt;br/&gt;solutions of Navier-Stokes equations and turbulence. These
problems will&lt;br/&gt;be addressed by a robust combination of advanced
mathematical tools, and&lt;br/&gt;performant computational tools.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This study is aimed at improving, in the long range, the
numerical&lt;br/&gt;simulations on computer of these phenomena whose
understanding is&lt;br/&gt;essential for many problems in environment and
energy. For instance&lt;br/&gt;problem a) is important for improving local
weather predictions with&lt;br/&gt;applications including e.g. agriculture and
aviation. Problems b) is&lt;br/&gt;important for understanding the large scale
motion of the atmosphere;&lt;br/&gt;however the techniques used (averaging of
oscillations) are also needed in&lt;br/&gt;many other fields, in particular
biomathematics. Problems c) are more&lt;br/&gt;fundamental in nature, they
pertain to the understanding of turbulence,&lt;br/&gt;that is a serious
impediment in many studies on energy (and environment).&lt;br/&gt;By its nature
the proposal has a strong interdisciplinary component, with&lt;br/&gt;senior
geophysicists directly involved in topics a) and b). The proposal&lt;br/&gt;has
also a strong educational component (interdisciplinary training
of&lt;br/&gt;graduate students and post docs).&lt;br/&gt;