* 0305974
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Richard Lawler, Lawler, Richard R
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 09/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others) who seek to conduct research on biological questions
using informatics tools and methods. It is expected that the Fellows trained
through these fellowships will play an important role in training the future
workforce. Postdoctoral training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.

The research and training plan is entitled "Linking variation in behavior to
long-term population dynamics in a wild lemur population." This research is
developing modeling techniques linking short-term fitness consequences of
individual behaviors (using dynamic programming) with long-term population
dynamics (using matrix modeling). It uses data collected on a wild population of
lemur, the white sifaka, and neural networks to merge behavioral sequences with
population dynamics, with a view toward conservation problems.