* 0305859
* ITWF: Toward Gender Equitable Outcomes in IT HIgher Education: Beyond Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Christine Ogan, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 12/31/2007
* USD 713,187.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EIA-0305859&lt;br/&gt;Jean C.
Robinson&lt;br/&gt;Indiana University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Toward Gender
Equitable Outcomes in Higher Education: Beyond Computer
Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ITWF award provides support to investigate 15
tertiary education programs in information science, information systems,
instructional systems technology, and informatics, with computer science
programs as a baseline comparison, in five major IT degree-granting
institutions. The purpose of the study is to determine which
universities/departments/programs are most successful at recruiting and
retaining female students, and what factors favor female success over time. The
programs are hypothesized to be differentially responsive to female students due
to differences in academic culture, operationalized in terms of the availability
of mentorship, role models, peer support networks, grant programs, and other
resources at the departmental, university, and disciplinary levels. These
measures of organizational culture will be correlated with measures of student
outcomes and self-reports of student experiences. Data about students'
experiences will be collected through a web-based survey of a sample of 5,000
students, followed by three face-to-face interviews with an estimated 155
students, over-sampling for females, over a two-year period. In addition,
faculty, administrators and staff in the study programs will be interviewed by
telephone and in person. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Previous
research has identified culture as among the most important factors that
discourage girls and women from studying computer science. This project
contributes to knowledge in this area by operationalizing culture in the context
of academic IT programs and systematically investigating its contribution to
student experiences and outcomes. The project will identify encouraging and
discouraging factors, and produce comparative statistics, that can be used as a
baseline in future research on IT education and gender, much as this project
draws on findings from previous research on female students in computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. As the need for information
technology professionals continues to grow, so too does the need to engage women
and girls in courses of study that will qualify them for IT-related careers.
Findings of which factors encourage or discourage the success of women students
can be used to inform programmatic recommendations aimed at moving more women
into the IT pipeline through a diverse range of educational programs. To the
extent that new IT paradigms such as are taught in schools of information,
informatics, education, and business help to create those cultural associations,
they can contribute to reducing the persistent gender segregation in academic
IT-related programs and thus IT employment.&lt;br/&gt;