* 0305946
* Casson-type invariants in dimension four
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Nikolai Saveliev, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2007
* USD 103,719.00

The principal investigator applies gauge theoretic methods to
the&lt;br/&gt;little studied class of 4-dimensional manifolds, namely,
smooth&lt;br/&gt;manifolds having integral homology of the 3--sphere times
the&lt;br/&gt;circle. These manifolds arise naturally as the doubles of
homology&lt;br/&gt;cobordisms of integral homology spheres. They remain rather
elusive,&lt;br/&gt;mainly because the conventional approach via Donaldson
polynomials&lt;br/&gt;and Seiberg--Witten invariants fails due to the lack of
second&lt;br/&gt;homology. Instead, the investigator studies the flat moduli
spaces&lt;br/&gt;on such manifolds. A creative count of flat connections leads
to an&lt;br/&gt;invariant reminiscent of the Casson invariant for homology 3--
spheres.&lt;br/&gt;The investigator works on developing a torus surgery theory
modeled&lt;br/&gt;after Casson's surgery formula and Fintushel--Stern's knot
surgery on&lt;br/&gt;4--manifolds, with the view of using it to relate the
above&lt;br/&gt;Casson--type invariant to the classical Rohlin invariant.
This&lt;br/&gt;approach is expected to lead to solution of some old and
difficult&lt;br/&gt;problems concerning homology cobordisms of integral
homology&lt;br/&gt;3--spheres, smoothing of topological 4--manifolds, and
triangulation&lt;br/&gt;of topological manifolds in higher dimensions. A part of
the above&lt;br/&gt;program is a calculation of the degree zero Donaldson
polynomial,&lt;br/&gt;which is of great interest in its own right. For mapping
tori of&lt;br/&gt;integral homology spheres, the Donaldson polynomial is
identified&lt;br/&gt;with the equivariant Casson invariant. For homology 4--
tori, it is&lt;br/&gt;equal to the Seiberg--Witten invariant, at least modulo 2,
thus&lt;br/&gt;partially confirming the Seiberg--Witten
conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is an investigation of
various properties of&lt;br/&gt;manifolds in dimensions three and four by
methods of gauge theory.&lt;br/&gt;These methods, rooted in theoretical physics,
have revolutionized&lt;br/&gt;low dimensional topology. In the past twenty
years, they have been&lt;br/&gt;actively used to solve many difficult problems.
Nevertheless, their&lt;br/&gt;potential is far from being exhausted: the
researcher initiates&lt;br/&gt;application of gauge theoretic methods to a
special class of&lt;br/&gt;manifolds which was overlooked until recently but
which is crucial&lt;br/&gt;for understanding several fundamental questions of
topology and&lt;br/&gt;topological field theory. In addition to advancing
knowledge in&lt;br/&gt;these specific areas, the research has a broader
educational impact.&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator's teaching experience
shows that the&lt;br/&gt;graduate classes based on the above topics are of great
interest to&lt;br/&gt;students in both mathematics and physics, thus promoting
closer&lt;br/&gt;cooperation between the two sciences. The researcher intends
to&lt;br/&gt;develop further topics courses, and offer parts of his program
as&lt;br/&gt;independent research projects for graduate students. The
research&lt;br/&gt;results will be broadly disseminated at scientific
conferences, in&lt;br/&gt;professional journals, and on the internet.&lt;br/&gt;