* 0305414
* U.S.-Mexico Program:  Development of Rapid Methods for Plant Membrane Transport Protein Localization Using Epitope Tags
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Daniel Schachtman, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 05/31/2006
* USD 19,250.00

0305414 Schachtman

This U.S.-Mexico award will support Dr. Daniel Schachtman of the Donald Danforth
Plant Science Center in St. Louis, Missouri, in a research collaboration with
Dr. Bronwyn J. Barkla of the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM) in
Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico. The researchers intend to work on several transport
proteins (KUPs) that are involved in potassium uptake and cellular equilibrium.

Potassium is an essential mineral for both animal and plant nutrition. Plants
require large quantities of this mineral, which they acquire through root uptake
from soils. Several families of transporters are involved in moving potassium
into cells and around the plant. The KUPs (potassium uptake permeases) are a
major family of proteins involved in potassium uptake into cells, a process that
drives cell expansion and plant development. The proposed collaboration will
focus on methods for the membrane localization of the KUP proteins, an important
objective since little is known about which membranes these proteins are located
on. The knowledge gained will help to understand their function fully. The
collaborators will benefit from the Mexican lab's expertise in plant membrane
transporter biochemistry and the St. Louis lab's expertise in plant molecular
and cell biology. A postdoctoral fellow and a student will take part in the
exchange and will be trained in membrane biochemistry.