* 0306704
* Structure and Sedimentology of the Beardmore Group,         Antarctica: Latest Neoproterozoic to Early Paleozoic        Tectonic Evolution of the East Antarctic Margin
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2002,02/29/2004
* John Goodge, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 02/29/2004
* USD 31,140.00

The Neoproterozoic to early Paleozoic transition (700-500 million years ago
(Ma)) is a critical period in Earth history. During this period one
supercontinent known as Rodinia was coalesced, then fragmented, prior to
amalgamation of a second supercontinent referred to as Gondwanaland. These
events were manifested by major mountain building, continental erosion, species
diversification, sea-level fluctuations, and changes in sea- water composition.
Continental-margin sedimentary sequences from this era (notably in western and
eastern North America, northeastern Asia, southern Africa, eastern Australia,
and the Ross margin of Antarctica) provide detailed records of sea-level
fluctuations, faunal distributions, and post- depositional tectonism. One of
these sequences, the Beardmore Group in Antarctica, represents a significant
element in the evolution of the East Antarctic craton, yet very little is known
about its depositional or tectonic history. The Beardmore Group is a thick
sequence of graywacke and carbonate that is traditionally correlated with
similar rocks elsewhere in the Transantarctic Mountains. Beardmore rocks are
largely unfossiliferous, lithologically monotonous, and lie in uncertain
depositional relation with both crystalline basement rocks and fossiliferous
Lower Cambrian carbonates. Previous workers have suggested that the entire
Beardmore Group is Neoproterozoic in age and that it records two distinct
deformations, the well-known Ross orogeny (~500 Ma) and an earlier cryptic
"Beardmore" orogeny. Reconnaissance field and geochronologic studies indicate
that portions of the Beardmore Group are significantly younger (&lt;600 Ma) than
previously thought, and that it only shows evidence for Ross deformation. These
preliminary data reflect uncertainty in the geologic relations of these rocks,
and they indicate that the Neoproterozoic tectonic history for the region must
be revised. This project will investigate the Beardmore Group in the ce ntral
Transantarctic Mountains in order to better understand its depositional history
and its role in orogenic events shaping the outer margin of Gondwanaland. The
study will include: (1) detailed field study of the stratigraphy, sedimentology,
and structure; (2) provenance (source) study of graywackes to constrain the
depositional setting of the turbidites; (3) determination of carbonate isotopic
compositions for comparison with the global C-isotopic record; (4) refinement of
depositional age(s) through U-Pb dating of detrital and igneous zircons; and (5)
constraint on the age(s) of deformation(s) with Ar-isotope thermochronology.
Field work will be completed during the 1998-99 and 1999-2000 austral summers.
This work will test a recently proposed model for Beardmore Group deposition and
deformation that involves latest Neoproterozoic-early Paleozoic(?) rift-margin
sedimentation and structural inversion as an early expression of Ross activity.
The results will help to directly resolve long- standing uncertainties in the
geologic history of the Antarctica and they will improve our understanding of
global paleogeographic and plate-tectonic relations during supercontinent
transformation at the close of the Proterozoic.