* 0306787
* Molecular Visualization:  Spreading Kinematics and Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Sergei Sheiko, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2006
* USD 292,000.00

Spreading of thin polymer films on solid surfaces is of both fundamental and
technological interest. During the last 20 years, significant experimental and
theoretical studies have been carried out to understand the way fluids spread on
surfaces. These have led to a macroscopic understanding of wetting; however, the
molecular mechanism remains largely unknown. Thus, there is an apparent need for
the development of experimental methods that are capable of visualization of
individual molecules during spreading. It is proposed to develop an integrated
system for monitoring molecular spreading based on a combination of AFM and
fluorescent microscopy. It is also proposed to use branched polymer molecules as
model systems that can be visualized by the chosen techniques. Four fundamental
questions will be addressed in the project. (i) What is the conformation and
packing of polymer chains confined to the surface plane? (ii) What is the
spreading kinematics of polymer molecules in two dimensions and its correlation
with the motion of the leading edge of the precursor film? (iii) What are the
driving forces and dissipation channels, and their relative contribution to the
wetting kinetics? (iv) What is the molecular pattern of the surface flow and its
correlation with the surface structure of the substrate? This work will advance
the fundamental understanding of the molecular mechanism of wetting and will
also provide practical guidelines for manipulation of the molecular architecture
to control the wetting kinetics.&lt;br/&gt;The project will also provide
interdisciplinary research training for graduate and undergraduate students,
since it combines fine polymer chemistry and advanced experimental techniques.
An exceptional area of broader impact stems from the already established
interactions with local high schools in form of regular scientific seminars and
summer research at the UNC-Chapel Hill. In addition to the educational aspects,
the project will reinforce collaborations in the Research Triangle Area
including UNC, NCSU, and Duke University. Because of its innovative approach -
investigation of material properties via visualization of individual molecules -
this project will have broad impact on materials science and engineering in the
area.&lt;br/&gt;