* 0306682
* Design and Synthesis of Power Efficient Programmable Fabric
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2009
* Lei He, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2009
* USD 306,000.00

Rapid increase of manufacturing costs of the integrated circuit (IC) and the
widening gap between the design productivity and manufacturing capacity may
prevent the IC technology from continuing to advance according to the Moore's
Law. Programmable devices offer an attractive solution for significantly
lowering the amortized manufacturing cost per unit and dramatically improving
the design productivity through re-use of the same silicon implementation for a
wide range of applications. However, existing programmable circuits and
architectures are not power efficient. In some cases, they may consume 100x
higher power compared to customized IC designs. This project focuses on research
and development of power-efficient programmable circuit fabrics and
architectures and associated synthesis tools, and is aimed to reduce the power
dissipation by over 10x. &lt;br/&gt;Our research will be guided by two key
principles: (i) the use of a highly quantitative approach to circuit and
architecture design and optimization; (ii) the integration of different levels
of optimization techniques, from circuit-level to fabric-level and system-level,
and finally synthesis tools, for developing novel programmable devices with the
highest power efficiency. Outcome of this research includes: (1) A flexible
power evaluation framework to enable accurate quantitative evaluation of
programmable logic devices; (2) Novel circuits and fabrics to reduce leakage and
dynamic power in programmable devices; (3) Novel implementation of clock gating
and power gating for dynamic power management; and (4) effective and efficient
algorithms and tools to support the aforementioned circuit-level, fabric-level,
and system-level optimization techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
of this project include (1) Timely dissemination of research results and
technology transfer to enable new applications of programmable devices that can
significantly benefit the overall information technology (IT) industry; (2)
Involvement of graduate and possibly undergraduate students in the proposed
research and include the latest research methodologies/results into teaching,
which will help to train future researchers and engineers for further
advancement of the information technology. &lt;br/&gt;