* 0306574
* Higher order accuracy of bootstrap methods for temporal and spatial processes
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Soumendra Lahiri, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 01/31/2008
* USD 225,588.00

The emphasis of the project is on investigating higher order properties of
common resampling methods for time-series and spatial data and on development of
new inference methods that improve the accuracy and stability of existing
methods. Specifically, this project concentrates on &lt;br/&gt;(i) developing
Edgeworth expansion theory for Studentized statistics under dependence,
&lt;br/&gt;(ii) investigating higher order accuracy of bootstrap approximations
for time series data, &lt;br/&gt;(iii) developing resampling methods with an aim
towards achieving higher order accuracy, &lt;br/&gt;(iv) a nonparametric method
for the selection of optimal block length empirically,&lt;br/&gt;(v) a pooling
method for the bootstrap that yields more stable estimators of population
parameters, &lt;br/&gt;(vi) investigating accuracy of bootstrap approximation in
spatial prediction problems, and&lt;br/&gt;(vii) investigating accuracy of
bootstrap approximation for spatial data for irregularly spaced data-
points.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data exhibiting temporal and spatial dependence
appear in many areas of sciences, such as Astronomy, Atmospheric Sciences,
Economics, Geology, Hydrology, Physics, etc. Analyses of such data sets using
current statistical methodology face some limitations. This is primarily due to
the fact that the existing statistical methodology mostly relies on strong
structural (i.e., parametric model) assumptions that are often inadequate to
capture all important features of the data. This project seeks to&lt;br/&gt;(i)
develop new methodology (based on what are known as Resampling Methods) that
provides valid assessment of uncertainty without strong structural assumptions
and &lt;br/&gt;(ii) develop theoretical tools to investigate optimality
properties of various resampling methods for time- and space-dependent data.
&lt;br/&gt;