* 0306078
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Christopher Lepczyk, Lepczyk, Christopher A
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 07/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others) who seek to conduct research on biological questions
using informatics tools and methods. It is expected that the Fellows trained
through these fellowships will play an important role in training the future
workforce. Postdoctoral training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and
training plan is entitled "Integrating demographic and wildlife population data
to understand the effects of housing growth on avian populations." Housing
growth is changing American landscapes and may have substantial effects on avian
populations. The research utilizes a geographic information system and
population models to investigate how housing development has affected avian
population trends over the past 30 years across five major ecoregions of the
Northeastern U.S. Housing growth forecasts are being used to project future
changes in avian populations.&lt;br/&gt;