* 0306572
* Reliability Screening via Outlier Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Duncan Walker, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 230,000.00

Testing integrated circuit chips at elevated temperature and
voltage,&lt;br/&gt;known as burn-in testing, is used to improve product
reliability by&lt;br/&gt;screening out chips that pass all their regular tests,
but might fail&lt;br/&gt;during customer use. Burn-in of high performance chips
such as&lt;br/&gt;microprocessors requires increasingly expensive power and
temperature&lt;br/&gt;control to avoid destroying good chips. Burn-in test is
also becoming&lt;br/&gt;less effective in newer technologies. The combination of
these&lt;br/&gt;problems means that burn-in test can now cost more than regular
chip&lt;br/&gt;testing for high-performance products. Burn-in test is already
too&lt;br/&gt;expensive for many products, even though they have high
reliability&lt;br/&gt;requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One way to improve chip
reliability without burn-in is to throw away&lt;br/&gt;chips which are
"different" from the rest of the chips. They are&lt;br/&gt;different in that
they work correctly, but some measurements have&lt;br/&gt;abnormal values. These
"black sheep" chips are known to statisticians&lt;br/&gt;as "outliers". What
makes this problem challenging is that past&lt;br/&gt;experience shows that most
of the chips thrown away will work just&lt;br/&gt;fine for the customer. So
throwing them away represents lost profits&lt;br/&gt;to the manufacturer. The
research goal is to find techniques that more&lt;br/&gt;accurately identify
outliers that would fail for the customer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two
research challenges. The first is to identify a set of&lt;br/&gt;measurements
that are good at detecting outliers. The second is to&lt;br/&gt;determine when a
measurement is so abnormal that a chip should be&lt;br/&gt;thrown away.
Historically the standby power consumed by a chip has&lt;br/&gt;worked well for
detecting outliers. However this is becoming less so&lt;br/&gt;in new
technologies. New ideas are to consider other measurements,&lt;br/&gt;such as
behavior under abnormally low operating voltages, or how&lt;br/&gt;different a
chip is from its neighbors on the semiconductor&lt;br/&gt;wafer. This research
will evaluate these and other ideas using chip&lt;br/&gt;data from IBM, LSI
Logic and Texas Instruments to identify approaches&lt;br/&gt;that work well in
practice. The primary merit of the research is that&lt;br/&gt;it will develop
techniques to reduce chip manufacturing costs and&lt;br/&gt;improve the
reliability of chips shipped to customers.&lt;br/&gt;