* 0306056
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Steven Freedberg, Freedberg, Steven A
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 12/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others). It is expected that the Fellows trained through these
fellowships will play an important role in training the future workforce.
Postdoctoral research and training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.

The research and training plan is entitled "Gene-culture conflict and evolution
in turtles." In this research computer simulation modeling is being used to
explore the evolutionary dynamics and consequences of gene-culture interactions.
Specifically, the effects of matrilineal nest-site imprinting and male combat on
the evolution of environmental sex determination and sex ratios in reptiles are
being examined.