* 0306098
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Multidisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Jeffrey Chuang, Chuang                  Jeffrey        H
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others). It is expected that the Fellows trained through these
fellowships will play an important role in training the future workforce.
Postdoctoral research and training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.

The research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled "Mutations,
evolution, and functional sequences: a comprehensive comparison of the mouse and
human genomes". By studying orthologous genes and noncoding regions, this
research is elucidating the process of molecular evolution, the variations of
mutation patterns across the genome, and the detection of functional sites in
the noncoding regions.