* 0306502
* CG Techniques for Terrain Representation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* W Randolph Franklin, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 07/31/2007
* USD 195,532.00

The major thrust of this research is representation and operation on terrain
data using computational geometry techniques. That includes operations such as
data compression, visibility, mobility, and drainage, representing multiple
related data layers, and multiple data source correlations, and nonlinear
representations. This project is cognizant of the peculiar properties of
terrain, including its low level of continuity, its long-range correlations
(such as drainage basins), and its vertical asymmetry (there are many local
maxima, but few local minima). New terraforming operators include scooping and
deposition and erosion. Efficiency in both computational space and time is also
a priority.

The importance of terrain modeling and computational cartography is attested by
the number of companies specializing in this, and by the several database
companies attempting to add these features to their generic products. New
techniques are necessary because of the growing volume of data from sources such
as LIDAR and IFSAR. The techniques developed here will be applicable in a
growing range of domains from environmental planning, to radio communication on
the Moon and Mars as well as on the earth, and to national defense. Visibility
determination has applications from minimizing visual nuisances, to siting of
military observers, and to route planning to avoid the other side's observers.
The software resulting from this project will be freely available to other
researchers.