* 0306096
* Education Innovation: LEGO MindStorms - Cost-Effectively Expanding CS Students' Horizons and Enthusiasm Outside the (Desktop) Box
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Myles McNally, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2007
* USD 505,000.00

0306096&lt;br/&gt;Frank Klassner&lt;br/&gt;Villanova
University&lt;br/&gt;Education Innovation: LEGO MindStorms - Cost-Effectively
Expanding CS students' Horizons and Enthusiasm Outside the (Desktop)
Box&lt;br/&gt;$490,000&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves investigators
from three institutions - Villanova University, University of Mississippi, and
Alma College - and is a follow up of a Proof of Concept grant, DUE-0088884,
awarded by the DUE Division of NSF. The current project involves four
activities: developing a set of 40 assignments and laboratory exercises that use
LEGO MindStorms robot kits to promote active student learning across the
ACM/IEEE Computing Curricula 2001 (CC2001) guidelines; identifying and
maintaining software technology that is needed to make the MindStorms platform
support the range of assignments developed; motivating students' interest in,
understanding of, and application of advanced computer science research results
through exploration with the MindStorms platform; and measuring the pedagogical
efficacy of the MindStorms platform. In part, this project was motivated by a
survey of research efforts and employment opportunities in CISE fields over the
past five years that showed several trends that may have serious implications
for the traditional undergraduate computer science curriculum design - that is,
greater emphasis on mobile networking, ubiquitous computing, large-scale
networks, real time systems, agent architectures, embedded signal analysis
systems in robotics and information retrieval systems, distributed system
design, and world-wide-web language design in the research community, in part
because of the explosion in network capabilities on the WWW. Employment
opportunities for computer science BS graduates are increasingly requiring
competence in distributed computing solutions and embedded programming solutions
within the greater context of the World Wide Web. This institution's experience
with hands-on robotics projects, in an NSF CCLI proof-of-concept grant,
indicated that undergraduate students' motivation to learn new computing
principles increases significantly when they apply those principles to
constructing robots and designing problem-solving control code for their
creations. However, scarcity of educational materials available to implement
this approach is a deterrent to its pursuit. This project identifies seven out
of the fourteen knowledge areas in the CC2001that might be pedagogically
enhanced through robotics-oriented projects: Programming Fundamentals,
Algorithms and Complexity, Programming Languages, Architecture, Operating
Systems, Intelligent Systems, and Net-Centric Computing. All of the areas
targeted in this project contain material that the committee has designated as
'core' topics. Thus, advanced and elective courses in a CC2001-based curriculum
can seamlessly take advantage of students' experiences in the core topics when
exploring advanced research results in the context of MindStorms robotics. The
materials developed by this project will be disseminated both through the WWW
and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;