* 0306720
* Self-Assembly of Discrete and Infinite Nanoscale Supramolecular Assemblies via Metal Directed Coordination
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Peter Stang, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2008
* USD 572,000.00

The directional bonding paradigm parallels Nature's self-assembly strategy using
hydrogen bonding, but takes advantage of the greater directionality and stronger
bond strength of metal-ligand coordination. In combination with other weak
interactions, such as pi-pi stacking, van der Waals and electrostatic forces, it
allows for the assembly of two-dimensional and three-dimensional supramolecules
with well defined shape and size of unprecedented variety and diversity. This
project will take the directional bonding paradigm to the next level of
complexity, incorporating carboranes, metal clusters, and liquid crystal forming
units into supramolecular polygons and molecular cages, and will begin the
exploration of the capabilities of these molecular cages to include guest
molecules, including the fullerenes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As chemists have grown
increasingly sophisticated in their ability to construct molecules of
considerable size and complexity, they have turned their attention to the
possibility of "self-assembly" of large multi-molecular aggregates, in which
smaller molecular building blocks spontaneously assemble into more elaborate
materials with defined shape and structure. Professor Peter J. Stang, of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Utah, is supported by the Organic
and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for his studies of the self-assembly of
nanoscale supramolecular assemblies through the use of coordination complexes of
metals. Professor Stang has developed a general synthetic strategy for the
construction of such assemblies, exploiting the defined geometries of metal
coordination complexes to dictate the shape and structure of aggregates
containing metal complexes as key building blocks. Through his studies, he is
helping to define the power of self-assembly in the construction of unusual
molecular architectures that may play central roles in the areas of nanoscale
devices and molecular machinery. His research also serves as an effective
vehicle for the education and technical training of undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral students in the fundamentally and technologically important areas
of chemical synthesis and supramolecular structure.