* 0306059
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Gary Langham, Langham, Gary M
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 10/31/2006
* USD 160,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others). It is expected that the Fellows trained through these
fellowships will play an important role in training the future workforce.
Postdoctoral research and training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.

The research and training plan is entitled "Modeling current and historical
habitat fragmentation effects on genetic diversity in vertebrates of Australia's
wet tropics." Two modelling approaches are being used to compare historical
connectivity and current genetic structure among four vertebrate species. This
project compares models of paleodistribution and current genetic structure using
nested-clade and coalescent approaches while creating predictive cost-surface
models and comparing patterns of local genetic structure using graph theory.