* 0306686
* Variational problems in optimal mass transportation and intersection homology theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Qinglan Xia, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/28/2006
* USD 77,433.00

VARIATIONAL PROBLEMS IN MASS TRANSPORTATION AND
INTERSECTION&lt;br/&gt;HOMOLOGY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: QINGLAN XIA
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; ABSTRACT: The goal of the proposed projects is to study
geometric &lt;br/&gt;variational problems derived from optimal mass
transportation as well as &lt;br/&gt;from the intersection homology theory of
singular varieties. The first &lt;br/&gt;proposed project is building a model to
simulate ``tree shaped'' objects &lt;br/&gt;in nature, and apply it to optimal
mass transportation problems. The &lt;br/&gt;problems proposed here include
building a transport theory of &lt;br/&gt;rectifiable varifolds, finding
connections of this model with other &lt;br/&gt;problems, and extending this
theory to more general spaces. The second &lt;br/&gt;project concerns minimal
surfaces that live in singular spaces such as &lt;br/&gt;singular complex
projective varieties under their intersection homology &lt;br/&gt;groups. In his
thesis, the PI gave a rectifiable currents' version of &lt;br/&gt;intersection
homology theory on stratified subanalytic pseudomanifolds. &lt;br/&gt;He showed
that there exists a modified mass minimizer (which is a &lt;br/&gt;rectifiable
current) in every intersection homology class. The &lt;br/&gt;associated mass
minimizers turn out to be almost minimal currents. The &lt;br/&gt;mass
minimizers the PI considered may intersect (in a controlled &lt;br/&gt;fashion)
the singular locus of the singular space. In this proposal, the &lt;br/&gt;PI
will continue his investigation on regularity properties of the
&lt;br/&gt;associated mass minimizers, and possible link with Hodge theory. One
of &lt;br/&gt;the main methods used in both projects is geometric measure
theory.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The phenomenon of ``tree shaped'' path is very
common in nature. Trees, &lt;br/&gt;railways, airlines, lightning, the
circulatory system, and neural &lt;br/&gt;networks are common examples. The
research of optimal ``tree shaped'' &lt;br/&gt;path not only expands the
research area of mass transportation, but also &lt;br/&gt;of both theoretical
and applied interest. Biologists are currently &lt;br/&gt;looking for a model to
give a fundamental explanation for biological &lt;br/&gt;scaling laws which are
mathematical expressions of how organisms' &lt;br/&gt;biology varies with their
size. The model proposed in this research &lt;br/&gt;might be the desired one.
As Monge's mass transport problem is strongly &lt;br/&gt;linked with many areas
of mathematics, especially with partial &lt;br/&gt;differential equations, it is
also possible that this new approach of &lt;br/&gt;mass transportation will find
its applications in economics, biology, &lt;br/&gt;image processing and some
other subjects. Soap films are physical model &lt;br/&gt;for minimal surfaces.
These surfaces play an important role as a tool in &lt;br/&gt;the study of
topology, geometry and physics. The research of the second &lt;br/&gt;project
concerns global properties of soap films that live in more &lt;br/&gt;general
singular spaces and possible links to Hodge theory and optimal &lt;br/&gt;mass
transportation. It might provides some hint to the famous Hodge
&lt;br/&gt;conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;