* 0306349
* Investigations into Droplet-Based Microelectrofluidic Technology for Hot Spot Cooling and Thermal Management in Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Krishnendu Chakrabarty, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2007
* USD 250,000.00

Decreasing feature sizes and increasing package densities are making thermal
issues extremely important in integrated circuit (IC) design. Uneven thermal
maps and hot spots in ICs cause physical stress and performance degradation, and
they also reduce reliability. This research project is focused on embedded
cooling methods and an IC design flow for&lt;br/&gt;thermal
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop new
techniques for chip cooling based on droplet microfluidics, and to relate this
technology to the integrated circuit (IC) design flow. It leverages a recent
DARPA-funded research effort at Duke University that led to a
novel&lt;br/&gt;electrowetting-based droplet transport technology. It is based
on high-speed electrowetting transport of discrete microliter- and nanoliter-
sized droplets under voltage control. Cooling liquids can be transported, in
user-defined patterns, under clocked-voltage control over a 2D-array of
electrodes without the need for external pumps and valves.In addition, liquid
flow is inherently increased with increasing temperature. Thus, local hot areas
on a chip will have increased cooling applied locally without the need for
external sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is also focused on the design
of the architecture for fluidic pathways, which will transport droplets for
convective cooling. While the droplet paths are statically allocated during
design time, the rate of droplet transport is dynamically determined during run-
time. Simulation and profiling tools are being developed to determine the rate
of droplet transport on different channels and at different times during field
operation. Additional topics being investigated include protocols for droplet
routing and optimization techniques for droplet layout.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in a self-contained, self-
regulated, and low power (&lt; a microwatt) chip cooling technique. The insights
gained from this work are expected to pave the way for a new generation of
embedded systems for computing and communications, as well as high-end, high-
speed computation platforms. Power management and thermal problems are being
widely seen as major roadblocks in the evolution of ICs; this project is
expected to help overcome these roadblocks. This project also serves as an
important bridge between two diverse research communities. It provides
researchers from the microfluidics area with a major application driver for
continued research into droplet-flow methods at the nanoliter and picoliter
scales. On the other hand, it enables IC designers to leverage advances in
droplet-flow technology for chip cooling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;