* 0306017
* Collaborative Research:    Dynamics, Stabilization and Control of Nonholonomic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Dmitry Zenkov, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 160,000.00

Proposal: DMS-0306017 PI: Dmitry V. Zenkov [dvzenkov@unity.ncsu.edu]
Institution: North Carolina State University Title: Collaborative Research:
Dynamics, Stabilization and Control of Nonholonomic Systems

ABSTRACT

The investigators explore the dynamics of nonholonomic systems, that is,
mechanical systems subject to velocity constraints. Proposed research includes
studying the existence and properties of momentum conservation laws in
nonholonomic dynamics, energy-momentum methods in stability analysis, the
qualitative analysis of dynamics of systems with non-free group actions,
nonlinear feedback stabilization, and the energy-based approach to tracking
problems, both holonomic and nonholonomic. Momentum conservation laws in
nonholonomic mechanics are subtle as the classical Noether theorem does not in
general apply. This leads to rich dynamics which the investigators study. The
role of integrability and discrete symmetries in nonholonomic systems is also
analyzed. The investigators study various extensions of the energy-momentum
method to both stability, stabilization and control of physical systems. In the
nonholonomic setting integrability of the momentum equation is utilized, while
in general use is made of the method of controlled Lagrangians.

The dynamics of systems with velocity constraints (such as rolling and sliding
constraints) has numerous applications in industry; robotics and the dynamics of
wheeled vehicles are examples. In applications, stabilization of steady-state
motions (such as the straightforward motion of a car at a constant speed) is
often desired. The investigators use various tools from the geometric theory of
dynamics and control for studying such motions and, more importantly, for
programming desired motions in the presence of control forces. The study is
ultimately aimed at the design of energy-efficient controllers based on the
natural mechanical features of the systems under investigation. The dynamics of
single-wheeled vehicles is of special interest because of their exceptional,
maneuverability. More complex systems are studied as well.



