* 0306996
* Complex Flows In Porous Media
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Daniel Anderson, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2006
* USD 75,000.00

Fluid flows in porous materials are ubiquitous in natural, industrial and
biological settings. These range from relatively simple flows through
homogeneous media with uniform and well-characterized properties to very complex
flows in strongly heterogeneous media, or in reactive and/or deformable porous
media in which the thermochemistry of the fluid and the dynamics of the flow can
significantly alter the properties of the media which in turn then further
complicate the flow. Three such complex flows form the scientific basis for this
proposal. The first, a materials science application, arises during the
solidification of a ternary alloy. Here the porous medium is made up of
dendritic crystals that solidify or melt depending on local thermodynamic
conditions of the interstitial fluid. The fluid flow and solidification
processes are tightly coupled in this reactive porous medium. The second project
arises in response to interest by environmental scientists in developing
strategies for the removal or containment of groundwater contaminants in
nonhomogeneous porous media. The proposed work addresses gravity-driven flow
through spatially nonuniform porous media using asymptotic homogenization
methods in order to identify effective media properties which characterize a
relatively complex porous media by a much simpler description. The third project
involves fluid flow through a porous medium whose porous matrix can be deformed
by the fluid moving through it. Such flows appear in soils, in tissues, organs
and tumors in the human body and in industrial applications such as injection
molding, filtration and inkjet printing. The proposed work attempts to extend
mathematical modeling tools for inkjet printing technology and to connect these
ideas to other application areas. The proposed research is of an
interdisciplinary nature that through the use of applied mathematical techniques
addresses directly problems in materials processing, environmental science and
industrial printing technologies. Applications impacted directly by this
research include industrial alloy processing, strategies for the removal or
containment of groundwater contaminants and related environmental hazards, and
flows arising during industrial applications such as inkjet printing. This work
may indirectly impact the understanding of geophysical flows that occur in the
earth's core or during the formation and melting of sea ice, other industrial
applications such as injection molding and filtration, and biological
applications involving the transport of fluid in tissues, organs and tumors in
the human body. The work proposed by the PI at George Mason University will
involve collaboration with researchers at the University of Tennessee, the
University of North Carolina as well as with researchers in the United Kingdom
and at the National Institute of Standards and Technology.