* 0306083
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Theodore Perkins, Perkins                 Theodore       J
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others). It is expected that the Fellows trained through these
fellowships will play an important role in training the future workforce.
Postdoctoral research and training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.

The research and training plan is entitled "Automatically determining logical
rules for how genes are regulated based on expression levels observed under
different conditions and over time." Determining how large networks of genes
function and interact with each other is one of the great challenges facing
molecular biology. The goal of this project is to study the problem of
automatically inferring Boolean-differential models of gene networks based on
observed expression levels under different conditions and over time. Specific
plans include: (1) developing algorithms to infer Boolean-differential models,
(2) theoretically estimating how much data is required in order to have
confidence in an inferred model, and (3) applying these ideas to model the
Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly) segmentation network.