* 0306005
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Matthew Dimmic, Dimmic, Matthew W
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 07/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others) who seek to conduct research on biological questions
using informatics tools and methods. It is expected that the Fellows trained
through these fellowships will play an important role in training the future
workforce. Postdoctoral training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.

The research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled "Using Bayesian
statistical methods to identify coevolving protein domains." Bayesian
phylogenetic methods can identify protein sequence sites that have undergone
evolutionary adaptation. The goal of this research is to extend these methods to
detect correlated mutations, and to use this information to identify sites of
interaction between protein domains. These putative epitopes will be compared to
experimental data to test hypotheses regarding specific protein interactions and
their role in the evolution of cellular networks.