* 0307423
* Supernova Remnants Interacting with Molecular Clouds
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Farhad Yusef-Zadeh, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 05/31/2007
* USD 192,773.00

AST 0307423&lt;br/&gt;Yusef-Zadeh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A supernova explosion
creates an expanding bubble of hot gas which sweeps up the
surrounding&lt;br/&gt;medium. Since the massive stars that become supernovae
cannot drift far from their parent molecular clouds during their short
lifetimes, the interaction of supernova remnants and molecular clouds should be
a common occurrence. When a supernova remnant encounters a dense interstellar
cloud, the compression may trigger gravitational collapse resulting in the
formation of a new generation of stars. There is a great deal of interest in the
regions of the interactions, especially where multi-wavelength observations can
test theoretical models of shock waves within clouds. The expanding shock wave
accelerates particles to high energies and may be responsible for the origin of
Galactic cosmic ray particles. The interaction of supernova remnants and
molecular clouds can be detected through intense stimulated emission in the 1720
MHz transition of the hydroxyl radical, OH. The maser (a microwave counterpart
to laser) emission yields unique insights into the physical processes and
conditions occurring during the interaction. Detailed modeling of the production
and excitation of these species during the interaction will be used in this
project led by Dr. Farhad Yusef-Zadeh to critically evaluate the theory of
interstellar shock waves, the origin of supernova remnant masers, and the effect
of X-rays emitted by the remnant on ionization and chemistry in the shocked gas.
It will also enable the discovery of additional interactions between supernovae
and interstellar clouds that will be crucial for future studies. The three-year
program, which combines both theory and observations, will provide a crucial
window into the physical and chemical processes occurring in shock waves induced
within the cloud by the interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
aspects of this project will be closely related to education and public
outreach&lt;br/&gt;components in three areas, each targeting a different
audience. The goals of each outreach component are to help the public understand
the process of scientific research, to communicate fundamental scientific
concepts and to present the specific motivations and research results of this
scientific program. Dr. Yusef-Zadeh has been working with programmers and
educators to create and distribute learning-based problems to introduce the
science topics of this project into undergraduate education at Northwestern and
other universities. Dr. Yusef-Zadeh and colleagues have selected eight problems
for a course to be offered as "Imaging in Astronomy". One of the problems will
be using multi-wavelength observations of the W28 supernova remnant to discuss
the physical and spatial relationships between X-ray, maser and synchrotron
emitting gas. Building upon the strong relationship with the Adler Planetarium
&amp; Astronomy Museum in Chicago, a series of interactive educational products
are being deployed to encourage the public understanding of research, as well as
to present research results. Dr. Yusef-Zadeh will be working closely with
educator and multimedia developers at Northwestern University to provide content
and motivations needed for such activities. Dr. Yusef-Zadeh, educators, and
undergraduate students at Northwestern are working on the second phase of a
website (spaceimages.northwestern.edu). The space images&lt;br/&gt;website
provides visitors with astronomy images and image manipulation tools along
with&lt;br/&gt;necessary contextual
information.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;