* 0307054
* International Research Fellowship Program:  High-Performance Models for the Growth of Single Crystals by the Vertical Bridgman Technique
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Paul Sonda, Sonda                   Paul           J
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 09/30/2004
* USD 45,846.00

0307054 Sonda

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twelve month research fellowship by Dr. Paul J. Sonda to
work with Dr. Georg Muller at the University of Erlangen-Nurnberg in Germany.

This project seeks to develop new computational models for the analysis and
optimization of crystal growth processes. This joint project will integrate a
realistic and user-friendly two-dimensional model for furnace heat transfer, the
CrysVUn++ code developed by the host lab, with a three-dimensional, crystal
growth code used for computing continuum transport and interfacial phenomena in
crystal growth, developed by Dr. Jeff Derby's group at the University of
Minnesota. This arrangement facilitates the study of three-dimensional transport
phenomena in crystal growth by isolating some of the most complicated aspects of
the problem, namely those related to furnace geometry and radiative heat
transfer, to an outer region in which CrysVUn++ is used. The key to this
integration is the application of model boundary conditions to ensure optimal
accuracy, and convergence. Once these models have been developed, they will be
applied to study transport phenomena within crystal growth systems.