* 0307368
* Dynamics and Chemistry of Star Formation in Magnetic Clouds
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Zhi-Yun Li, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 05/31/2007
* USD 204,601.00

Proposal ID: AST-0307368&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Virginia&lt;br/&gt;PI: Li, Zhi-Yun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic fields can
change the character of star formation fundamentally. The potentially critical
role of magnetic fields in star formation has long been recognized, but remains
hard to ascertain, because of the difficulty in directly measuring the field
strength. This is particularly true for the dense cores of molecular clouds,
which are the centers of star formation. Working at the University of Virginia,
Dr. Li will carry out a program of research to elucidate the role of magnetic
fields in the formation of both single stars and stellar systems. For single
stars, he will develop a model for isolated magnetized cloud cores that couples
dynamics and chemistry. For stellar systems, he will extend the existing
axisymmetric calculations of magnetic cloud evolution driven by ambipolar
diffusion to non-axisymmetric cases. These non-axisymmetric calculations will
enable a detailed investigation into the role of magnetic fields in cloud
fragmentation, which lies at the heart of the problem of stellar system
formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of Dr. Li's program are the
training of a graduate student at the University of Virginia and close
collaboration between researchers specializing in dynamical simulations and
astrochemistry. Successful completion of the program will lead to a better
understanding of the birth of stars, a topic that captures the public
imagination. Dr. Li will integrate his research results into undergraduate
courses and public presentations. &lt;br/&gt;