* 0307950
* Watching the Birth of Super Star Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* J. Turner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 07/31/2007
* USD 286,441.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AST 0307950&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jean
Turner&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of California, Los Angeles
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Globular clusters present one of the great mysteries of
modern astronomy. Globular clusters are large, spherical clusters containing
hundreds of thousands of stars. In the Milky Way, globular clusters are all
older than 10 billion years. Yet our Galaxy continues to form individual stars
and small star clusters to the present day; why not globular clusters? For years
it was believed that special conditions in the early universe were required for
the formation of large clusters. Recently young "super star clusters", believed
to be the precursors to globular clusters, have been discovered in nearby
galaxies. The presence of young super star clusters in the local universe tells
us that large clusters CAN form in the "present" universe, that is, within the
past few million years. It also means that it is now possible to actually watch
globular clusters being born, and to attempt to solve the puzzle of why globular
clusters in the Milky Way are all old.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Turner will
study super star clusters that are very young, so young that they are still
buried in their natal gas clouds. She will use the Very Large Array to image
gaseous nebulae associated with young super star clusters at centimeter
wavelengths, and to obtain precise locations and sharp images of the hot gas
clouds that surround the clusters. Observations on the Keck Telescope will yield
subarcsecond-resolution images of the infrared emission from dust in the gas
clouds, to determine the energy outputs of the young clusters, and infrared
spectra will be used to determine Doppler-shifted velocities for the gas, from
which the motions, dynamics, and evolution of the gas clouds can be determined.
Do these clusters cause superwinds, which might affect the galaxy around them?
What properties of these gas clouds -density, angular momentum?-might explain
the differences between super star cluster formation and star formation in the
Milky Way? Is there evidence for the dissolution of these young clusters, which
might explain why there are no young super star clusters in the Milky
Way?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this ongoing research project will be
widely disseminated to astronomers and physicists through articles in scholarly
journals, scientific talks, and postings on the World Wide Web. Dr. Turner and
her colleagues will provide reduced data and images to astronomers who request
them and maintain the most popular radio and infrared images on the web. She and
her collaborators and students will also reach the public with the presentation
of images and results through popular talks, popular articles, press
conferences, press releases, and web materials. A major component of this
research project is the training of young physicists and astrophysicists, both
graduate and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***