* 0307908
* Management and Processing of Continuous Streams from Moving Sensors
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Shahram Ghandeharizadeh, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 08/31/2007
* USD 300,399.00

The goal of this project is to investigate a framework to capture both the
semantics and essence of an activity pertaining to moving sensor data streams.
Moving sensors refers to an emerging class of data intensive applications that
impacts disciplines such as communication, health-care, scientific applications,
etc. These applications consist of a fixed number of sensors that move and
produce streams of data as a function of time. With communication, for example,
a hearing impaired individual might utilize a cyber glove that translates hand
signs into written (spoken) words. The glove consists of a sensor for each
finger joint that reports its location as a function of time, producing streams
of data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework consumes streams of data and
constructs their multi level, spatio temporal representation at different levels
of abstraction. This multi-layer design ensures extensibility, modularity, and
physical data independence from the stream producing devices. While this
framework is demonstrated in the context of several applications, its key
demonstration is with an application to recognize hand signs (in particular,
American Sign Language) using a virtual-reality glove. This shows the
extensibility of the framework to recognize new signs and its modularity to
handle new input devices. The framework improves the quality of detected
patterns by (a) employing buffers for delayed decision making, (b) different
layers maintain context to provide hints when input data is noisy, and (c)
employs the concept of Envelope of Limits (EoL) to compensate for a user's
slight variations when performing a spatio-temporal sign.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More information can be obtained from the project web
sites (http://dblab.usc.edu) and (http://infolab.usc.edu). The broader impact of
this project is to further the field of multimedia by incorporating hand-gesture
as a new mode for conveying information, with applications for the people with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;