* 0307938
* Morphology and Chemsitry of Lateral Composition Modulations
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Bradford Orr, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2008
* USD 504,204.00

The objective of this project is to extend understanding of the initiation of
compositional inho-mogeneities in III-V semiconductor alloy systems. The
approach utilizes a number of experimen-tal methods to examine the
(non)homogeneity of alloy layers and lateral composition modulation in
multilayers. A tool central to the investigation is a combined MBE-STM chamber
to examine the atomic scale structure of clustering in alloy layers and lateral
composition modulation in mul-tilayers. This information will feedback into the
growth process and allow perfecting the assem-bly of the phase-separated
regions. Specific goals are: To develop a quantitative understanding of the
connections between surface reconstruction, strain, and local alloy composition
for InGaAs; To determine experimentally the initiation mechanisms of spontaneous
lateral composition modulation and how it relates to surface features and the
local variations in alloy composition; To form self assembled arrays in InGaSbAs
alloys; To establish empirically the degree of self-assembly that can be
achieved using patterned substrates.&lt;br/&gt;The research is expected to have
significant impact on basic physical understanding of alloy for-mation and
origins of compositional inhomogeneities in III-V compound semiconductor
material systems. The results will be applied to eliminate compositional
nonuniformities within device layers. Additionally, the research forms the basis
to design compositional variations in semicon-ductor thin films and exploit the
novel properties arising from their nanometer-size scale struc-ture, such as low
threshold lasers. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental
research issues associated with electronic/photonic materials having
technological relevance and emphasizes the integration of research and
education. The project promotes teaching, training, and learning of all levels
of scientific mastery, from post Ph.D. researchers, to graduate students,
nontraditional undergraduates, and middle-school girls, including researchers
from Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (University of Michigan-Flint). The
project will also improve the research and education infrastructure in Michigan.
It has al-ready established a track record for including members from
underrepresented groups, including women, African Americans, and Hispanics. The
PIs will continue to seek diversity in building their research
team.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;