* 0307682
* Collaborative Research:  The Effects of Information on Firm Conduct and Market Structure
* SBE,SES
* 05/31/2002,06/30/2004
* Phillip Leslie, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2004
* USD 71,325.00

There is a significant theoretical literature in economics that identifies
various ways through&lt;br/&gt;which providing more information to consumers may
lead to improvements in market effciency&lt;br/&gt;and consumer welfare in
particular. The theoretical insights provide a basis for
government&lt;br/&gt;policies that seek to increase the amount of information
available to consumers. Examples of&lt;br/&gt;such policies include food
labeling laws, accounting disclosure rules and energy effciency
labels&lt;br/&gt;on home applicances. Meanwhile existing empirical studies into
the effects of information to&lt;br/&gt;consumers on firm behavior find small or
negligible effects, casting doubt on the importance of&lt;br/&gt;such policies.
In this project, we analyze a regulatory change that provides an appealing
context&lt;br/&gt;for evaluating the effects of increased product information on
firms' product quality choices and&lt;br/&gt;disclosure decisions.&lt;br/&gt;In
1998, Los Angeles County introduced hygiene quality grade cards to be displayed
in restaurant&lt;br/&gt;windows. The regulatory change provides an experiment in
whether firms are subject to volun-&lt;br/&gt;tary disclosure (of hygiene
quality) without verifiability, voluntary disclosure with
verifiability&lt;br/&gt;or mandatory disclosure. Our research indicates
substantial effects of the increased information&lt;br/&gt;on restaurant hygiene
quality. We also find that the effects from mandatory disclosure are
very&lt;br/&gt;similar to the effects from voluntary verifiable disclosure. A
possible implication of this finding&lt;br/&gt;is that mandatory disclosure laws
(which could be hard to introduce due to lobbying by indus-&lt;br/&gt;try
groups) are less important than having the government provide
mechanisms/procedures for&lt;br/&gt;firms to voluntarily disclose verifiable
product information.&lt;br/&gt;The richness of our dataset allows us to also
analyze how the effects of the grade cards differ&lt;br/&gt;across restaurants.
This is interesting because we can address questions that have
received&lt;br/&gt;little or no attention in the existing empirical literature,
such as: (i) does reputation help firms&lt;br/&gt;to overcome adverse selection
problems, (ii) do franchised chain-restaurants free-ride on
chain&lt;br/&gt;reputation, and (iii) what is the effect of the increased
product information on firms' profitability&lt;br/&gt;and market structure?