* 0307358
* Radio Polarimetry as a New Probe of the Interstellar Medium
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Charles Alcock, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 05/31/2007
* USD 336,833.00

AST 0307358&lt;br/&gt;Gaensler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an effect known as
Faraday rotation, a linearly polarized radio wave rotates in its position angle
as it travels through a magnetized gas. This effect can be used to determine the
strength of the intervening magnetic field. This project, led by Dr. Bryan
Gaensler at Harvard University, pursues new observing and analysis techniques
for studying faint background polarization, and for measuring the consequent
Faraday rotation. The magnetic properties of interstellar gas can then be
measured over wide regions of the sky, allowing one to map out both ordered and
turbulent structures in otherwise invisible magnetic fields. These measurements
will be applied to&lt;br/&gt;polarization data on both our own Milky Way and on
the two nearest galaxies to our own,&lt;br/&gt;the Large and Small Magellanic
Clouds. These data will be used to characterize the strength and scale of
magnetic turbulence, both in diffuse interstellar gas and towards specific
sources. How the properties of interstellar turbulence vary as a function of
location, whether there is a transition from three- to two dimensional
turbulence at a certain physical scale, and if turbulence is injected into
the&lt;br/&gt;interstellar medium at particular sites, can all thus be
determined. Using the fact that Faraday rotation in foreground sources can
depolarize polarized background emission, one can also determine the gas
density, magnetic field strength and degree of turbulence within discrete
foreground objects. In this project, this phenomenon will be used to measure the
scale of turbulent eddies in HII regions, to trace out the enhanced turbulence
produced by supernova remnant shocks, and to probe the interaction between young
stars and molecular clouds. Finally, polarization data will be used to determine
the overall magnetic field structure of the Milky Way and of the Magellanic
Clouds. Using the geometry of these fields and their relation to the
distribution of interstellar gas, one can determine how galactic magnetism is
generated. The overall goal of this project is to reach a full understanding of
how magnetic fields are distributed throughout space, ranging from the small
scales associated with random motions and turbulence, up to global Galactic
structure. The fundamental contribution made by magnetic fields to the
energetics and dynamics of our Galaxy and of every object within it are often
overlooked - this project should amend this situation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
is challenging for lay people of all ages to understand just what it means to
measure the radio emission from space, and to comprehend the process through
which these measurements are carried out. As a complement to the scientific
program described above, activities will therefore be developed whose aim will
be to make some of the astrophysical themes underlying this project accessible
to middle- and high-school students. Specifically, activities will be designed
which demonstrate that radio waves are a form of electromagnetic radiation,
which explain how radio astronomers gather their data, which highlight the need
to avoid and overcome radio frequency interference, and which explain the
principles underlying interferometry. These activities will be piloted in local
schools, assessed for their levels of student engagement and comprehension,
refined and field-tested in a larger number of classrooms, and then made freely
available via the WWW.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;