* 0307084
* Structural Recovery and Physical Aging in Plasticizing Environments
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Gregory McKenna, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2008
* USD 583,000.00

The discovery of anomalous volume recovery in polymer glasses subjected to
plasticizer-jumps through the glass transition will be explored using three new
classes of experiment. First, the kinetics of mass absorption during structural
recovery will be investigated. Second, the first enthalpy recovery experiments
after plasticizer-jumps will be performed to determine if the observed volume
anomalies are also found in the enthalpy part of the glassy structure. This will
require development of a unique pressure cell for the Calvet calorimeter in the
laboratories of the PI. Third, a non-resonant dielectric hole burning
spectroscopy (NSHB) technique will be developed to establish how dynamic
heterogeneity of the plasticizer-jump and T-jump created glasses compares. The
experimental results will be interpreted within the energy landscape paradigm
for glass-forming materials. The work will provide the first complete set of
data that constructs the full range of macroscopic variables (volume, enthalpy
and concentration) and relates them to a measure of the microscopic nature of
the material (NSHB) during the evolution of glassy structure or physical aging.
Finally, the development of the NSHB capabilities at Texas Tech University will
be the first such apparatus in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The
graduate students and post-doctoral researcher will perform the proposed
research under the direct supervision of the PI. The proposed work is expected
to provide excellent training for the graduate student and post-doctoral
associate in cutting edge research. As part of their training, the graduate
student and post-doc will attend and present their research results at national
or regional meetings. In addition to providing good training for students, the
results of the project will be incorporated to the extent feasible in both
undergraduate and graduate courses taught by the PI. Because the research is
interdisciplinary, containing multiple aspects of polymer materials science
(structural recovery and plasticization of glass forming materials) and
calorimetry as well as fundamental condensed matter physics (non-resonant
spectral hole burning) the work provides a rare educational opportunity for the
graduate student and post-doc. They will be expected to be familiar with all
aspects of the program. In addition, the work involves two significant
instrument design and construction tasks (pressure vessel for calorimeter and
dielectric NSHB apparatus) that are important in the education of experimental
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;***