* 0307252
* Matter and Radiation in Superstrong Magnetic Fields of Neutron Stars
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Dong Lai, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 05/31/2007
* USD 234,046.00

Lai, Dong AST 0307252

Neutron stars are the collapsed end states for most massive stars. They provide
a testing ground for physics under extreme conditions unrealizable on the Earth.
The study of thermal radiation from isolated neutron stars (including radio
pulsars, radio-quiet neutron stars and magnetically-powered pulsing neutron
stars) can provide important information on the interior physics, magnetic
fields, surface composition and other properties of neutron stars. The new
generation of X-ray telescopes, especially, are bringing great promise to such
study, and high-quality data are already coming online. Understanding the
properties of matter and radiation in strong magnetic fields is essential for
the proper interpretation of the current and future observations of neutron star
surface emission. The principle investigator (PI) of this project is continuing
to systematically study the surface layers and the radiation spectra of strongly
magnetized neutron stars in a series of related investigation. The PI is
studying the electronic and radiative properties of matter in strong magnetic
fields, the propagation of radiation in the superstrong magnetic field regime,
atmosphere models to examine radiation spectra from magnetic neutron stars for
comparisons with observations, and certain phase transitions of condensed
metallic hydrogen and helium and their radiation signatures, relevant to cool
neutron stars with superstrong magnetic fields.

Broader Impacts. The research project includes training and support for graduate
students (including a woman student), and it involves talented undergraduate
students as well. The subject of "Astrophysics under Extreme Conditions" has a
broad appeal to undergraduate students (even nonscience students), and the PI
gives many presentations on this subject to undergraduates and the general
public. There is active collaboration and interdisciplinary research with solid
state physicists at Cornell, and plasma physicists and astrophysicists in Russia
and France. The PI also provides theoretical models to observational groups.
Discussion is underway with scientists at the Laboratory for Laser Energetics to
explore laboratory astrophysics research using intense lasers.

