* 0307562
* Fundamental Stellar Parameters from the CHARA Array
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Harold McAlister, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 09/30/2006
* USD 727,881.00

AST 0307562&lt;br/&gt;McAlister&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Georgia State University's
Center for High Angular Resolution Astronomy (CHARA) operates an interferometric
array on Mt. Wilson, California. The CHARA Array consists of six 1-m aperture
telescopes arranged in a Y configuration providing 15 baselines from 33 to 331
meters in length. The Array operates in the visible and near-infrared spectral
regions with limiting resolutions of 1.6 and 0.4 milli-arcseconds at the K and V
bands. In terms of the number and aperture size of its telescopes and the length
of its baselines, the CHARA Array is among the most powerful facilities of its
type in the world. Built with funds provided by Georgia State University (GSU),
the NSF, the W.M. Keck Foundation, and the David and Lucile Packard Foundation,
the CHARA Array is poised to undertake extensive observational programs having a
broad impact on stellar astrophysics. This award will support these programs
primarily by maintaining an adequate scientific, technical and operational staff
at the Array site. The core CHARA team has also developed a number of
collaborations to more fully exploit the Array's scientific capability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of its very high angular resolution and its good
sensitivity and UV-plane coverage, the CHARA Array will have unprecedented
access to stellar diameter measures for main sequence stars of all temperatures
as well as for evolved stars. Accurate low-visibility measurements will
characterize atmospheric limb darkening in stars. The sizes and shapes of young
stellar objects will be mapped. Pulsations of Cepheid variables and their limb
darkening will be measured to directly calibrate this important rung in the
cosmic distance ladder. Continuum and molecular band observations will
characterize scale heights in the atmospheres of evolved stars. Disks
surrounding Be stars and massive outflows from luminous blue variable stars,
Wolf-Rayet stars and interacting binaries will be detected and characterized. In
the area of binary star studies, the Array will eliminate the classical problem
of non-overlapping selection effects among the various techniques for
discovering binary stars and measuring their orbital motions. It will resolve
the majority of the spectroscopic binaries accessible to it, providing
measurements of stellar mass, luminosity and radius for stars broadly
distributed throughout the HR diagram. The emphasis will be on accuracy of mass
determination, not just more masses of mediocre quality, to observationally
detect the influence of age and metallicity on stellar evolution. Low-mass,
unseen companions will be sought in wider binary systems. Known extrasolar
planetary systems will be inspected to ensure that face-on binaries are not
contaminating the sample even at a low level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact beyond the scientific and intellectual goals exists in three areas.
First, CHARA is actively training the next generation of scientific and
technical experts in the field of interferometry. A significant fraction of GSU
astronomy graduate students are pursuing their PhD research with the Array.
CHARA staff have participated in all of the NASA/JPL Michelson Summer Schools.
Second, CHARA will enhance science awareness in the large and diverse
undergraduate community at GSU by incorporating Array imagery (real-time in some
cases) in undergraduate astronomy courses, which enroll approximately 700
students per semester. Several undergraduates will be recruited to participate
in remote observations and data processing. Third, a CHARA Exhibit Hall on Mt.
Wilson dramatically displays the historic 20-ft Michelson Stellar
Interferometer, used at the 100-inch telescope in the 1920s. Thousands of
visitors to the observatory grounds each year will have a unique opportunity to
interactively learn how interferometry can probe stars to reveal their surfaces
and fundamental properties. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;