* 0307365
* RUI:  Radio and high energy emission from pulsars
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Peter Gonthier, Hope College
* Continuing Grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 06/30/2008
* USD 129,017.00

AST 0307365&lt;br/&gt;PI: Gonthier&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until now the Compton
Gamma-Ray Observatory has detected pulsed gamma-ray emission from about 10
isolated pulsars, and more than a dozen X-ray pulsars have been detected by
other satellites. Simulations of these emission processes in neutron star
magnetospheres have not been able to pin down the location of the acceleration
and emission regions whether the acceleration of particles occurs near the
neutron star surface (polar cap models) or many stellar radii from the surface
near the light cylinder (outer gap models). The team will improve current
simulations by introducing realistic luminosities and geometries of radio and
gamma-ray beams for both the polar cap and outer gap models. These calculations
will put the polar cap and outer gap models on the same footing within the same
calculation normalized by the comparison of the simulated radio pulsars with
those observed by a selected group of radio surveys. The team will investigate
further discriminating signatures by studying the correlations between the radio
profiles and the gamma-ray profiles. There is growing evidence for the existence
of a new class of isolated neutron stars with ultra-strong magnetic fields that
includes soft gamma-ray repeaters (SGRs) in which photon splitting and Compton
scattering play a significant role in the magnetospheric physics. As in the
previously accomplished work for Compton scattering in the polar cap model, the
team will develop magnetic Compton scattering required in these near or supra
critical magnetic fields applicable to the SGR environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These projects have broad impacts primarily on the
education of undergraduate students by providing an environment and challenging
topics that lead to the enhancement of their knowledge and skills. The PI will
take students for a month to Goddard Space Flight Center where the
undergraduates will interact with NASA scientists discussing their findings as
well as attending talks given in a wide variety of areas of investigation. The
students are respected as fellow colleagues in the pursuit of the project and
are encouraged to excel. The experience instills in the students the confidence
in their quest and encourages them to train and discipline themselves. The
students also gain oral and presentation skills as they prepare and present a
poster at the end of their summer experience, later presented in a yearly
research symposium at Hope College. &lt;br/&gt;