* 0307077
* Complexity of Feasible Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Alan Selman, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Richard Beigel
* 12/31/2006
* USD 149,817.00

This project continues research on the computational complexity of feasible
computations, with the larger goal being to distinguish complexity classes that
contain feasibly computable problems from those that do not. The emphasis is to
continue investigation into fundamental areas of computational complexity
theory.

The project advances research on disjoint NP pairs. Disjoint NP pairs are
technically equivalent to promise problems, and they were studied previously
because of their relevance to security issues in cryptography. This project
investigates their relevance to propositional proof systems, and solves problems
that add insight to questions about proof systems.

The project continues to investigate multivalued functions as a model of
computation. Whereas it has been common practice to study the complexity of
computational problems by focusing on decision problems alone, it is frequently
more natural to study the computational complexity of problems directly as
multivalued partial functions.

Average-case complexity theory provides a framework for the classification of
problems according to average-case analyses. This project continues to develop
the theory of average-time complexity, for the average-case complexity of a
problem is frequently a more important measure than its worst-case complexity.

Regarding the broader impact of this activity, the PI offers advanced graduate
courses and seminars that include the results of this project. The PI's graduate
students participate fully in the activities of this project. All results are
disseminated broadly. Results are submitted to major scientific symposia and to
refereed journals