* 0307427
* Instabilities, Waves, and Growth in the Dynamics of Filaments
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Alain Goriely, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 173,607.00

The proposal is divided into three main lines of interconnected research: the
nonlinear analysis of filament instabilities, the study of wave propagation and
singularity formation in elastic rods, and the analysis and modeling of elastic
growth. The analysis of filament instabilities will be carried out through the
use and extension of nonlinear analysis techniques developed by the principal
investigators. These techniques, which yield systems of nonlinear amplitude
equations of considerable mathematical interest, will be applied to a wide
variety of cases of practical importance including extensible and shearable
rods, tubes conveying fluids, and growing filamentary organisms. The studies of
wave propagation in filaments under various conditions will be investigated by a
variety of analytical stability techniques, and the investigations of
singularity formation will draw on adaptations of techniques used to study wave
propagation in inhomogeneous media. The modeling of elastic growth pertinent to
biological processes will be developed according to continuum mechanical
principles and applied to both filamentary and three dimensional
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Filamentary structures are
ubiquitous in both the natural and physical worlds at scales ranging from the
microscopic to the macroscopic. In nature we see the sinuous motion of vines and
plant tendrils; under the optical microscope we can see filamentary bacteria;
and through electron microscopy we can see the structure of DNA strands. If the
original motivations for developing a rational continuum mechanics of
filamentary structures was provided by the mechanical world of cables, springs
and struts, contemporary research has often been motivated by the biological
context. These problems, including the fundamental natural phenomenon of growth,
raise new challenges to the classical formulations. While the static theory of
elastic structures has a long and distinguished history, the theory of dynamical
effects still presents many important challenges, both theoretically and
computationally. Work of the principal investigators over the past few years has
shown that the governing equations of elastic filaments, can be reduced to more
tractable nonlinear evolution equations capable of describing many dynamical
bifurcations including the fundamental twist-to-writhe conversion. If this
earlier work concentrated on simplest cases, the extension of this theory to a
whole host of important cases of practical importance has yet to be developed.
In addition to the effects of structural asymmetry, and inhomogeneity, the
effects of internal fluid flow that arise in pipes and hoses, and the
incorporation of growth effects required for biological modeling, will be
addressed in work supported by this award. Once achieved, these formulations
will provide the necessary mathematical tools to study conformation changes,
instability, and wave propagation in filamentary structures as varied as whips,
hoses and bacterial filaments. The principal investigators will apply these
studies to the analysis of filamentary and other elastic structures in a variety
of mechanical and biological settings such as the spontaneous change in
handedness exhibited by climbing plants and other filamentary organisms, twist
wave propagation in bacterial filaments, and morphological changes in aerially
growing bacterial microorganisms and fungi. In all these examples, natural
growth is a fundamental component in the morphological dynamics, and a variety
of investigations will be carried out to improve our understanding of how this
fundamental natural effect can be incorporated into self-consistent mathematical
models. These will range from the inclusion of growth terms in the constitutive
equations for rods, to the development of continuum mechanical models of growing
three dimensional elastic structures such as those arising in the description of
bulk growth in biological tissues.&lt;br/&gt;