* 0307044
* FIBR: Planning: Proteomic Analysis of Critical Targets of Environmental Stress
* BIO,EF
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2004
* Gordon Lithgow, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/29/2004
* USD 49,892.00

The proposed work will discover thermal "weak links" in organisms. That is, as
organisms encounter progressively higher temperatures, which are the first
proteins to be damaged by temperature? To do so, the work will exploit a
molecular chaperone, a special protein that recognizes and binds to damaged
proteins. These chaperones will be isolated - and with them the damaged proteins
that they bind. The damaged proteins in turn will be identified by peptide mass
fingerprinting, a novel, state-of-the-art technique. The proposed work is a
pilot project that will seek weak links in populations of a model bacterial
species, E. coli, that have been evolving at different temperatures, and test
whether the weak links in low-temperature populations have been strengthened in
high temperature populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
will set the stage for a methodology whereby weak links can be identified for
any organism whose genome has been characterized, and in relation to any natural
or anthropogenic stress. Potentially these weak links determine the ecological
and evolutionary limits of organisms, the maximum age they can reach,
susceptibility to disease, etc. - but heretofore it has not been possible to
identify the weak links themselves. The project will also be among the first to
demonstrate the applicability of peptide mass fingerprinting to problems in this
area of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;