* 0307092
* Multi-Wavelength Observations and Analysis of Asteroid 2100 Ra-Shalom
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Beth Ellen Clark, COMMONWEALTH UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 81,405.00

AST 0307092&lt;br/&gt;Shepard&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Dr. Michael Shepard, at
Bloomsburg University of Pennsylvania, and Dr. Beth Clark, at Ithaca College,
will conduct a multi-wavelength campaign of observation and analysis of asteroid
2100 Ra-Shalom during its August 2003 close approach. Ra-Shalom is of interest
for several reasons. &lt;br/&gt;(1) Ra-Shalom is one of the largest members of
the Aten near-Earth population, a group that is &lt;br/&gt;poorly characterized.
(2) Ra-Shalom is one of a handful of asteroids that appear to have little or no
surface regolith, suggested by very high values of surface thermal inertia. (3)
Spectral data gathered to-date strongly suggest Ra-Shalom to be a K-class
asteroid, similar to members of the Eos family, and a good spectral match to CV3
meteorites. (4) Ra-Shalom has a relatively low delta-V, making it a good
candidate for future spacecraft missions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;August 2003
offers the best opportunity to study Ra-Shalom for the next two decades. These
investigators will make the following near-simultaneous observations of Ra-
Shalom over one complete rotation so that all sides are observed: (1) 12.6-cm
radar imaging at ~50 m/pixel resolution or better (Arecibo), (2) Near Infrared
(NIR, 0.8 - 3.5 micron) observations (Infrared Telescope Facility), (3) Ultra-
Violet/Visible (0.3-0.9 micron) observations (Kitt Peak/McDonald), and (4)
Thermal Infrared (TIR, 8-14 micron) observations (Palomar). The observations are
designed to image all of Ra-Shalom in multi-wavelengths to address the following
questions: (1) What is the shape and physical structure of Ra-Shalom? (2) What
large scale surface features can be discerned? (3) Are there rotational phase
spectral heterogeneities? If so, can surface features be correlated with these
variations? (4) Do spectral variations (if existent) suggest compositional or
textural (e.g. grain size) variations? (5) Can a water absorption feature be
identified? (6) Can we confirm or refute a lack of regolith? (7) If the
K-classification is confirmed, can a link be made between this asteroid and the
Eos main-belt population? (8) Can a reasonable case be made that this near-Earth
asteroid (NEA) is the source of any meteorites in our collections? &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work can be summarized as follows. A
detailed characterization of &lt;br/&gt;this asteroid provides society with
information that will be of use to: (1) Evaluate the threat of asteroid impacts
with the Earth, (2) Evaluate the potential resources available in the near Earth
asteroid population, and (3) Increase understanding of the primitive building
blocks of the Solar System. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;