* 0307869
* Fundamentals and Implications of Interstellar Turbulence
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Alexandre Lazarian, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 06/30/2007
* USD 154,008.00

AST 0307869&lt;br/&gt;Lazarian&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interstellar medium
(ISM) of a galaxy plays a crucial role in its appearance, evolution,
and&lt;br/&gt;overall properties. In turn, the nature of the ISM and many
processes within it are determined&lt;br/&gt;by the magnetic turbulence that
stirs it. The proposal is focused on the studies of fundamentals&lt;br/&gt;of
interstellar turbulence and its implications. The most fundamental process in
turbulence is&lt;br/&gt;the energy cascading to small scales. Dr. Alexandre
Lazarian will study this process in typical interstellar environments where
sources of energy are localized both in space and time. Implications of this
process on the evolution of inflows onto clumps inside molecular clouds, as well
as for cosmic ray acceleration, will be studied. The interaction of magnetic
turbulence with charged particles is another fundamental process that is
determined by the properties of the turbulence. Recent progress in understanding
of MHD turbulence motivates Dr. Lazarian to explore what this new insight
entails for the dynamics of cosmic rays and charged grains. Pilot calculations
show that the expected changes are dramatic with the consequences that will have
a broad impact not only on the interstellar medium, but also to other branches
of astrophysics. This research group has (a) made substantial progress in
understanding those fundamental properties, discovered some new previously
unknown regimes of magnetic turbulence (the continuation of the magnetic cascade
beyond the ion-neutral damping scale), and (b) has developed numerical tools and
expertise to deal the complicated issues turbulence raises. Intended
collaborations will enhance the available infrastructure for the research,
accelerate it, and will provide a stimulating environment for the intellectual
development of a graduate student. These efforts will go hand in hand with
observational testing of the predictions. For this purpose, the team will use
and improve statistical tools that it has developed and successfully tested
recently. Those tools allow the extraction of statistics of velocity and density
from data spectral line data cubes, establish topology of different interstellar
phases and determine turbulence anisotropy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon the
completion of the work, the team will make those tools available to the
astrophysical community. The completed projects will improve understanding of
fundamental properties of interstellar turbulence and will develop new tools for
comparing theory and observations. The results will have a broad impact on
adjacent fields, since many astrophysical processes (e.g. heating of the ISM,
star formation, heat and mass transfer) depend on properties of interstellar
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;