* 0307793
* Comparing Theory with Observation Using Chemical Probes of Turbulent Molecular Clouds
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Simon Glover, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 07/31/2008
* USD 149,912.00

AST 0307793 Glover

Our understanding of the interstellar clouds of molecular gas where stars form
depends primarily on observations of spectral lines from trace molecules such as
CO, water, and ammonia. Recent models of these molecular clouds have suggested
that they are dynamical objects with lifetimes under 10 million years, and that
cores within the clouds usually represent dynamically collapsing objects.
However, the models yield physical variables such as density, temperature, and
velocity, which are difficult to compare directly to observed maps of line
intensity. This project removes one difficulty standing in the way of that
comparison by directly following the formation and evolution of molecular
species in three-dimensional numerical simulations of magnetohydrodynamical
turbulence, including the effects of self-gravity. Approximations will also be
made to model the effects of UV radiation on the chemistry. Direct comparisons
to the observations will be made by comparing measurements of chemical
abundances, and by modeling line transfer through the turbulent gas with an
iterative method. The simulations will be used to study a number of problems;
for instance, whether current observations of molecular clouds can be used to
constrain the nature of the turbulence, and whether the chemical composition of
simulated cores is compatible with the observed composition of real cores.

The models computed in this project will be made freely available to observers
in a form suitable for simulating observations from a wide variety of different
instruments, as part of the digital collection of the American Museum of Natural
History. This research will also be incorporated into ongoing presentations of
research to the media, in-service teachers, and the general public, as well as
classes at Columbia University. This research will be done in an international
collaboration with colleagues in the United Kingdom. ***

