* 0307194
* EPSCOR: Workshop:  Linux Cluster Workshop
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2003,08/31/2003
* John W.D. Connolly, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Xiaodong Zhang
* 08/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

There is an increasing need for scientists/researchers in the United States who
are knowledgeable about cluster computing; however, there are few opportunities
offered at geographically remote locations to acquire this knowledge easily.
Interested faculty and graduate students throughout the EPSCoR states are
building their own clusters--ranging from small (8 nodes) to large (128
nodes)--and teaching themselves as they proceed; this is a slow
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Linux Cluster Workshop will increase the
research and development competitiveness of EPSCoR states by enabling
computational scientists and engineers todevelop applications that achieve
maximum performance and scalability on Linux clusters of all sizes; system
administrators will learn about issues related to the administration of Linux
clusters in support of secure, reliable, and high-performance
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prospective users of Linux clusters will find
the workshops to be a detailed and informative introduction to the process of
configuring, acquiring, and using Linux clusters. LCI technical materials
highlight the information that scientific application developers and systems
administrators need but cannot readily find elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will further the ambitious outreach and education efforts of the
WESNet&lt;br/&gt;group of seven western EPSCoR states that have been
collaborating in an effort to&lt;br/&gt;introduce EPSCoR researchers to high-
performance cluster computing activities. This will be one more step to
optimally exploit our national talent for science and engineering and develop
excellent centers of research and learning in every state in the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;Students trained on these clusters will be better prepared to
assume the role of&lt;br/&gt;computational scientists in high-performance
computing upon graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Linux Cluster workshop will
promote high-performance computing among a diverse group of EPSCoR researchers
in a long-term effort to stimulate new collaborations and scientific research
opportunities. The home states of these individuals will be more competitive in
terms of securing new research funding and providing intellectual and
computational assistance to private sector activities.&lt;br/&gt;