* 0307395
* U.S.-Romania Mathematics Research:  Factorization, Extension, and Interpolation Problems for Operator-valued Functions on Groups
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Mihai Bakonyi, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 28,100.00

The goal of this U.S.-Romanian mathematics project between Mihai Bakonyi of
Georgia State University and Dan G. Timotin of the Romanian Academy's Institute
of Mathematical Sciences is to advance our knowledge of positive definite
functions on groups, an area of interest in noncommutative harmonic analysis.
This will be accomplished by considering two classes of groups, first, totally
ordered abelian groups and second, finitely generated nonabelian free groups.
Building on the U.S. participants' strengths in factorization and extension
problems and the Romanian side's in interpolation and operator generalizations,
the team intends to examine: 1) factorization of positive definite operator-
valued functions, 2) extensions of partially positive definite operator-valued
functions on finitely generated free groups and 3) interpolation of operator-
valued functions on free groups. Results are expected to lead to a more unified
theoretical framework for multivariable operator theory and related areas of
operator algebras. Success would enhance future applications in system theory
and electrical engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mathematics project
fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
experts in the United States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents
and share research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.
Broader impacts include the introduction of U.S. and Romanian students to the
international community of people working on multivariable operator theory
through collaborative work at partner institutions and direct involvement in the
project's advanced data analysis and modeling techniques.