* 0307460
* XStreamCast: Broadcasting and Query Processing of Streamed XML Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Leonidas Fegaras, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2008
* USD 314,913.00

The XStreamCast project addresses the efficient processing of XQueries over
continuous streams in which a server broadcasts XML data to multiple clients
concurrently and a client may tune-in to multiple streams at the same time. The
goal of this project is to develop a framework that improves query throughput
and response time on all clients, taking full advantage of their limited
resources. Under this framework, the unit of transmission in an XML stream is an
XML fragment, which corresponds to one or a few XML elements from the
transmitted document. A server may choose to disseminate XML fragments from
multiple documents in the same stream, can repeat some fragments when they are
critical or in high demand, can replace them by sending delta changes, and can
delete invalid ones. The client architecture is based on an optimization
framework for XQuery that utilizes many efficient evaluation algorithms for
processing XML data streams under memory and processing power constraints. The
end goal is the construction of a complete prototype system based on the
theoretical framework, which is expected to drastically improve performance when
compared with other stream processing systems. The algorithms and the software
resulting from this project will have a broader impact on a wide range of
applications, especially in electronic commerce, since they will improve the way
services are provided to clients. They will also reduce network traffic between
servers and clients and will give the ability to small service providers and
businesses to serve a larger number of clients using less powerful server
computers and lower cost networking. The project Web site
(http://lambda.uta.edu/XStreamCast/) will provide access research results and to
a public interface to allow other researchers to test-drive the XQuery
engine.&lt;br/&gt;