* 0307055
* Simultaneous Statistical Modeling of Several Large Covariance Matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Mohsen Pourahmadi, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 05/31/2006
* USD 82,050.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Mohsen Pourahmadi,
DMS-0307055&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Simultaneous Statistical Modeling of
Several Large Covariance Matrices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on
the development of a three-stage statistical model-fitting process consisting of
model formulation, estimation and diagnostics for contemporaneous covariance
matrices of large multivariate responses arising, for example, in business and
economics, epidemiology, environmental monitoring and global change,
biotechnology and manufacturing (quality control). Correlation and covariance
matrices and their spectral (eigenvalue) decomposition provide the basis for all
classical multivariate techniques. For temporal correlations, however, the
Cholesky decomposition lies at the core of most time series techniques. A
growing body of work in step-down procedures in multivariate statistics and
multivariate stochastic volatility models implicitly rely on the Cholesky
decomposition or view each long random vactor as a "time series", for a given
arrangement of the variables. The proposed work intends to make explicit and
reveal the full potential of using Cholesky decomposition or time series
techniques in modeling contemporaneous covariance matrices. It includes
developing parsimonious models, their estimates and asymptotic properties, their
practical implementation and uses, with an eye to guaranteeing the positive-
definiteness of the covariance matrices at each stage of an iterative procedure
used to compute the maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters. A major
difficulty of the implementation for high-dimensional unordered vectors is the
large number of possible arrangements of the variables. The methods and tools to
be employed include: generalized linear models, factor analysis and random
effects models, time-series model fitting process, maximum likelihood and
Bayesian estimation and numerical linear algebra. The proposed research has the
potential of elevating the Cholesky decomposition as a bona fide tool for
modeling temporal and contemporaneous correlations and hence connecting
(unifying) disparate areas like time series analysis, factor analysis and linear
structural models, graphical models and Bayesian covariance
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in technology and data collection have
enabled researchers to record measurements on many characteristics of systems
over finer units of time. The research proposed is motivated by statistical
problems arising in settings where large amounts of multivariate data are
available and the focus is on prediction, control, classification, clustering
and data mining. The reliability or error rates of these tasks invariably hinge
on the precise estimation of correlations among many variables and better
understanding of the dynamics of large covariance matrices. The goal of the
proposal is to provide a systematic and efficient method for analyzing high-
dimensional data through modeling of the relevant covariance matrices. The
proposal intends to use classical and recent statistical estimation and large-
scale computing. Results obtained by the proposed research will have
applications in diverse areas outlined above, however, particular attention will
be paid to their potential use in understanding intelligence in machines and
brains. A student will participate in the proposed research during summers.
&lt;br/&gt;