* 0307112
* Collaborative Research: NSF-NJGS Drilling of the Greenhouse World: The Cretaceous Transect
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Kenneth Miller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 07/31/2006
* USD 304,568.00

0307112&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful drilling onshore in the
New Jersey Coastal Plain (by the PI and his colleagues) and offshore on the NJ
shelf and slope (ODP) has provided: 1) ages for major Late Cretaceous-Cenozoic
sequence boundaries; 2) causal links between the formation of sequence
boundaries and the growth of ice sheets between 42 and 10 Ma, and evidence that
such a link exists in the older, supposedly "ice-free" world; 3) estimates of
the amplitudes of global sea-level changes; 4) evaluation of links among
sequence stratigraphic architecture, global sea-level variations, and margin
evolution; and 5) constraints on the causes of major global events in Earth
history, including the middle Eocene-earliest Oligocene global cooling, the late
Paleocene thermal maximum, the K/T boundary, early and late Maastrichtian
events, and the Cenomanian/Turonian carbon extraction event.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Backstripping results of sequences at Bass River and
Ancora, NJ accounts for the effects of sediment loading, compaction, paleodepth,
and basin subsidence, providing a new eustatic estimate. The PI's studies
indicate that large (&gt;25m) and rapid (&lt;&lt;1m.y.) eustatic variations
occurred in the Late Cretaceous Greenhouse world. This requires that either
small ice sheets paced sea-level changes during this time, or our understanding
of causal mechanisms for global sea-level change is fundamentally flawed.
Foraminiferal oxygen isotope changes are consistent with a glacioeustatic cause.
This award will allow the PIs to take advantage of an opportunity for joint
funding and collaboration with the New Jersey Geological Survey (NJGS) and the
US Geological Survey (USGS) by drilling a borehole on the coast of NJ near
Manasquan, NJ that will provide the thickest marine Upper Cretaceous section in
the region and tie to offshore MCS profiles obtained in 2002. These seismic
profiles cross thick marine Upper Cretaceous strata, revealing sequence
stratigraphic geometries for this Greenhouse interval; drilling at Manasquan
will provide detailed age and facies controls on these seismic sequences. In
addition, the NJGS is funding drilling costs for Upper Cretaceous targets at
Millville, NJ (1500 ft) and Batsto, NJ (1500 ft.). Together, these 5 sites will
provide updip-downdip and along-strike transects that will fully characterize
the ages, facies, and distribution of Late Cretaceous
sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The USGS Eastern Earth Surface Processes Team
will drill a 1600 ft. borehole at Manasquan; and will follow this with a
1500-1600 ft. borehole at Batsto in Spring 2004&lt;br/&gt;