* 0307688
* Near-Infrared Mapping of Silicate-Rich Asteroids in the Mainbelt
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Schelte Bus, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 06/30/2007
* USD 153,389.00

AST 0307688&lt;br/&gt;Bus&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The asteroid belt, located
between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, contains vital clues about the events
and processes that led to planetary formation. It also records a long history of
collisional disruptions and dynamical diffusion, processes that are still
ongoing. To reveal many of the secrets held by the asteroids requires that they
be studied as a population, so that trends and relationships can be identified.
Dr. Schelte Bus, University of Hawaii, will lead an observational campaign to
measure the near-infrared spectral properties of silicate-rich asteroids in the
main belt. This project will utilize SpeX, a new-generation near-IR spectrograph
at the Infrared Telescope Facility (IRTF) on Mauna Kea, to produce high-quality
spectra for 300-400 of these asteroids over the wavelength interval from 0.8 to
2.5 micro-meter. This spectral region is ideal for characterizing the mineralogy
of silicate-rich asteroids because of diagnostic absorption bands centered near
1 and 2 micro-meter. The immediate goals of this survey include sampling the
entire range of silicate mineralogies present in the main belt for asteroids
with diameters larger than 5 km, and mapping the distributions of these
mineralogies as functions of orbital parameters. These analyses will help place
constraints on the conditions in the inner main belt during proto-planetary
formation. Members of collisionally-derived asteroid families will be targeted
to search for variations in mineralogy within each family. These observations
will help constrain the degree of heating/differentiation that occurred in the
original parent bodies. Asteroids will also be sampled in and around suspected
main-belt source regions of near-Earth asteroids (NEAs) and meteorites. Also,
size-dependent trends in spectral characteristics will be closely examined in an
attempt to determine if they represent differences in mineralogy, or are caused
by varying degrees of surface alteration (space weathering).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this proposed project include the
public release of these spectral data to both the asteroid and meteorite
communities. These data will form a valuable resource for the characterization
of asteroids (both main-belt and NEAs) and for advancing studies in asteroid-
meteorite relationships for many years to come. Dr. Bus has made a significant
effort to optimize the reduction of asteroid data obtained with SpeX. Once these
reduction procedures are streamlined and fully documented, they will be made
openly available online. An important aspect of this project involves education
through the involvement of undergraduate students and a post-graduate research
assistant in various aspects of observing, data reduction and analysis. Special
effort will be made to recruit students from the University of Hawaii system.
Dr. Bus and his collaborators have extensive experience in asteroid
spectroscopy, data reduction and analysis, and mineral spectroscopy.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;