* 0308707
* Using He as a Natural Tracer to Understand the Dynamics of Groundwater Systems: A Quantitative Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* M. Clara Castro, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 05/31/2007
* USD 283,088.00

0308707&lt;br/&gt;Castro&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dating old groundwater has been
largely limited to time periods accessible by 14C dating. A promising new
approach is the application of a conservative tracer such as 4He which has no
limitations on its age scale for determining groundwater residence times. A
difficulty with the 4He approach is an apparent inconsistency among water ages
calculated using 14C and 4He isotopes. These discrepancies likely result from an
inadequate treatment of how 4He is transported in and by water (advection,
dispersion and/or molecular diffusion). This study will investigate and
hopefully resolve the 14C - 4He discrepancy, with the goal of further developing
the 4He tracer technique so that it can have broader applicability in hydrologic
studies. The Carrizo Aquifer and surrounding formations in Texas provide an
excellent setting to compare 14C - 4He water residence times. Quantitative
exploration and understanding requires a numerical approach of both water flow
and mass transport in the system. An extensive noble gas and 14C sampling
campaign will be undertaken to provide a basis for simulations and calibration
of a 4He transport model. Simulations of water flow and mass transport will be
conducted simultaneously, in steady and transient states with a finite element
code. Two approaches will be undertaken. First, a water flow model will be
calibrated on observed 4He concentrations. The pattern of variation in 4He
concentrations will yield information on spatial variation in hydraulic
conductivities, thus constraining the groundwater flow model and contributing to
a better definition of this heterogeneous groundwater flow system. Second, an
independent calibration of the groundwater flow model based on hydraulic head
and transmissivity data will be carried out using an inverse methodology.
Measured 4He concentrations will reduce the number of possible solutions by
showing which are compatible with He data. The reliability of 4He as a tool to
date groundwater will be assessed by both approaches, which are expected to lead
to similar results. Groundwater ages estimated in this way will then be compared
with calculated ages from 14C concentrations. The water flow model obtained with
4He will also be used to simulate transport of 3He, 14C, Cl, Br, and Sr in order
to further reduce uncertainties associated with groundwater flow models. The
initial 2-D model will be subsequently expanded into a 3-D representation in
order to assess potential errors introduced by representing a three-dimensional
system as a two-dimensional one. This study will benefit a number of diverse
fields, particularly hydrogeology and paleoclimatology.&lt;br/&gt;