* 0308862
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The structure-function tradeoffs associated with embolism resistance in conifer wood
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* John Sperry, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 05/31/2005
* USD 12,701.00

Dissertation Research: The structure-function tradeoffs associated with embolism
resistance in conifer wood&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;John Sperry and Jarmila
Pittermann&lt;br/&gt;University of Utah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water transport in
plants may be challenged by drought and/or freezing. When subjected to either
phenomenon, the introduction of air into the water conducting tissue (xylem) may
impair the movement of water from root to stem by what is commonly referred to
as embolism. What are the costs associated with resistance to embolism under
these stresses? The current research will answer this question by investigating
the hydraulic efficiency and wood anatomy of members of the Pinaceae,
Cupressaceae and Podocarpaceae families. Conifers are the ideal choice for this
study because the structural simplicity of their wood, coupled with their broad
distribution will allow for effective modeling and testing of their hydraulic
response to drought and freezing. Currently, it is known that large xylem
conduits are efficient conductors of water, but highly vulnerable to freezing-
induced embolism. Also, drought resistant xylem exhibits high wood density, and
is costly to construct. Hence, hydraulic conductance and wood density represent
the currency of the cost-benefit tradeoffs associated with freezing and drought
resistance, respectively. The predictions are that conifers inhabiting regions
prone to water deficit and freezing, such as North American high deserts, will
be much less vulnerable to these stresses, but at the cost of reduced hydraulic
efficiency, and high wood density. Conversely, taxa inhabiting warm, mesic
regions where freezing is rare, as in Australian tropical rainforests, will
exhibit low tolerance to drought and freezing stress, but will enjoy efficient
hydraulic conductance. Ultimately, conifers inhabiting any point on the drought-
freezing spectrum will optimize their cost-benefit strategy to maximize fitness
in their habitat. The goals of this research are to clarify not only the
physiological significance of variation in xylem anatomy, but also the selective
forces restricting current and past conifer
distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;