* 0308878
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics and Host-Parasite Associations of Rodent-Restricted Sucking Lice (Anoplura: Polyplacidae): Fahrenholzia lice and their Heteromyid Rodent Hosts
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Mark Hafner, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 01/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Mark Hafner and Ms. Jessica Light at Louisiana
State University to investigate the relationships among rodent-restricted
sucking lice using both molecular and morphological data. The investigators will
also test for coevolution between one group of sucking lice (Fahrenholzia) and
their heteromyid rodent hosts using molecular data. Sucking lice are obligate,
blood-feeding ectoparasites of mammals and they are known disease vectors as
well as agricultural menaces. Yet, despite the obvious health and economic
importance of sucking lice, there are only a few living researchers
investigating anopluran biology and relationships. Studying the relationships
that sucking louse species have not only to each other, but also with their
hosts, can greatly improve our knowledge of these poorly known organisms.
Funding will be used to collect both sucking lice and their rodent hosts and to
purchase laboratory supplies for molecular investigation of relationships.
Statistical analyses will be performed to test for coevolution between host and
parasite groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the first to investigate
the relationships among rodent-restricted sucking lice and the first to
investigate coevolution between anoplurans and their hosts. Results will be
published in peer-reviewed journals and collected data will be submitted to
online databases. By increasing our knowledge of louse relationships, these
results will have both medical and agricultural benefits. This investigation
will also identify appropriate louse-specific techniques and molecular markers
for use in future analyses. Furthermore, a female graduate student will be
trained in louse taxonomy, molecular techniques, and phylogenetic methods.
Collaborations with louse morphologists, mammalian systematists, and molecular
biologists will also be established as a result of this research.&lt;br/&gt;