* 0308894
* Mathematical Psychology: Geometry, Mapping and Dynamics in Emotion Space
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Nicholas Thompson, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 02/28/2005
* USD 99,921.00

This grant will support the Principal Investigator, a Professor of Mathematics,
during one year of a longer-term, already on-going interdisciplinary research
project in collaboration with two co-PIs, both Professors in the School of
Psychology at the PI's home institution. Specifically: (1) The PI will undertake
intensive study and training in social psychology, with particular attention to
current theories of embodied human emotions. (2) The PI will develop
mathematical models of individual and group ``emotion spaces'', and will
supervise the development of computer-aided tools to map and explore these
models using techniques from topology, geometry, and dynamics. (3) The PI, co-
PIs, and other collaborators (including graduate and undergraduate students in
Psychology, faculty and students in Computer Science, and in time probably
clinical faculty in the School of Psychology) will use these models and tools to
develop new experimental protocols, gather data, and refine the models and
tools.

The starting point of this investigation is the observation by the psychologists
Fritz Heider and Albert Michotte, over half a century ago, that even a very
degraded geometric stimulus (crude animations of circles and triangles moving,
in highly constrained ways, along a line or in a plane) produces in very many
observers a compelling experience of highly varied emotions. Despite tremendous
advances in animation technology, it has only been comparatively recently that
psychologists and cognitive scientists have begun a vigorous exploration of the
Heider-Michotte Phenomenon; even these recent explorations have done little in
the way of mathematical modeling, an oversight which is addressed by this grant.
The larger project of which this grant forms a key part is an exploration of the
psychophysical, developmental, evolutionary and cultural bases of human
emotions. Because of its apparently simple geometrical nature, the Heider-
Michotte phenomenon provides a convenient, and very intriguing, entry point into
this project for the PI, a mathematician with expertise in topology and
geometry.

This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).