* 0308982
* Assembling Dendritic and Branched Molecules at Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Vladimir Tsukruk, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 10/31/2006
* USD 454,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses interfacial state of dendritic and branched
molecules with various functionalized cores and branches such as amphiphilic
monodendrons, branched discs, and hyperbranched polymers. The ultimate goal of
this project is to understand the basic relationships in chemical
architecture-&gt;interfacial organization-&gt;interfacial properties of novel
dendritic and branched molecules with variable shape and symmetry of cores,
degree and nature of branching, variable amphiphilic balance, and anchoring
ability. For such molecules, surface anchoring can occur at well-defined single
or multiple points. This anchoring should stabilize molecules on a surface but
still allow enough mobility for the outer shell to form organized nanoassemblies
with external functional groups. For such assembly, terminal groups of
monodendron shell are completely exposed to external interactions. In further
developing this concept, the previously explored selection will be expanded by
including new types of molecules: disc-, rod-, and hair-pin branched
amphiphiles, monodendrons with anchoring focal point, hetero-armed star-
polymers, functionalized hyperbranches, and phosphor-organic dendrimers. This
research will address several important questions: How does the chemical
composition and symmetry of shape-persistent cores and flexible branches affect
the balance of interfacial forces? What is an optimal balance for the formation
of stable organized monolayers at the air-water interface and a solid surface?
How is surface anchoring affected by the dendritic architecture? How do
principles of chemically and electrostatically-driven self-assembly known for
linear macromolecules, work in complex branched macromolecules?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broader impact includes fostering an intensive
partnership between the PI's group and other researchers from science and
engineering departments in the U.S., France, Korea, and Ukraine. This
collaboration involves polymer chemists from University of Arizona, CNRS
Toulouse, Yonsei University, Seoul, and the Institute of Macromolecular
Chemistry, Kiev, as well as soft matter physicists from the DOE Ames Lab and Oak
Ridge National Lab. Continuing collaboration with industrial labs will enhance
this activity and will bring invaluable experience for graduate students.
Through intensive external collaboration, the proposed research program will
enable Ph.D. students to become mature, internationally aware researchers
familiar with cutting-edge basic and applied research. The PI will focus his
efforts to increase the number of students pursuing advanced degrees in science
and engineering by working with several recruiting/retention programs, including
"Learn and Earn Program" (i.e., recruiting freshman materials students),
Freshman Honors Program, Women in Science and Engineering Program, BS/MS Program
(recruitment of senior students to graduate program), and REU programs. The PI
will continue his emphasis on recruiting women and minority students, an area in
which he has been quite successful. Given the current composition of his
research group, the PI expects that more than 50% of his students graduating
within next three years will be women. This will be a significant increase in
representation for the group that currently does not exceed 15% of all students
in the engineering college.&lt;br/&gt;