* 0308353
* Experimental and Theoretical Determination of Solubilities of Rock-Forming Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* John Walther, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2007
* USD 266,196.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will continue an experimental
program of determining the equilibrium solubilities of Al-silicate minerals at
crustal conditions. Aluminum speciation in H2O-HCl and H2O-NaCl-HCl solutions
will be investigated building on recent experiments measuring corundum
solubilities in pure H2O, H2O-NaCl and H2O-CaCl2 solutions. Corundum and
andalusite plus quartz, at elevated temperatures (400o to 650o C) and pressures
(up to 3 kbar) in acid solutions and aqueous salt fluids (0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0
molal HCl and NaCl) will be measured and interpreted. The experiments supported
by this award will involve extracting fluid samples while they are at high
pressure and temperature with a uniquely designed hydrothermal apparatus and
then determining the concentration of all volatile and non-volatile constituents
of the fluid through a battery of modern analytical techniques including a
direct current plasma emission spectrophotometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
important part of the theoretical analysis of the measurements is that activity
coefficients of neutral species, which are common in these solutions, must be
considered when determining the equilibrium. Hopefully a better model of Al
speciation as a function of pH and ionic strength at supercritical pressure and
temperature can be constructed in the Al2O-SiO2-H2O-NaCl-HCl system and the
extent of Na+Al and possible Na+Al+Si complexes in solution determined. The
proposed experiments should put limits on the possible solution compositions
from which aluminum can be transported and aluminum bearing phases precipitate
during metamorphism of the earth's crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
undertake the training of 1 to 2 graduate students giving them the ability to
run the instruments in a modern wet-chemical and hydrothermal laboratory. The PI
will use concepts developed in this project in a graduate level course and
include them in an undergraduate/graduate textbook he is
developing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;