* 0308861
* Adaptive Analysis of Sparse Factorial Designs and Related Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Daniel Voss, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 87,061.00

DMS-0308861 Adaptive analysis of sparse factorial designs and related problems
Weizhen Wang and Daniel T. Voss

Abstract

The investigators study the statistical theory underlying control of error rates
for adaptive analysis of sparse factorial designs. Considered are orthogonal and
nonorthogonal saturated designs, nearly saturated designs, and supersaturated
designs. Methods under consideration rely upon the presence of an adequate but
unknown level of effect sparsity, for lack of an adequate variance estimator
independent of the effect estimates, and adapt to the level of effect sparsity
suggested by the data. Much of the difficulty and intrigue lies in the
apparently circular nature of the required arguments, since relatively large
effect estimates are in some sense adaptively set aside for variance estimation,
then the resulting variance estimate is used to make inferences about the
effects. Lack of an adequate independent variance estimator gives rise to a
variety of problems that are important and technically challenging. The
investigators bring to bear on these problems a geometric perspective and the
rigor and perspective of the multiple comparisons field, seeking methods of
inference that control error rate strongly, while using the data adaptively and
efficiently.

The investigators study the probabilistic foundations of data analysis for
sophisticated experiments fundamental to the development and production of high-
quality, low-cost products. Critical characteristics often depend in unknown
ways on an unknown subset of a larger collection of variables or factors. The
resulting necessity to study many factors simultaneously in small, economical
experiments--essentially to learn a lot from but a little data--presents many
statistical challenges. While great progress has been made in the development of
designs or plans for conducting such experiments, fundamental problems
concerning the corresponding data analysis remain. The investigators study the
theoretical foundations for the analysis of data from such experiments, and
consequently propose innovative methods of data analysis, justifying them
mathematically. This entails seeking solutions to a variety of related problems
in probability pertinent to the analysis of data from such factorial
experiments. Results have direct applications in engineering product and process
design and in statistical process control and improvement, enhancing efforts to
achieve competitive economic advantage.