* 0308617
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Integrating Genetic and Acoustic Data in the Study of Fin Whale [Balaenoptera physalus] Population Structure
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Richard Harrison, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Jerry O. Wolff
* 06/30/2004
* USD 11,929.00

ABSTRACT ["Integrating genetic and acoustic data in the study of fin whale
(Balaenoptera physalus) population structure"]

Understanding genetic relationships among whales from different geographic areas
is essential to effectively managing these endangered species. This project
focuses on defining relatedness and gene flow among populations of fin whales
(Balaenoptera physalus) in the North Pacific and North Atlantic as a case study
for better understanding the utility of genetic and acoustic variation for
identifying "stocks" of vocally active baleen whales. In order to determine
whether gene flow is "gender-biased", male-mediated gene flow estimated from Y
chromosome-specific molecular markers (inherited only through males) will be
compared directly to female-mediated gene flow estimated from mitochrondrial DNA
(which is maternally inherited). Geographic variation in songs produced by male
fin whales from populations in the North Pacific and North Atlantic will then be
compared to estimates of genetic distance based on both Y chromosome and mtDNA
in order to determine whether geographic variation in songs reflects patterns of
gene flow mediated by male fin whales, female fin whales or both. Acoustic
features useful for detecting shorter-term discontinuities in fin whale movement
and/or social behavior will be also be identified. Finally, the research will
examine the potential utility of Y chromosome markers for studies of other
baleen whale species.