* 0308548
* Scale Invariance and Dynamic Phase Transitions in Non-Equilibrium Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Uwe Tauber, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 240,000.00

This award supports theoretical studies of non-equilibrium condensed matter
systems. Statistical mechanics provides the foundation for our present
understanding of interacting many-particle systems. In the (usually idealized)
situation of thermal equilibrium, the probability distributions for a variety of
physical realizations are known at least in principle. This allows a systematic
construction of the thermodynamics of a given system in terms of a few relevant
macroscopic variables, and the derivation of its equations of state. For systems
slightly disturbed away from equilibrium, linear response theory can be used to
compute dynamical susceptibilities, transport coefficients, and relaxation
rates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, no such general theoretical framework
exists to date for systems far from equilibrium. Aside from a large variety of
interesting physical examples, many chemical and virtually all biological
systems are sustained in a non-equilibrium steady state (NESS). In addition,
problems from ecology, sociology, and economic theory can be described in terms
of stochastic processes, i.e., models akin to those used in non-equilibrium
statistical mechanics. Among the truly fundamental problems in current
theoretical physics is therefore the characterization of the stationary
probability distributions of NESS in terms of certain global properties such as
symmetries, overall features of the interactions, conservation laws, etc. Some
progress in this direction has been achieved for non-equilibrium systems that
are either tuned to the vicinity of a dynamic phase transition, or generally
display scale invariance: In these situations the renormalization group (RG) can
be employed as a powerful tool to classify the ensuing phases and characterize
the transitions in terms of universal scaling
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on previous research, the project here
has a double approach to the investigation of NESS in scale-invariant dynamical
systems, namely the study of simplified model cases by means of all available
mathematical methods, and the detailed analysis of experiments performed far-
from-equilibrium conditions. The goal is to extract general features and
principles that permit the classification of NESS and, in the second case,
optimize material properties and processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
offers an integrated interdisciplinary environment for research and education.
Research material will be incorporated into courses. A textbook on this subject
continues to be written.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;This theoretical research
project addresses the non-equilibrium behavior of condensed matter systems.
Typical examples of such systems are materials growth, pattern formation, and
phase transitions with driving forces. Most chemical systems and all biological
systems are in these non-equilibrium states. Research will look for common
themes that can assist the understanding of these
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project offers an integrated
interdisciplinary environment for research and education. Research material will
be incorporated into courses. A textbook on this subject continues to be
written.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;