* 0308969
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Testing the Parallel Speciation Hypothesis in Scincid Lizards of the Eumeces skiltonianus Species Complex
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Elizabeth Jockusch, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2005
* USD 11,182.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Elizabeth Jockusch and Mr. Jonathan Richmond at
the University of Connecticut to investigate how differences in environmental
conditions facilitate the formation of new species (a.k.a. ecological
speciation). The focal organisms in this study are a group of closely related
and geographically widespread North American lizard species known as skinks.
Within this group, two distinct forms that inhabit different environments (i.e.
ecotypes) occur: a large-bodied, monochrome form in warm, arid habitats and a
small-bodied, striped form in cooler, moister areas. In conjunction with DNA
evidence indicating that the large-bodied form has originated three times
independently, the correlation between body types and habitat association
suggests that evolutionary divergence among members of the group is the result
of physiological adaptation to alternative environments. Likely as a result of
these changes in body morphology, the different ecotypes are reproductively
incompatible and have diverged into separate evolutionary lineages that likely
represent undescribed species. This project will examine in detail how such
processes can occur in natural populations by combining molecular studies using
DNA data, behavioral assays of sexual isolation using live animals, and
developmental studies that examine evolutionary changes in internal and external
anatomy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although focused on skinks, this project will
serve as a model system for studying the general theoretical predictions of
ecological speciation. It will also help identify features of the environment
that may be critical for maintaining and promoting biological diversity, and
highlight the importance of using an evolutionary perspective in recognizing
undescribed species. Furthermore, the multidisciplinary approach of the study
will provide a graduate student with training in several fields of organismal
biology and will include undergraduates as an integral part of the fieldwork and
behavioral studies. Lastly, all specimens, tissues, and DNA data will be made
publicly available for further scientific use.&lt;br/&gt;