* 0308902
* The Crazy Mountains Basin Project: Composition, Diversity, and Evolution of Paleocene Mammalian Faunas
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* David Krause, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2006
* USD 138,426.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Crazy Mountains Basin Project: Composition, Diversity, and
Evolution of Paleocene Mammalian Faunas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;David Krause (Stony
Brook University)&lt;br/&gt;Jonathan Bloch (South Dakota School of Mines &amp; T
echnology)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(EAR-
0308902)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the extinction
of non-avian dinosaurs, the Paleocene epoch (roughly 65 to 55 million years ago)
was a critically formative interval in the evolutionary history of modern
mammals. Turnover in the composition of the mammalian fauna during the
Paleocene, and particularly between the Torrejonian (To) and Tiffanian (Ti)
North American Land Mammal Ages, was among the most significant during the
Cenozoic, the so-called Age of Mammals. It is then that mammals underwent rapid
diversification and became dominant land animals. The causes and mechanisms of
Paleocene mammalian faunal turnover have been variously ascribed to either
climatic change or pseudo-extinction but the data required to test these
hypotheses have, heretofore, been wanting. This proposal seeks to document the
pattern of To/Ti mammalian faunal turnover by employing massive samples of
largely undescribed fossils, collected by Stony Brook University field crews in
the 1980s and early 1990s from the eastern Crazy Mountains Basin (CMB), Montana.
When studied in the context of the careful litho-, magneto- and biostratigraphic
analyses proposed here, the samples from these localities will provide data
crucial for a revision of the biochronology of the Paleocene epoch. The proposed
project will also result in exploitation and realization of the vast potential
of a poorly known and under-sampled site, the Bangtail locality, on the western
side of the basin. Limestones from Bangtail have begun to yield some of the most
complete and exquisitely preserved mammalian skulls and skeletons yet known for
the Paleocene. The samples from both the eastern and western sides of the CMB
will significantly augment knowledge of the phylogeny, functional morphology,
and paleoecology of Paleocene mammals. Identification, description, and analysis
of these samples, coupled with new paleoclimatic data based on paleofloras and
stable isotope analyses of mammalian teeth, will be employed to address long
unanswered and increasingly controversial questions concerning the mechanisms
and causes of rapid faunal turnover during the Paleocene. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;