* 0308420
* BE/CNH: An Integrated Analysis of Regional Land-Climate Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2009
* Bryan Pijanowski, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2009
* USD 1,750,000.00

The intensity and spatial reach of contemporary human alterations of the Earth's
land surface are unprecedented. Land-use and land-cover change (LULCC) are among
the most significant of these human influences. Many studies demonstrate the
influence of LULCC on local and regional climate, which, when aggregated, may
significantly alter the global climate. Meanwhile, climate change related to
increased atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases is expected to
considerably affect people and ecosystems due to altered temperature and
precipitation patterns. While significant research has focused on global climate
modeling and socioeconomic factors influencing land-use change, an integrated
assessment at the regional scale of coupled human-climatic systems is required
to address the question, What is the magnitude and nature of the interaction
between land use and climate change at regional and local scales? Through this
research project, an international multidisciplinary team including social,
ecological, atmospheric, and statistical scientists will address this question
by exploring the linkages between two foci of global change research, LULCC and
climate change. A major goal of global change science is to obtain a more
reliable estimation of future climatic conditions. This goal increasingly
requires high-resolution regional scale climate modeling that includes feedbacks
between the land and atmosphere. This project aims to complete the loop of land-
use/climate/land-use impacts assessment. Its contribution is in analysis of the
complex linkages among components, with special emphasis on the questions, how
does land-use change affect climate and how will climate change affect land use?
These linkages will be examined through analysis and modeling of agricultural
systems, land-use change, the physical properties of land cover, and regional
climate dynamics. The study will focus on East Africa, which has broad ranges of
ecosystems, tropical climatic conditions, and areas of rapid land use change as
well as a population vulnerable to climatic variability. The project will
integrate (1) future local-level climate scenarios derived from downscaling of
global climate models; (2) information derived from detailed long-term case
studies of LULCC and analyses of long records of observed climate; (3) models to
project LULCC from local to regional scales; (4) analyses of time-series
satellite imagery to translate the effects of LULCC on land surface
characteristics; (5) net primary productivity simulations; and (6) climate
information from a regional climate model parameterized using local land surface
parameters. The culmination of the project will be a series of climate-land
system feedback experiments identifying the magnitude and nature of interactions
between land and climate dynamics at regional scales. The investigators will
characterize these interactions in terms of the determining form of feedbacks,
the strength of linkages, issues of spatial and temporal scales, and the effect
of "tipping points" on climate-land interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will make a significant contribution both to science and to policy. Its
scientific importance lies in addressing the complex interactions and feedback
between climate change and land-use change by integrating state-of-the-art
methodologies and multidisciplinary approaches. It will explicitly address
issues important to biocomplexity theory and complex system modeling, including
feedback, thresholds, uncertainty, and non-linearity. These are inherent issues
in linking information derived from a variety of models and case studies in
order to understand the multi-scale dynamics associated with linking LULCC and
climate change over time. The anticipated scientific findings and new
methodologies will advance future climate change research at regional and global
scales. With respect to application, the project will provide plausible
scenarios of future climate change and its impacts upon the dominant livelihood
systems of East Africa. The team will work with policy-makers and other
stakeholders, including farmers and herders, to assess the implications of these
scenarios for future agricultural research and policy, conservation, and land-
use planning in the region. The findings will be relevant to scientists and
policy-makers in many other parts of the world who are concerned with the
implications for society and environment of complex interactions between land
use and climate. In addition to addressing many fundamental climatic, ecological
and socioeconomic questions, the research will be tightly integrated with the
education of students from elementary school to graduate school. It will provide
capacity-building opportunities for young and mid-career American and African
scientists as well as outreach to various stakeholders from local to
international communities. This project is supported by an award resulting from
the FY 2003 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on
the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;