* 0308777
* BE/GEN-EN: Functional Genomics: Interactions Among Ecology, Population Biology and Gene Expression
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Douglas Crawford, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/2008
* USD 1,998,733.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fish Fundulus heteroclitus is widely
distributed in estuaries along the eastern seacoast of North America. This
species is found in areas where there is considerable variation in habitat
spatial heterogeneity (i.e., landscape complexity) and in a region characterized
by one of the world's steepest thermal clines: approximately 1.0 degree
centigrade per degree of latitude. The goals of this project are to
determine&lt;br/&gt;how landscape complexity within a local region and along the
steep thermal cline affect genome-wide patterns of gene expression. Landscape
structure is hypothesized to affect population size and genetic structure, and
individual growth rates, longevity, and migration. These parameters in turn
alter the process of natural selection and thus affect an organism's ability to
adapt to local conditions. This project will measure these&lt;br/&gt;ecological
and population variables and explore their relationships to patterns of gene
expression. Genetic crosses of field-collected populations, and laboratory
acclimation of their progeny, will determine if physiological induction or
heritable genetic differences are responsible for the differences in gene
expression. Genome-wide patterns of mRNA expression will be quantified with F.
heteroclitus microarrays. Because variation in messenger RNA must be translated
into changes in protein concentration to produce a phenotypic change, microarray
experiments will be complemented by high-throughput analyses of protein
expression (proteomics). If variation in gene expression is one of the most
important adaptive mechanisms, this project will detect significant differences
in gene expression associated with differences in landscape and thermal ecology.
This research will determine how ecological factors operating at diverse
geographic scales affect the population biology and gene expression of F.
heteroclitus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;