* 0308888
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Adaptive Benefits to Vocal Mimicry in a Tropical Mixed-Species Flocking Bird
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Donald Kroodsma, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 07/31/2004
* USD 9,684.00

The adaptive benefits to vocal mimicry in a tropical mixed-species flocking
bird.

Avian vocal mimicry has sparked both a great amount of interest and an equal
amount of frustration, as researchers have often been unable to demonstrate the
adaptive benefits of this behavior. While it is tempting to think that mimicry
of other species influences the behavior of these species to benefit the caller,
this has rarely been shown (but see Chu, Behaviour, 2001). In the course of
Goodale's dissertation work he has documented mimicry by the Greater Racket-
tailed Drongo (Dicrurus paradiseus), a participant in mixed-species flocks of
rainforest in Sri Lanka. Drongos have been observed to mimic in two contexts:
when solitary they mimic the non-alarm vocalizations of other flocking species,
and during mobbing they mimic the other species' alarm calls. In this study,
Goodale will test the hypothesis that mimicry functions to attract other
species, considering the alternate hypotheses that mimicry is a way of
increasing a sexually selected repertoire or a non-adaptive by-product of vocal
learning. To do this, he will a) track and tape record drongos inside and
outside of flocks, b) elicit responses from drongos with models of perched
Accipiter hawks, and c) conduct playback trials measuring the response of
heterospecifics to drongo mimicked and non-mimicked vocalizations. The study can
serve as a foundation to investigate the cognitive processes involved in this
highly context-dependent behavior. It is also a fitting conclusion to a
dissertation investigating inter-specific communication in mixed-species flocks.

