* 0308827
* Interdisciplinary Grants in the Mathematical Sciences:     Combinatorial Methods in Manufacturing
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* H. Joseph Newton, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,999.00

The proposal is an interdisciplinary research project with an educational
emphasis in combinatorial theory and industrial engineering. The principle
investigator proposes to substantially broaden her background in industrial
engineering, specifically in manufacturing systems and supply chain management,
to establish &lt;br/&gt;collaboration with researchers in engineering and
industry, and to build an interdisciplinary research program on probabilistic
combinatorics and applications in manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will spend the 2003--2004 academic year in the Department of Industrial
Engineering (IE) at the Dwight Look College of Engineering, Texas A&amp;M
University (TAMU). She plans to take several courses from &lt;br/&gt;IE and to
interact closely with engineers and their graduate students by participating in
seminars and projects. She plans to work on two projects, one is focused on new
approaches for identifying and mitigating enterprise risk, and the other is
concerned with the application of probabilistic combinatorics to stochastic
model of supply chain networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
proposal is both research and educational. On the research side, the PI expects
to establish a long term collaboration with researchers in engineering and
industry, with results disseminated &lt;br/&gt;in both the mathematical and
industrial engineering literatures, as well as directly to industry. On the
educational side, the PI will bring the experiences gained back into the
Department of Mathematics. In &lt;br/&gt;addition to creating interdisciplinary
courses and projects, the PI will contribute to the development of a new
institute on Mathematical Applications in Homeland Security, which will greatly
enhance &lt;br/&gt;the research and education program at TAMU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences
(DMS).