* 0308945
* Frustrated Quantum Magnetism in Insulators and Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Patrick Lee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2006
* USD 240,000.00

This award supports theoretical research and education on the quantum theory of
localized magnetic moments in diverse electronic environments in solids.
Specific areas of research include the physics of geometric frustration of
quantum magnetism in insulating materials and the interplay between possibly
frustrated inter-moment exchange and coupling between local moments and
conduction electrons in metallic materials. Emphasis will be on understanding
low temperature phenomena where quantum mechanical effects dominate. The PI aims
to clarify the nature of the ground states and low energy excitations suggested
by experiments or numerical calculations on several low-dimensional insulating
frustrated quantum magnets. Field theoretical methods will be developed with an
aim to obtaining physical insight. The PI will explore whether frustrated
quantum magnets display excitations with fractional quantum numbers. The PI
seeks to bridge the gap between theory and experiments in this active area of
condensed matter physics. The PI will also study Kondo lattice models for
metallic systems with localized magnetic moments, for example LiVO. Various
phenomena discovered in these systems originate in the competition between
possibly frustrated magnetic exchange between the local moments and the
interaction between the local moments and the conduction
electrons.&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports education at the graduate level in
advanced theoretical condensed matter physics. The PI plans to involve
undergraduate students in the research. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports fundamental theoretical condensed matter physics research on phenomena
that arise from geometrical frustration of quantum magnetic materials and the
interaction between magnetic moments localized on particular atomic sites with
itinerant conduction electrons. Geometrical frustration occurs when the
interactions between magnetic moments cannot be simply satisfied because of the
geometrical arrangement of the moments on the crystal lattice. This is
fundamental research in an active and challenging area that involves strongly
correlated electron materials including heavy fermion materials and quantum
magnets like Cs2CuCl4. Research in this area has revealed subtle and beautiful
phenomena in condensed matter physics and provides the intellectual foundation
for future materials and device technologies. This award also supports education
at the graduate level in advanced theoretical condensed matter physics. The PI
plans to involve undergraduate students in the research.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;