* 0308917
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Transposable Element Sequence Evolution in Natural Saccharomyces Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Paul Sniegowski, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2004
* USD 10,134.00

Transposable elements are stretches of DNA with the ability to insert
themselves, or copies of themselves, into new sites in the genomes of their
hosts. This project will study how the force of natural selection affects the
maintenance and distribution of these elements. These questions will be
addressed by examining DNA sequences of the transposable element Ty3 in natural
isolates of two yeast species: Saccharomyces cerevisiae (the common brewers' and
bakers' yeast) and its close relative Saccharomyces paradoxus. The amount and
type of variation in Ty3 DNA sequences will be analyzed to reveal how natural
selection is acting on Ty3 elements in these
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transposable elements have been discovered in
virtually every organism with a well-characterized genome, including the human
genome. The movement and replication of these elements is a major source of
harmful genetic mutations, and this observation has led to the theory that
transposable elements are DNA parasites. This "selfish DNA" hypothesis remains
to be tested rigorously in diverse natural populations of organisms. The project
described in this proposal focuses on the primary organism studied in modern
genomic research (yeast) and integrates genomic and molecular methods with
evolutionary approaches to further our understanding of the biological
significance of transposable elements.&lt;br/&gt;