* 0308642
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Parent-Offspring Recognition in Greater Spear-Nosed Bats
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Gerald Wilkinson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 05/31/2005
* USD 11,780.00

FROM INDIVIDUALS TO POPULATIONS:&lt;br/&gt;FEMALE DECISIONS AND GROUP SIZE
VARIATION IN BARN SWALLOWS&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Using information
gathered experimentally on the individual habitat- and mate-
selection&lt;br/&gt;decisions of barn swallows to model population-level
patterns of group size variation, this study&lt;br/&gt;offers a new perspective
for examining the causes and consequences of group breeding.
The&lt;br/&gt;samples necessary to evaluate the relationship between a known
signal of individual quality,&lt;br/&gt;feather coloration, and the social and
genetic mate choice of females across different group&lt;br/&gt;sizes were
collected during a field experiment in 2002. Funds are requested to conduct
genetic&lt;br/&gt;parentage analyses using variation in five polymorphic
microsatellite loci. These data will (1)&lt;br/&gt;provide information about the
differences between social and genetic mates selection and&lt;br/&gt;whether
these vary with group size; (2) are necessary to parameterize the mate selection
rules&lt;br/&gt;for an agent-based model; and (3) will also add to our knowledge
of the effects of density on&lt;br/&gt;female mate choice decisions, a
relationship that has only once been examined experimentally&lt;br/&gt;and has
potentially large impacts on sexual selection. Additionally, the genotype data
will be&lt;br/&gt;used for the independent honor's thesis of a Cornell
undergraduate and the DNA samples will&lt;br/&gt;be deposited in the Cornell Lab
of Ornithology's Genetics Facility and made widely available to&lt;br/&gt;other
researchers.