* 0309922
* The Seamless Biology Classroom: An Integration of Conference and Laboratory Instruction in Botany and Zoology
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Patricia Burrowes, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 03/31/2007
* USD 199,999.00

Biological Sciences (61) This project addresses the need to promote conceptual
understanding, process skills, and motivation in introductory botany and zoology
classes by integrating course content with inquiry-based, hands-on activities
and experimentation. The models for this curriculum reform are the physics
course designed by Lopez, et al. (Proceedings of the VII Interamerican
Conference on Physics Education, 2000) and the Concept Advancement through
Chemistry Lab-Lecture (cAcL2) initiative of Oliver-Hoyo at North Carolina State
University (http://www2.ncsu.edu/chemistry/moh/moh.html). The new curriculum
also adapts exemplary teaching practices such as cooperative learning (T. Lord,
The American Biology Teacher, 1998) and problem-based learning (M. Sundberg, In
Student-Active Science. Models of Innovation in College Science Teaching, 1997).
In this classroom environment, students can immediately develop and test
hypotheses about questions that arise during course content
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are collaborating with Drs. Lopez,
Oliver-Hoyo, Lord, and Sundberg in the design of the new curriculum, as well as
in action research to assess the new research-based courses. These
collaborations enrich the interdisciplinary nature of the new curriculum.
Materials and model teaching strategies are shared with inservice teachers,
teacher candidates, graduate students, and other faculty members through summer
workshops and a website.&lt;br/&gt;