* 0309057
* Lithospheric Controls on Flood Basalt Volcanism
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Linda Elkins-Tanton, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2006
* USD 113,912.00

EAR-0309057&lt;br/&gt;Elkins-Tanton&lt;br/&gt;Continental flood basalt provinces
are enigmatic due to their infrequency in the geologic record, their remarkable
size (at least 105 km3 of lava), their speed of formation (the Siberian and
several others were complete in about a million years) and their apparent or
possible age coincidences with other terrestrial catastrophes, including
extinctions, meteorite impacts, and sea level changes. The Siberian flood basalt
province, one of the largest, is also closely coincident in time with the
Permian extinction, the largest in Earth history. Understanding the processes
that trigger and create continental flood basalts therefore has relevance not
only to geology and geophysics, but possibly to cycles of life on earth and
certainly to interactions of global chemical systems. Flood basalts are a link
between the evolution of the Earth and evolution of life on Earth.&lt;br/&gt;The
work is designed to help differentiate among competing theories for the
formation of flood basalts, and, more specifically, to create better
understanding of the role of lithosphere in triggering and eruption. The project
bridges the fields of experimental petrology and numerical modeling. The work
will be carried out by the P.I. and will also constitute the undergraduate
thesis of at least one Brown University undergraduate. The work will consist of
two parts: 1. High-pressure and temperature experiments on high-MgO magmas from
Siberia to assess their pressure and temperature of formation; and 2. Numerical
modeling to study the role of lithospheric foundering as a magmatic focus and
trigger, and to study lithospheric topography at the edge of cratons and how it
affects plume ascent.&lt;br/&gt;This project will be one of the first
experimental studies on primitive flood basalt compositions. The results of the
experimental study have the potential to differentiate between models for lavas
requiring very deep, hot melting, and models suggesting alternative mantle
lithologies melting at lower temperatures. These results may significantly alter
models for flood basalt formation. &lt;br/&gt;