* 0309731
* Hydrology of Tropical Montane Cloud Forest in Hawai'i
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Thomas Giambelluca, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2008
* USD 424,682.00

0309731&lt;br/&gt;Giambelluca&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical montane forests with
frequent fog are zones of great hydrological and ecological value. Within the
cloud zone, vegetation strips droplets from the passing air, thereby increasing
water input. Because of cloud water interception and suppressed transpiration,
they generate high watershed yields, supporting water resource needs of
downstream regions. In Hawai'i, wet montane forest areas are critically
important sources of groundwater recharge and host threatened ecological
resources. Planning for water development and protection of fragile ecosystems
in Hawai'i depend on accurate quantification of hydrological processes in
forests. However, no direct measurements of ET have ever been made in Hawai'i's
forests, nor have any prior studies focused on the hydrological impacts of the
loss of the epiphyte layer due to species invasion or other disturbances in
Hawai'i's tropical montane cloud forests. &lt;br/&gt;Recent studies in similar
maritime tropical environments suggest that forest ET in Hawai'i may exceed
current estimates by 265-900 mm yr-1. Accurate forest ET measurements in Hawai'i
are urgently needed to test the reproducibility of exceptionally high rates
found elsewhere and to answer specific questions about hydrologic processes in
Hawai'i. Canopy water balance observations suggest cloud water interception may
be responsible for a larger proportion of the hydrological input in Hawai'i than
previously thought. This project will contribute to a more comprehensive
understanding of tropical forest hydrology generally, and address pressing needs
for more accurate estimates of hydrologic fluxes in Hawai'i, by: (1) determining
the rates of evapotranspiration, transpiration, interception evaporation, and
soil/litter evaporation for wet forest sites in Hawai`i; (2) determining fog
interception, interception evaporation, stem flow, stem storage, and
transpiration in native forest and in an alien species stand; (3) testing
alternative methods of estimating ET for Hawai'i forest sites; and (4) using
alternative methods to estimate ET at existing observing sites on Maui.
&lt;br/&gt;To address the objectives of this study, we will conduct
comprehensive field measurements of all components of water flux into, out of,
and within the vegetative layer at two forest sites on Hawai'i Island. The sites
will include native forest and an invasive species site, both within the cloud
zone. There will be three overlapping components of this research. In the first
component, rainfall partitioning, evapotranspiration, transpiration, and fog
interception will be intensively monitored at the two primary field sites. Field
monitoring will continue throughout the three years of the study. Beginning in
the second year of the study and intensifying in the final year, component two
of the study will focus on analysis of the total evaporation and interception
evaporation at each site, effects of species invasion on fog interception and
interception evaporation, influences of SST variations on these processes, and
performance of alternative methods of estimating ET in Hawai`i forests. In
component three, knowledge gained in the first two phases will be applied to the
problem of estimating ET over a range of Hawai'i's
topoclimates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;