* 0309115
* CAREER:  Medium-Range Order in Polymeric Phosphate Glasses: Effects of Atomic-Scale Structures on Macroscopic Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,02/28/2005
* Joshua Otaigbe, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/28/2005
* USD 60,845.00

9733350 Otaigbe This Faculty Early Career Development project will investigate
one of the most fundamental and general questions regarding the properties of
amorphous materials: namely, what is the relationship between the structural
characteristics of disordered materials and the various physical processes used
to produce the amorphous material. Specifically, the project will examine the
changes in polymeric phosphate glass structure caused by variations in
composition and evolved by melt processing. It will correlate these structural
changes in novel durable polymeric phosphate glasses with the rheology,
durability to water, and resistance to crystallization. The research objectives
will be accomplished using an interdisciplinary approach that integrates aspects
of materials science, rheology, solid-state chemistry and physics, and process
engineering to explore the effects of controlled shear flow on both the short-
range and the intermediate-range order structure of the glasses produced. The
macroscopic glass structure will be studied by various spectroscopy, microscopy,
high performance liquid chromatography, and calorimetry techniques; it will then
be linked to its microscopic origin through X-ray diffraction experiments. This
work will correlate melt-processing conditions (such as shear distortion,
temperature, and shear rate) with the ultimate rheological behavior of the
glass. The results will be compared to reported structural models for phosphate
glasses. This project will evolve into a major education and research capability
at Iowa State University that will be facilitated through collaborations with
international leaders in phosphate glass research. In addition, students in the
Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) Department will be provided with a
relevant, and practice-oriented education that is attractive to industry. This
objective will be accomplished by (a) providing research experiences for
graduate and undergraduate students in MSE; (b) demonstrating to students the
synergistic effect of interdisciplinary research in solving fundamental problems
using innovative, computer-based instructional modules; (c) developing graduate
student internship opportunities with industry by leveraging both the human and
the equipment resources of the industrial collaborators; (d) developing simple
practical materials science demonstration kits for high school science students
and other distant education teaching aids; (e) developing cooperative student
learning groups, and (f) incorporating research findings into the principal
investigator's courses. %%% Understanding the dependencies of chemical
durability and resistance to crystallization tendencies on both the composition
and the melt-processing conditions of phosphate glasses will enhance the use of
phosphate glasses in applications such as glass-to-metal seals for high
expansion metal applications, flame retardants, biomaterials, storage materials
for nuclear wastes, optics, phosphorescent/fluorescent materials, scintillators,
and load-bearing organic/inorganic composites. In addition, students in the
Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) Department at Iowa State University will
be provided with a relevant, and practice-oriented education that is attractive
to industry. ***