* 0309017
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Landscape Correlates of Population Genetic Structure in Three Vertebrate Species
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Stevan Arnold, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

A principal goal of conservation biology is the preservation of a population's
evolutionary potential, frequently measured as genetic diversity. Conducting
surveys of genetic diversity in rare species, however, may be difficult due to
sampling limitations or high costs of developing and screening molecular
markers. Because an organism's environment can greatly influence patterns of
genetic variation, it is logical to ask if there are features of the physical
landscape that can be used as surrogates for population genetic structure.
Similarly, can the population genetic structure of one species be inferred from
that of phylogenetically or ecologically related species? We are using
microsatellite markers, GIS techniques and multivariate and spatial statistics
to explore potential landscape surrogates of genetic structure in a comparative
framework of three vertebrate species inhabiting lakes, ponds and meadows in
northern California. I seek to understand the relationship between landscape
structure and genetic structure, as well as how these interactions vary among
species with different, yet related, evolutionary and natural histories. The
broader impacts of this novel approach will felt through an integration of
population genetics, landscape ecology and community biology that has direct
implications for applied management practices.