* 0309247
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Lithic Raw Material Exploitation Patterns in the Wadi al-Hasa, West-Central Jordan
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2005
* Harold Dibble, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Harold Dibble and Dr. Deborah Olszewski, Ms. Maire
Crowley will collect data for her doctoral dissertation on lithic raw material
exploitation patterns in the Wadi al?Hasa, Jordan. She will analyze lithic
assemblages from seven sites which span a time range from the Middle/Upper
Paleolithic transition through to the Neolithic, and conduct a survey of chert
bearing formations which will expand (both in detail and areas covered) a survey
conducted in 2000 by the Eastern al?Hasa Late Pleistocene Project.

There are two principal models which dominate interpretations of Late
Pleistocene human behavior in the Levant, the circulating/radiating model, based
on research in the Central Negev Highlands, and the transhumance model, based on
research in southern Jordan. However, these models are based on the study of
behavioral responses to very different environmental and/or topographical
conditions from the lake/marsh ecological system which existed in the Wadi
al?Hasa in the Late Pleistocene. Ms. Crowley will be testing and refining a
model of behavioral mobility developed specifically for this type of lake/marsh
environment. This model will provide a useful alternative to the two dominant
models and aid our understanding of prehistoric behavior patterns in other areas
of the Levant where similar lake/marsh environments existed, for example the
Azraq and Jafr Basins.

Raw material availability has been shown to be one of the most important factors
influencing morphological and technological patterns in lithic assemblages.
Because high quality raw material is widely available in the Levant, an
assumption pervades much Levantine lithic research that raw material can be
treated as a constant. Research in other regions of the world, such as Europe,
where raw material is much less widely available, has shown that depletion of
raw material sources over time is a significant factor which must be taken into
account when examining diachronic assemblage variability. Ms. Crowley will also
examine whether depletion is a factor that needs to be considered when studying
diachronic variability in Levantine lithic assemblages, questioning the
previously unchallenged assumption that in this area raw material availability
may be treated as a constant.

The difficulty of identifying raw material sources utilized by prehistoric
flintknappers has frequently been noted in the literature. However, Ms. Crowley
will be developing and refining procedures for combining a variety of visual
criteria which will enable large numbers of artifacts to be analyzed efficiently
and inexpensively and which should make it possible to narrow sources down to
where the body of raw material data collected may be used to test behavioral
models.

Sourcing studies have rarely been performed in the Levant. This research is also
important because it will generate a large and detailed computerized database of
sourcing and raw material utilization data. This database will provide a useful
resource for other paleolithic lithic researchers to draw on to test a variety
of hypotheses. This research will also make a significant contribution to the
training of a promising paleolithic archaeologist.