* 0309368
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Sunbird Community Organization: Opportunities and Challeges for Conservation in Arabuko-Sokoke Forest, Kenya
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Joel Brown, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Amani Sunbird (Anthreptes pallidigaster), exists in two forests in
the world. In Kenya, it resides in a 6,700 ha coastal Brachystegia woodland
within Arabuko-Sokoke Forest. The forest is under demand for selective logging,
eco-tourism, and small scale building pole and fuel wood collection. Will these
activities compromise or, in the extreme, cause the extirpation of the Amani
Sunbird? My project will answer this question. To accomplish these goals, I will
use foraging theory and habitat selection theory to understand community
organization among Amani Sunbird (Anthreptes pallidigaster), Plain-backed
Sunbird (Anthreptes reichenowi yokanae), Collared Sunbird (Anthreptes collaris)
and Olive Sunbird (Nectarinia olicacea). Specifically, I will census sunbirds
and use direct observation to measure activity patterns of sunbirds in response
to habitat type, competitors, predators, nectar and insect availability to
determine the factors that promote species success and the factor that threatens
it.. Together, these data will allow me to determine the habitat preferences of
Amani Sunbirds, and how habitat modification and competition from other species
affect these preferences. A longer-range goal of this approach will be to
develop good indicators of current and future problems for a wide variety of
bird species, and needs for intervention in this important and severely
threatened forest. This project is being co-funded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;