* 0309123
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics of Haloragaceae R. Br. Emphasizing the Aquatic Genus Myriophylum: Phylogeny, Hybridization, and Character Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Donald Les, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2004
* USD 9,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Donald Les and Mr. Michael Moody at the
University of Connecticut to study the species relationships of plants in the
angiosperm family Haloragaceae, which will enable them to identify invasive
hybrid weeds, enhance viability of rare species and elucidate patterns of
character evolution. Haloragaceae are distributed worldwide with approximately
120 species. They are extremely diverse, ranging from small trees to submerged
aquatics. They are important economically as aquarium and water garden plants.
Molecular data from both nuclear and chloroplast DNA will be analyzed using
phylogenetic methods to infer relationships among the species. Molecular methods
will also be used to determine parentages of hybrids. Because DNA profiles
unique to each potentially parental species can be determined, plants sharing
DNA markers from different species can be readily identified as hybrid
offspring. DNA data will also be used to assess species limits of several rare
species in North America and also Australia. &lt;br/&gt; Within this family the
species look quite similar and often it is difficult to confidently distinguish
those considered rare or endangered from those regarded as nuisance weeds. In
order to make appropriate recommendations equally useful for conservation and
management it is essential to identify the species accurately. Because these
aquatic plants often display much variation in leaf shape, etc., molecular data
will assure that plants are identified accurately. Dr. Les and Mr. Moody have
shown for the first time that weedy watermilfoil (Myriophyllum) populations in
North America have hybrid origins. Many state government agencies spend millions
annually to combat watermilfoil weeds and some of these agencies already have
solicited assistance to facilitate identification and improve their knowledge of
invasive hybrid distributions. This work should provide important
recommendations for invasive plant management, leading ultimately to more
efficient aquatic weed control strategies.&lt;br/&gt;