* 0309012
* Collaborative Research:  Holocene Geomagnetic Field Variability from the High-latitude Southern Hemisphere
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Joseph Stoner, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 10/31/2004
* USD 106,696.00

EAR-0309012&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are currently no detailed directional PSV
records from most of the Southern Hemisphere prior to the last 3000 years and
only one detailed Holocene (last 12,000 years) paleointensity record from
anywhere in the Southern Hemisphere. This critical data gap precludes developing
spherical harmonic models for prehistoric time intervals to better understand
dynamo sources in the Earth's deep interior or to even properly interpret PSV
records in the Northern Hemisphere. ODP Leg 202 Sites 1233, 1234, 1235 and Site
Survey cores adjacent to the southern Chilean margin provide an exceptional
opportunity to address this data gap. In this project, the investigators intend
to: (1) Recover four replicate directional PSV records spanning the Holocene
from deep-sea sediment cores collected adjacent to the southern Chilean
continental margin (35 degreesS-50 degreesS). (2) Recover at least two replicate
paleointensity records from these same cores. (3) Carry out a careful rock
magnetic study of all sediments (magnetic mineralogy, ARM, IRM, CHI, plus
selected AMS and hysteresis measurements) to assess where environmental effects
might be biasing the directional or paleointensity data. (4) Carry out a
regional inter-comparison of all Holocene PSV records from this region to assess
data quality and integrate them into an existing Holocene PSV database for
future modeling studies. Results from this proposal will significantly aid
development of spherical harmonic models of the Earth's Holocene field
variability and provide a much better view of the overall space/time variability
of the field. Such observations and models are required to properly assess the
nature of dynamo processes acting within the Earth's core. Broader Impacts: This
project will mentor at least one high school student, one undergraduate student
and a paid graduate student. Final paleomagnetic datasets will be made available
on the PI's website (http://earth.usc.edu/~slund) and forwarded as a
contribution to other database initiatives.