* 0309879
* In Situ Density Measurements of Molten Minerals at High Pressures and Temperatures
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Jiuhua Chen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 279,367.00

The properties of molten minerals become more and more important
for&lt;br/&gt;understanding the structure and dynamics of the Earth's interior,
as&lt;br/&gt;crystalline minerals have been much more extensively studied. This
proposal&lt;br/&gt;will take the advantage of new experimental capabilities at
synchrotron&lt;br/&gt;beamlines to study molten minerals, and to explore new
possibilities at the&lt;br/&gt;community owned facilities. The proposed research
activities include: 1)&lt;br/&gt;Measuring the density of molten Fe-FeS system
at high pressures and&lt;br/&gt;temperatures 2) Observing Fe and H alloying at
high pressure and measuring&lt;br/&gt;density of Fe-H melt. 3) Exploring the
reality of density measurements of&lt;br/&gt;molten silicates. The project will
use a multi-anvil press for pressure and&lt;br/&gt;temperature generation, and
monochromatic x-ray radiography and x-ray&lt;br/&gt;absorption simulation for
melt density measurements at high pressures.&lt;br/&gt;Results of density
measurements on the iron alloy system will &lt;br/&gt;provide
essential&lt;br/&gt;information for understanding Earth's core composition and
robust data for&lt;br/&gt;future DAC melt density measurement development to
advance the pressure&lt;br/&gt;range up to core conditions. The materials to be
studied in this project are&lt;br/&gt;not limited to core minerals. This
research will also include &lt;br/&gt;exploring the possibility of measuring
iron-rich silicate melts. &lt;br/&gt;Collaborations and technical developments
will be&lt;br/&gt;brought into the project as the research proceeds. All of the
new&lt;br/&gt;experimental capabilities developed at synchrotron x-ray beamlines
as a&lt;br/&gt;result of this project will be open to the community for
scientific&lt;br/&gt;research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;