* 0309007
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Building a Robust Classification for March Flies (Diptera: Bibionomorpha: Bibionidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Darlene Judd, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 12/31/2005
* USD 10,076.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Darlene Judd and Mr. Scott Fitzgerald to study
relationships within the fly family Bibionidae (Diptera: Bibionomorpha),
commonly known as March flies or Love Bugs. The goals of this study include
defining the familial-level boundaries, identifying families that are closely
related, and comparing features across this broad assemblage to erect a
classification that reflects natural groups. Exemplar species from all
biogeographic regions will be included and morphological characters from larval,
pupal, and adult life stages will be analyzed using cladistic methods. The
immature stages (larva and pupa) occur in soil and leaf litter and are poorly
represented in natural history collections. Fitzgerald's field work will
concentrate on obtaining the immature stages of the 60+ species recorded from
the western United States and Mexico and he will travel to the B.P. Bishop
Museum, Hawaii to study the world's most comprehensive bibionid research
collection. Diptera, or "true flies," is arguably the most poorly known of the
larger orders of insects and is of considerable medical, agricultural, and
biological importance. Flies account for approximately 80% of medically
important insects and are the vectors of pathogens that cause diseases such as
malaria, yellow fever, and west nile. For some time, investigators have agreed
that the traditional classification proposed for flies does not reflect natural
groups and thus does not provide a predictive framework for storing information
and understanding their evolution, morphology, and behavior (e.g. blood
feeding). The phylogenetic position of bibionids is unclear. However, they are
key to understanding the transition between primitive groups (e.g. mosquitoes)
and the advanced groups (e.g. house flies and Drosophila). In addition, some of
the larvae are important vegetable and cereal crop pests and a better
understanding of their characteristics, life history habits and relationships
may provide useful insights into their control.