* 0309095
* Charge and Currrent Imaging of GaN Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Alison Baski, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2008
* USD 385,395.00

The goal of this project is to gain fundamental understanding of charged defects
and leakage paths that ultimately degrade performance in GaN-based devices. Such
defects may arise from bulk imperfections such as threading dislocations and
inversion domains, or from surface states due to poor passivation. The approach
includes HVPE (hydride vapor phase epitaxy) GaN film growth on sapphire, SiC,
and GaN templates followed by surface science characterization with an emphasis
on imaging defect features on a micron to nanometer-scale using techniques such
as Surface-Contact-Potential Electric Force Microscopy (SCP-EFM) and Conductive
Atomic Force Microscopy (C-AFM). The project will extend the imaging of active
Modulation Doped Field Effect Transistors (MODFET's or HEMT's) based on
AlGaN/GaN heterostructures. These imaging techniques will help elucidate how
surface defects, strain, and polarization are related to device anomalies such
as current lag that degrade high frequency behavior. The influence of surface
passivation techniques and interface barriers will also be explored. These
findings, which will enhance understanding of parasitic pathways to current
conduction and charge transfer, will also be applicable to other GaN devices and
will extend fundamental understanding of this important materials system.
&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The broad impact of this project includes advancement
of a high technological impact research area along with training of graduate and
undergraduate students in multidisciplinary research. The PI's are from
departments of Electrical Engineering and Physics, and will collaboratively use
their expertise in surface science imaging to address fundamental problems of
electrically active defects in MODFET structures, as well as to fabricate and
test prototype device structures. The project provides support for graduate and
undergraduate students who will have unique research and educational
opportunities working with sophisticated materials synthesis, processing, and
characterization equipment along with device fabrication, testing, and analysis,
while participating in interdisciplinary research in an environment of joint
mentoring across materials science, physics, and electrical engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;