* 0309233
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Individual Behavior and Female Associations in Fission-Fusion Equid Societies
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Daniel Rubenstein, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 09/30/2005
* USD 9,506.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the role of ecological and social
factors in shaping social&lt;br/&gt;organizing relationships in fission-fusion
ungulate societies. Current models of fission-&lt;br/&gt;fusion societies focus
either on examining preferential associations between individuals&lt;br/&gt;or
on examining factors that determine group size and its correlation with group
size&lt;br/&gt;variations. Individual relationships are still not completely
understood. A novel model for&lt;br/&gt;analyzing individual relationships
incorporating key ecological and social drivers (i.e.&lt;br/&gt;forage, water,
predators and bachelor males) together with female internal state is used
to&lt;br/&gt;predict rules for associations between individuals. The
consequences of these individual&lt;br/&gt;decisions for population level
association and dispersion patterns are also explored. The&lt;br/&gt;predictions
derived from this framework will be tested using ecological and
behavioral&lt;br/&gt;data from two endangered Equids: Grevys zebra (Equus
grevyi) and Asiatic Wild Asses&lt;br/&gt;(Equus hemionus) at four sites. Both
species have similar morphology, physiology and&lt;br/&gt;social systems. The
four sites provide natural variation in ecological and social
factors&lt;br/&gt;and serve as an ideal system for exploring the predictions of
our model. The broader&lt;br/&gt;impacts of the study include educational
activities about the value of ecological and&lt;br/&gt;behavioral data for lay
public, students and forest managers, and improvement of&lt;br/&gt;conservation
strategies for endangered Equids.