* 0309853
* How Long Does It Take to Make and Preserve a HP/UHP Terrane?  Petrologic and Geochronologic Studies of the Zermatt-Saas and Monte Rosa Units of the Western Alps
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Clark Johnson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2007
* USD 348,628.00

Abstract

Mountain building, particularly that associated with continent-continent
collisions is fundamentally driven by processes that occur in the deep crust and
upper mantle, far from direct observation. Recognition of this has led to a
great interest in terranes that have been subjected to high- and ultra-high-
pressure metamorphism because of the geodynamic problems associated with
subduction of crust to deep levels, followed by the rapid exhumation that is
required to preserve HP/UHP mineral assemblages. In this proposal, the PI's
outline a new approach aimed at determining the prograde histories of HP/UHP
terranes, namely combined Lu-Hf and Sm-Nd geochronology on garnet-bearing,
eclogite-facies rocks, which, because of highly preferential elemental
partitioning, will generally produce Lu-Hf ages that are relatively biased
toward earlier garnet growth as compared to Sm-Nd ages. They intend to combine
detailed geochronological data with petrologic constraints on garnet growth that
may be provided using the pseudo section approach, 3D tomographic imaging of
garnet size and distribution, and classic petrologic constraints on P-T
conditions. Based on preliminary work, it seems clear that different bulk
compositions of eclogite-facies rocks will have had different prograde garnet
growth histories, which should provide distinctly different Lu-Hf and Sm-Nd
ages. For example, in rocks that may have experienced 10-20 m.y. of prograde
garnet growth, Lu-Hf and Sm-Nd ages should be highly disparate; in contrast,
some bulk compositions predict that garnet growth occurs largely during peak
HP/UHP conditions, and in that case, Lu-Hf and Sm-Nd ages would be expected to
be the same. The focus of the proposed research will be the Zermatt-Saas
ophiolite complex and continental Monte Rosa nappe of the Western Alps, which
are superbly exposed in Switzerland and Italy. One of the key questions is the
interrelation of these two HP/UHP units, and their roles in deep subduction and
exhumation. Previous geologic, petrologic, and geochronological studies of these
and other HP/UHP units of the Western Alps provide a broad interpretive context
for the new proposed studies. In addition to the Lu-Hf and Sm-Nd studies noted
above, Rb-Sr and U-Pb geochronology will be applied on specific units that
contain key compositional or structural features that we believe will allow us
to begin developing mechanistic models for burial and exhumation of continental
and oceanic units of the Western Alps.

In terms of the broader impacts of the proposed research, the project will
expose two Ph.D. students to a broad range of research approaches, from field-
based to lab-based work, in collaboration with several European scientists. The
PI's view this as an excellent opportunity to expose U.S. students to the
international scientific community through an interdisciplinary (structure-
petrology-geochemistry) approach. They also hope to have opportunities for
summer undergraduate research experiences for students from underrepresented
groups through planned participation in the McNair Achievement Program.

