* 0309829
* Geochemical and Thermodynamic Constraints on the Chemical Interaction of Biomolecules and Minerals in Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Harold Helgeson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2007
* USD 299,408.00

Helgeson&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0309829&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is
concerned with the relative stabilities and chemical interaction in hydrothermal
systems of minerals and aqueous enzymes, nucleotides, nucleic acids and other
biomacromolecules derived from hyperthermophilic microbes. The overall
hypothesis is that classical high-temperature solution chemistry and reversible
and irreversible chemical thermodynamics can be used to characterize and
quantify reactions among minerals and biomacromolecules at the organic-inorganic
interface in hydrothermal systems. The methods to be employed consist of
thermodynamic calculations and computer experiments which will be carried out to
characterize quantitatively the biochemical-mineralogic interface in
hydrothermal systems. The intellectual merit of the proposed activity is
inherent in the goal to improve our understanding of the chemical and
thermodynamic factors responsible for stabilizing in the presence of minerals
biomacromolecules and therefore life in hydrothermal systems. Because it is
highly interdisciplinary in nature, the project will advance knowledge and
understanding not only within the field of geochemistry, but also across the
fields of biophysical chemistry, biotechnology, and related disciplines. The
creative and original concepts to be explored include application of
thermodynamics to quantify for the first time the relative stabilities of
biomacromolecules at high temperatures and the consequences of reversible and
irreversible biomolecular reactions with minerals that sustain microbial life in
hydrothermal systems. The broader impacts of the proposed research include
integrating research and education by advancing discovery and understanding of
the chemical and thermodynamic support system for life at high temperatures
while promoting teaching, training, and learning by students about the
environment in which life may have originated on the Earth. In addition, the
project will integrate and enhance the infrastructure for research and education
in the scientific and technological communities by posting on the Web all of the
thermodynamic properties and equations of state parameters generated for the
species and reactions considered in the project. The potential benefits of the
proposed research to society include application in biotechnology of the results
of the research to develop more efficient protocols for enzymatic drug
design.&lt;br/&gt;