* 0309773
* Collaborative Research: Structure, Conditions and Magmatic Processes Within an Active Volcano: Analysis of Samples From Boreholes Drilled into the Conduit of Unzen Volcano, Interna
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Thomas Vogel, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2007
* USD 137,198.00

This project will allow the PIs to participate in internationally collaborative
investigations of boreholes and samples now being drilled by the Unzen
Scientific Drilling Project (USDP), Japan. The USDP is part of the International
Continental Drilling Program (ICDP), which seeks to use drilling as a tool to
advance understanding of fundamental processes of Earth's crust. The goal of the
USDP is to understand the eruptive behavior of Unzen as representative of an
important class of andesitic arc volcanoes. In the now-completed first phase of
the drilling project, flank holes of 750 m and 1500 m were drilled to the base
of the volcanic edifice in order to obtain a complete physical and chemical
record of the volcano's activity. This proposal aims to continue a one-year
pilot project that have shown that the present Unzen magma system, which is
characterized by frequent injection of fractionated mafic magma into a crust-
resident slush of remarkably constant composition, has persisted for 500,000
years. The intellectual targets for the next phase of the drilling project will
be: 1.) to understand how viscous magma behaves mechanically, chemically, and
thermally as it approaches Earth.s surface; 2.) to determine why Unzen is such
an exemplary case of non-explosive eruption of initially wet magma, and 3.) to
improve techniques to forecast eruptions by providing direct subsurface
observations that inform interpretation of precursory seismicity, deformation,
and degassing. The investigators propose to use optical, SEM, electron
microprobe, XRF, and LA-ICPMS techniques to examine the samples. In particular,
proximal units will be correlated to units encountered in flank drilling, zones
of hydrothermal alteration will be mapped, and intrusive features identified.
Most importantly, the conduit that fed the 1991-1994 eruption will be
delineated. In order to constrain degassing behavior, special attention will be
paid to occurrence of intrusive glass on the margin of the conduit and residual
melt in the central portion. Comparison of glassy dome lava with partially
crystalline conduit material (if residual melt remains) and with crystalline
conduit material will serve to define the complete crystallization path of Unzen
magma. Conduit width, textural variations within the conduit related to
degassing and cooling, plausible rheologies of the magma and wallrock, and
effects of conduit flow and degassing on the wallrock will be determined. In
terms of broader impacts, the work should improve the understanding and
predictability of this dangerous type of volcanic activity, which has afflicted
not only Shimabara, Japan but also towns near Pinatubo Volcano in the
Philippines and Soufriere Hills Volcano in Montserrat in recent years. The
project has attracted much public interest in Japan, and will likely do so
worldwide once drilling to the conduit has begun. Accordingly, the USDP team
plans to make results available to the public in near-real time in English,
Japanese, and German over the Worldwide Web. As representatives of the US
scientific community on the team, the investigators will make appropriate use of
this opportunity to acquaint their American colleagues with research
opportunities as they arise. This will serve to increase the breadth of
expertise engaged in the Unzen enterprise, while at the same time acquainting
Americans with the very substantial resources, experience, and ideas of the
volcanological community of Japan.