* 0309425
* Beyond Single Interferograms: Inference of Subsurface Processes with Subtle Deformation Signatures from Time Series InSAR
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Paul Segall, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2007
* USD 302,947.00

&lt;br/&gt;Beyond single interferograms: inference of subsurface
&lt;br/&gt;processes with subtle deformation signatures from time
&lt;br/&gt;series InSAR&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Howard A. Zebker, Paul
Segall&lt;br/&gt;Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;InSAR, an exceptional
technique for visualizing and&lt;br/&gt;quantifying crustal deformation
patterns, has largely been&lt;br/&gt;limited in application to arid
environments. Subtle&lt;br/&gt;phenomena such as interseismic strain
accumulation or&lt;br/&gt;pre-eruptive deformation of volcanic edifices can
produce&lt;br/&gt;surface signatures that are undetected in single
radar&lt;br/&gt;interferograms because of i) temporal decorrelation
noise&lt;br/&gt;due to vegetation and ii) propagation through
a&lt;br/&gt;spatially-variable troposphere. We propose to view
these&lt;br/&gt;small signals using data acquired by Envisat, a
new&lt;br/&gt;satellite launched by ESA in March 2002. This new
radar&lt;br/&gt;incorporates electronic beam steering, which
permits&lt;br/&gt;multiple observations of a given study site during
a&lt;br/&gt;single orbit cycle. Furthermore, rapid beam
switching&lt;br/&gt;enables a ScanSAR capability for imaging wide
swaths.&lt;br/&gt;Although the satellite is to be orbited in a 35
day&lt;br/&gt;repeat orbit similar to that of ERS-1 and ?2, ScanSAR
can&lt;br/&gt;yield much denser temporal data, with each point on
the&lt;br/&gt;ground imaged four times during each cycle. We
propose&lt;br/&gt;here to develop algorithms and methods to produce
routine&lt;br/&gt;ScanSAR interferograms resulting in dense deformation
time&lt;br/&gt;series measurements. We also will develop filters
based&lt;br/&gt;on spatio-temporal models of expected signals and
error&lt;br/&gt;sources to coax deformations from within the
noisy&lt;br/&gt;background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;