* 0309377
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Molecular and Morphological Perspectives on the Dynamics of a Post-glacial Contact Zone
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Joseph Cook, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2006
* USD 11,018.00

Hybrid zones provide excellent opportunities to study evolutionary processes. By
elucidating mechanisms that shape hybrid zones, we can begin to understand the
role of evolutionary factors such as selection, barriers to genetic exchange,
and new adaptations. The dynamic glacial events of the late Pleistocene (130,000
- 10,000 years ago) are believed to have modified geographic distributions of
many high latitude organisms and created contact zones. While many of the
documented post-glacial contact zones are Eurasian, phylogeographic studies in
North America are demonstrating post-glacial contact following the retreat of
the ice sheets. &lt;br/&gt;Preliminary research on a post-glacial contact zone
between the northern red-backed vole (Clethrionomys rutilus) and southern red-
backed vole (Clethrionomys gapperi) in southeast Alaska documented
unidirectional introgression of the mitochondrial genome of C. rutilus into
populations of C. gapperi. The proposed work will use additional molecular
markers and morphometric tools to explore fundamental evolutionary processes in
this hybrid zone. The red-backed vole contact zone is an excellent model system
because the phylogeographic histories of these taxa are well known. These
species contact each other over 2000 km, providing an opportunity to study
interspecific dynamics at multiple localities to test for the consistency of
processes that may be shaping this contact zone. Using individuals from
populations across three transects of the contact zone, the study will combine
morphological data, sequences of the cytochrome b, Sry, MHY2 genes, and 12
microsatellite loci to address the following questions: What is the direction of
introgression? Is introgression contemporary? What are the fates of the hybrids?
Are the consequences of interspecific interactions the same across multiple
transects of the contact zone? &lt;br/&gt;