* 0309709
* Coarsening Dynamics of Faceted Crystal Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Stephen Watson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 144,000.00

The study of evolving faceted crystal surfaces has received significant impetus
from the discovery of nano-scale faceted pyramidal islands (quantum dots) on the
surface of epitaxially grown thin crystal films. The physics of such evolutions
involves an intricate interplay between the surface energy, the bulk elastic
energy, and the deposition. In particular, it is well known from experiment and
numerical studies of model equations that the presence of bulk driving forces
has dramatic consequences on the coarsening dynamics of faceted crystal growth;
e.g., accelerated coarsening, and significant change in surface morphology. We
propose a theoretical study of a class of bulk-driven faceting crystal growth
models aimed at elucidating this transition. Our equations arise from continuum
models based on strongly anisotropic surface energies which yield faceted
structures. The dominant mass transport mechanisms considered include either
attachment kinetics (evaporation/condensation) or surface diffusion. The
resulting equations have the form of a Hamilton-Jacobi equation supplemented by
a Cahn-Hilliard-like operator. Of particular note is a new model equation, which
incorporates bulk elastic energy into the surface diffusion-controlled evolution
of a faceted, epitaxially strained thin film. The PI studies the coarsening
dynamics of these model equations for both one- and two-dimensional surface
morphologies. The coarsening exponents asociated with the growth of the
characteristic length(s) of the faceted surface are sought. Also, the specific
surface morphologies which emerge are analyzed. The approach is based on a novel
sharp interface theory which has recently been developed by the PI for the
Hamilton-Jacobi-Aviles-Giga equation. It is based on a matched asymptotic
analysis that takes advantage of the interfacial structure which emerges during
faceted evolution; extended facets meet at narrow rounded edges. The resulting
theory yields an intrinsic (sharp-interface) characterization of the evolution
of the associated edge network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ordered arrays of quantum
dots are envisioned as the basis for the next generation of supercomputer chips,
each dot serving as a "bit." An understanding of the dynamic evolution of such
quantum dot arrays is critical for such an ambition to be realized. However, the
theory of such dynamics is in its infancy; e.g., during molecular beam epitaxy
or liquid-phase growth. The scope of research envisioned in the proposal
contributes to our understanding and mastery of this technologically important
problem. The PI is also undertaking the research training of a graduate and an
undergraduate student as part of this proposal, thereby enhancing the
mathematical research and education infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;