* 0309298
* Finite-Frequency Tomography of the Earth's Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2010
* Guust Nolet, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2010
* USD 650,000.00

The first tomographic images of P wave variations in the Earth's lower mantle
obtained with finite-frequency theory (as opposed to classical ray theory) show
a significant enhancement of important features at depth, especially those of
smaller scale that are susceptible to effects of wavefront healing, that are
neglected in the classical ray theoretical inversion methods. In particular, the
compressional velocity anomalies show that a limited number of plumes (Hawaii,
Tahiti, Easter Island, Cape Verde) clearly originate deep in the lower mantle,
some clearly do not (Iceland, Afar), while the jury is still out on others. The
investigators will continue efforts to improve tomographic images using these
new and innovative methods. This will include adding short period P waves to the
present long period data set, extending efforts to S waves, and continuing a
recently begun program to measure systematically the arrival times and
amplitudes of P and S waves for a range of frequencies. The investigators will
also extend finite-frequency theory to complicated 3D models so it can be used
for shallower investigations such as USArray. They plan to extend Radiative
Transfer theory such that it can predict scattering energy from tomographic
models, and predict observables that can be used to constrain such models. This
will be initiated with the inversion of amplitudes. Finally, they propose to
investigate finite frequency effects in waveform inversions for the Australian
upper mantle using a spectral element approach, in an effort to resolve
discrepancies between various models of heterogeneity and
anisotropy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results seem already to have
resolved the major controversy about the existence of deep mantle plumes. The
investigators expect to throw new light on the puzzling negative correlation
between compressibility and shear modulus variations in the lower mantle, on the
existence of a lower mantle layering, and on the origin of mantle plumes. In
addition, several students and postdocs will be educated to use the new
tomographic methods.