* 0309177
* Research Starter Grant. The Consequences of Variation in Predator-Prey Interactions: Models and Tests Using a Seed-Beetle and Parasitoid
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Brian Inouye, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 04/30/2005
* USD 30,000.00

Research Starter: The Consequences of Variation in Predator-Prey Interactions:
Models and Tests Using a Seed-Beetle and Parasitoid.&lt;br/&gt;Inouye, Brian D.
&lt;br/&gt;Florida State University &lt;br/&gt;DEB:
0309177&lt;br/&gt;Parasitoids are common and diverse members of most ecosystems
that play an important role in limiting insect herbivore populations. Due in
part to their ecological and economic significance, host-parasitoid interactions
have been the subject of many previous empirical and theoretical studies. To
compliment on-going fieldwork and modeling efforts, this project will use
populations of the seed-feeding bruchid weevil Callosobruchus maculatus and the
parasitoid Anisopteromalis calandrae as a model system for studying factors
affecting population regulation and stability. One of the major mechanisms
thought to stabilize host and parasitoid population dynamics is heterogeneity in
parasitoid attack rates. Such heterogeneity may occur when a parasitoid must
search for its host in a patchy environment, for example when the host is a
polyphagous herbivorous insect that feeds differentially on a number of types of
resource plants. One goal of this research project will be to parameterize a
model of host-parasitoid interactions including these alternative resources of
the host, in order to test hypotheses about host and parasitoid population
stability. First the functional responses of parasitoids attacking C. maculatus
in several species or varieties of legume seeds will be characterized, in order
to identify alternative resources that provoke different patterns of parasitoid
attack. In a second stage of experiments, the effects of the resource driven
heterogeneity on the stability of the host and parasitoid population dynamics
will be tested. To characterize long-term population dynamics generation-long
response surface experiments will be used to parameterize joint host-parasitoid
recruitment curves. These experiments will allow a test of the importance of
parasitoid density for functional responses, as part of the process of
parameterizing the population models. Developing these species as a model system
will further the long-term goals of blending theory and experiments to
understand the roles of spatial heterogeneity and nonlinearities in population
dynamics and community structure, and developing novel applications of
statistical methods for testing new ecological theory.&lt;br/&gt;