* 0309360
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Genetic and Ecological Bases of  Hostplant Specialization.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Fred Gould, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2005
* USD 0.00

The genetic basis of complex traits that help organisms adapt to their
environment is not well understood for any organism. The basis of such traits is
particularly fascinating when closely related species differ in adaptation to
their environment. Heliothis subflexa and Heliothis virescens are one such
species pair: recently evolved from a shared ancestor, they are 99% genetically
similar. In spite of this genetic similarity, they differ radically in the
number and diversity of hostplants fed upon. Heliothis subflexa is monophagous,
feeding only on Physalis plants, while Heliothis virescens is a dietary
generalist, feeding on 14 plant families. The goal of this proposal is to
determine whether use of Physalis plants by the generalist Heliothis virescens
is controlled by the same chromosomes as in Heliothis subflexa, and whether
selection for use of Physalis contributes to macroevolutionary divergence.
Ecologically important traits can affect both basic biological phenomena (e.g.,
speciation) and higher level interactions between species (e.g., the impact of
insect pests on agricultural production). An improved understanding of their
genetic bases could have profound impact on our understanding of the
relationship between adaptation and speciation. In addition, clarification of
the genetic mechanisms underlying insect hostplant range could lead to novel
ways of controlling agriculturally important pest species.