* 0310013
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Tran Ly, Ly                      Tran           M
* Fellowship Award
* Linda G. Lopez
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Minority Post-Doctoral Research and Training Grant in the Social and
Behavioral Sciences examines the roles of cultural values and disability-related
characteristics on parental expectations, attributions, and behaviors, and will
involve two groups of parent-child dyads, Asian and non-Asian. The first group
of children with Down syndrome who are not Asian would tease apart the effects
of characteristics associated with the disorder on parental expectations,
attributions, and behaviors. The second group of Asian children with Down
syndrome would illustrate the roles that child characteristics and cultural-
specific characteristics play in parental attributions. Parents will be asked to
interact with their child in completing a difficult cognitive task. Parental
expectations, attributions, reactions, and behaviors will be elicited through
questionnaire and videotaped interactions. The hypothesis to be tested is that
parents of children with Down syndrome from non-Asian backgrounds will make
attributions of low ability and provide more help and encouragement during the
interactions. In contrast, Asian parents with stronger effort-related beliefs
will have a greater difficulty accepting their child.s lower task persistence.
These parents will be more likely to exhibit anger and offer less help during
the interactions. Human subjects approval will be obtained from the Office for
Protection of Research Subjects before any participants will be recruited. In
order to conduct this and related studies, the researcher needs a more in-depth
understanding of attributional and ethnic minority research. The researcher's
primary training objective is to learn a about the conceptual, methodological,
and ethical concerns related to these two areas of research with children with
disabilities. Specifically, measuring attributions in the form of reactions and
behaviors as they occur during parent-child interactions requires a descriptive
and comprehensive coding system and an understanding of the linkages among
attributions, reactions, and behaviors. The secondary training objective is to
be aware of and sensitive to the issues and needs involved in conducting ethnic
minority research. The Fellow will work with Professor Sandra Graham, a
developmental social psychologist at UCLA who primarily studies motivation and
social behavior from an attributional perspective. The Fellow will also consult
with two attribution researchers, Bernard Weiner and Jaana Juvonen, in the
Psychology department and an ethnic minority researcher, Mitchell Chang, in the
Education department.