* 0310370
* Using Digital Imaging for Collaborative Learning in Morphology-based Lab Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Robert Stone, Suffolk Community College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 57,934.00

The Biology Department of Suffolk Community College (SCC) is enhancing student
comprehension by adapting digital imaging technology and incorporating
collaborative learning in several morphology-based laboratory courses:
Embryology, Anatomy &amp; Physiology (A&amp;P), Oceanography, Microbiology,
Modern Biology, and Principles of Biology. Educational research has indicated
that individual microscopy study (although traditional in biology) isolates
students and discourages collaborative learning. Other studies indicate that
many science students, especially women and other underrepresented groups, learn
more effectively when placed in teams that focus on critical thinking and
cognitive learning strategies skills that are also essential in the workplace.
Integrated student group workstations, complete with digital imaging technology
and a computer with Internet access, are being installed to enhance group
interactions and enable students to learn from their peers, an effective
pedagogy for developing higher-order learning. The adaptation of digital imaging
and computer technology is enabling students to quantify and explain biological
phenomena without the limitations imposed by traditional laboratory and field
equipment. It is an adaptation of a previous development efforts at Itawamba
community college. Students capture digital images from lab and field
experiments and commercially prepared slides, use them in active learning
exercises, then post images to course websites to provide all students with
distance education opportunities. The approach encourages positive
interdependence among students, and eliminates barriers to collaborative
learning. The project is being evaluated using formative and summative
procedures, with a cumulative system of qualitative and quantitative standards
designed to measure the effect of the project on students' academic success,
faculty development, and the institution. SCC's Office of Institutional Research
and Teaching and Learning Center is providing baseline data to determine
progress in both student achievement and faculty development. The results will
disseminated at regional and national conferences. The SCC Administration is
providing additional support for this project by funding the renovation of
Ammerman campus' biology laboratories to facilitate collaborative learning, and
by encouraging changes in the biology curriculum, particularly to meet the needs
of individuals with disabilities. This project's Intellectual Merit &amp;
Broader Impacts are to:&lt;br/&gt; Create learner-center environments for SCC
biology courses to broaden participation of&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups
and provide distance education opportunities for students
in&lt;br/&gt;morphology-based lab courses.&lt;br/&gt; Design and present
professional development workshops in collaboration with SCC's Teaching and
Learning Center to educate science faculty and professional assistants in
collaborative learning methodologies and digital imaging technology.&lt;br/&gt;
Complete subsequent curricular changes consistent with existing departmental
themes to&lt;br/&gt;implement student-designed, investigative, and exploratory
activities in morphology-based&lt;br/&gt;laboratory courses; and to integrate
state-of-the-art digital imaging technology within and&lt;br/&gt;among eight lab
courses serving more than 1,000 students annually.&lt;br/&gt; Serve as a model
for incorporating collaborative learning in morphology-based lab courses
at&lt;br/&gt;SCC's eastern and western campuses and other colleges.