* 0310511
* Collaborative Research:     Application Specific Architecture Customization and Co-Exploration
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Todd Austin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 08/31/2008
* USD 150,000.00

Collaborative Research: Application Specific
Architecture&lt;br/&gt;Customization and Co-
Exploration&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The embedded market
demands processors that can achieve high levels of performance in the smallest
possible area, while simultaneously minimizing power and energy dissipation.
Customized processors offer a way of meeting these demands through targeted
architectures specifically constructed to meet the performance, area, and power
demands of a given application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our approach is different
from the traditional ASICs design, since our focus is to bring the customization
up to a higher level where we generate programmable reconfigurable processors
that allow both the algorithm and architecture to be co-configured (configured
together). Architecture customization is not able to realize significant gains
until both the algorithms, data structures, ISA and certain architecture
components can all be configured. This grant focuses on co-exploring the
algorithm and architecture design space for speech, cryptographic and network
processors to discover common customizable components. The goal is to identify
customizable components from these application domains, so that they can be
incorporated into an overall infrastructure for co-
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To broader impact, this proposal will provide
infrastructure to aid in the automated co-exploration of architectures and
algorithms for industry and academic researchers. We will make this
infrastructure available to aid researchers in exploring these and other
application areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;