* 0310756
* Curriculum Enhancement: The Integration of FT-NMR Spectroscopy Across Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Daryle Fish, Saint Vincent College
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 07/31/2006
* USD 71,865.00

Chemistry (12) The goal of this project is to integrate FT-NMR spectroscopy into
the chemistry curriculum at Saint Vincent College beginning with General
Chemistry and culminating in a capstone research experience for the senior
chemistry undergraduate students. The project's objectives are to enhance
student learning and problem solving skills and to prepare students to benefit
from the senior research experiences. To achieve our goal, we are adapting a
number of mini-projects and/or project-based experiments from the Journal of
Chemical Ed. and from other resources across our entire chemistry curriculum.
Students in General Chemistry use H-NMR in conjunction with CAChe molecular
modeling to study mono-, di-, and tri-substituted halomethanes, which is an
adaptation of the experiment published in the Journal of Chemical Education. The
complexity of the NMR experiments increases as students proceed from the general
chemistry to the senior level in which advanced 1-D and 2-D techniques are
introduced. We have chosen the Anasazi EFT-NMR upgrade for our project because
students can obtain both one- and two-dimensional spectra rather easily. The
project impacts approximately 100 STEM majors annually, including chemistry
majors and teacher preparation students. It is our hope that the project-based
laboratories will enhance student learning, foster critical thinking, and
prepare students for their senior research experience. We intend to disseminate
the results from our project to the chemical education community through ACS
conferences and meetings and submitting articles to the Journal Of Chemical
Education.