* 0310337
* Mapping the Origin of Terrestrial Faunal Assemblages Using Strontium Isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Elizabeth Hadly, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2006
* USD 250,006.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fossil record is being called upon to enhance
our understanding of population responses to climate change and to serve as a
guide for predicting ecosystem responses in the future. However, interpretations
of the fossil record have heretofore been predicated on two untested hypotheses.
First, that the spatial scale of the response seen in the fossil record,
especially in terrestrial settings, is well understood, and second, that
community change through time represents shifts in local populations rather than
changes in sampling area. PIs Hadly and Paytan propose to test these hypotheses
by analyzing the strontium isotopic composition a rich sequence of fossil bones
from Yellowstone National Park. The Yellowstone sequences span the past 3000
years and are augmented by a comprehensive modern collection from the vicinity
of the fossil sites. Because strontium isotopes are not fractionated by
biological processes, the strontium content of the bedrock and overlying
regolith, the vegetation that takes up strontium from the soil and the animals
consuming the vegetation will be strongly related. The sampling localities are
distributed across a heterogeneous geologic landscape, with each site underlain
by bedrock with distinctly different 87Sr/86Sr isotopic signatures. If the
fossil sites represent local collections, Hadly and Paytan predict that the two
assemblages will record significantly different strontium isotope ratios.
Conversely, they expect values much different from the local bedrock (and
possibly more similar to each other) if the collecting radii of the sites are
large and incorporate regional average strontium values. Preliminary data
indicate that these fossil assemblages each have distinct Sr isotopic
compositions representing the local bedrock. The PIs will determine whether it
is possible both to rule out shifts in collection area through time and to
constrain statistically the scale at which ecological, evolutionary, and
paleoclimatic interpretations of a given site should be applied. Further, the
PIs propose to test the generalities of their approach by investigation of
samples from a middle Pleistocene faunal assemblage from the central Rocky
Mountains, Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What is the intellectual merit of the
proposed research?&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose to determine the range of
animal use of the environment in a novel way. They plan to assess habitat use
through time in a series of fossiliferous localities from three Rocky Mountain
localities. In the absence of such analyses, the spatial component of sampling
bias cannot be accounted for in most studies of either modern or paleontologic
assemblages. This analysis will determine to what extent strontium isotopes can
be used as a tool for assessing the ecological fidelity of the fossil
record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What are the broader impacts resulting from the
proposed research?&lt;br/&gt;The methods and results from this study will be of
interest to paleontologists interested in reconstruction of past communities and
to ecologists intent on understanding the spatial scale of ecosystem
functioning. This research also has relevance to other specialists such as
evolutionists, conservationists, geologists, and behaviorists. Through the
synthesis of several fields and integration of diverse field, analytical and
statistical methods, Hadly and Paytan emphasize the interdisciplinary training
of graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;