* 0310006
* NMR Studies of Rapid Granular Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Donald Candela, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 12/31/2007
* USD 477,899.00

Abstract CTS-0310006 D. Candela, U of Massachusetts Amherst

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) will be used to study the properties of
granular media such as sand, beads or seeds, forced into a state of motion by
gravity or gas flow. The project will focus mainly on rapid granular flows, in
which the grains fly ballistically between collisions with each other. Three
specialized NMR techniques will be employed, individually and in concert: (a)
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), which produces images or profiles showing the
density of material, (b) Pulsed Field Gradient (PFG), which gives detailed
information on movements of material over a wide range of time and space scales
(down to sub-micron), and (c) Hyperpolarized Gas (HPG), which makes it possible
to study the interstitial gas in a granular system.

Vertical Channel Flows. One set of experiments will probe the flow of granular
material through a vertical pipe. This is one of the common ways of transporting
granular material in industrial applications, and is an important example of a
granular shear flow, in which the different parts of the flow must move past
each other in a nonuniform manner. Using botanical seeds as grains and MRI/PFG
techniques, the density, velocity, and anisotropic diffusion tensor will be
mapped out for comparison with hydrodynamic theories. Grain motion statistics
will be examined for evidence of glassiness, caged motion, and large
fluctuations-as have been found in many other types of granular shear flow.

Fluidized Beds. A second set of experiments will study fluidized beds, in which
an upwards flow of gas maintains the granular medium in a fluid-like state.
Fluidized beds have widespread applications in chemical engineering and
industry, e.g. to crack petroleum into gasoline and in the development of newer,
cleaner-burning processes for combustion of fuels. NMR measurements of both
grain and gas motion in the interiors of fluidized beds will provide data to
compare with two-fluid hydrodynamic theories and large-scale simulations. PFG
NMR of the grains will be used to study the nature and stability of the
uniformly fluidized state of fine grains, and to map out the dispersion relation
for wave-like instabilities at higher gas flow rates. HPG NMR will be used to
study the structure and flow patterns in and around bubbles, which are crucial
to applications of fluidized beds.

Broader Impacts. (a) This project will provide long-range benefit to society by
helping to elucidate the fundamental physical processes of granular flow and
fluidization. This should ultimately affect engineering models used to design
many important industrial facilities. (b) The project furthers the cross-
disciplinary development of science and technology, making use of the expertise
in soft-condensed matter NMR at UMass Amherst and the expertise in
hyperpolarized gas NMR at Harvard-Smithsonian. (c) NMR expertise and equipment
exist at many labs around the world; hence an ancillary benefit of this project
is to help develop NMR as a "next generation" standard tool for studying rapid
granular flows. (d) Students will participate in all phases of this project,
gaining valuable training and exposure to the excitement and challenges of
cross-disciplinary research.