* 0310429
* GOALI: Effect of Fiber Orientation on Filter Media Performance
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* George Chase, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 04/30/2007
* USD 242,439.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0310429&lt;br/&gt;G. Chase, University of
Akron&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Filtration is an important operation in many
industrial processes. The filter medium controls the performance and separation
efficiency. Manufacturers are limited to only a few parameters to manipulate to
design a medium with a desired performance. The three-dimensional fiber
structure is seldom considered in design of non-woven media because difficulty
in characterization and control. We will develop a method using an electrical
field to control the three-dimensional structure of the filter media during
construction and use our expertise in filtration to evaluate the filter media
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work builds upon prior and current work
and has a high probability of success. In a prior NSF project a method was
developed to measure the average fiber angle and angle distribution relative to
the z-axis (the axis perpendicular to the plane of the filter sheet). The glass
fiber filter media tested in the prior work were limited by the formation method
to average angles in the range of 45 to 90 degrees. Liquid filtration
experiments show that the filter performance is significantly affected by the
fiber angle and that media with smaller angles have improved permeabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a current work in progress, filter media are
experimentally tested for effectiveness in coalescence and removal of submicron
oil drops from pressurized air. Experimental data from this work show that media
angles closer to 45 degrees in the 45 to 90 degree range perform better than
media with larger angles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The media to be constructed in
this proposed work will extend the fiber angle range to the 0 to 45 degree
range. These media will be tested in the liquid filtration and gas phase
coalescence experiments to correlate the performance to the fiber angles in the
0 to 45 degree range that has not been tested previously. Such correlations will
provide manufacturers the means to predict filter performance to optimize
parameters such as pressure drop and capture efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary experiments show that glass fibers, typical of
those used in non-woven media, are strongly oriented by electrical fields. In
this proposed work sheet formers will be constructed with electrodes to generate
electric fields that orient the fibers while the sheets are formed. A set of
media samples will be made with a variation of average fiber angles in the 0 to
45 degree range as measured relative to the z-axis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is a GOALI proposal. The broader impacts of this project include
training of student engineers in particle technology and establishing a strong
collaboration with the Parker Hannifin Corporation to enhance process
development and to promote technology transfer. Additional outlets for this
technology are provided through the Coalescence Research Consortium of six
filter companies, at the University of Akron, and a partnership in Combined
Research and Curriculum Development on multiphase transport phenomena between
the University of Akron, Michigan State University, and University of Tulsa. As
part of this project the co-PI engineer from Parker Hannifin will visit the
University of Akron twice per year as an industrial advisor on the project, to
give seminars to undergraduate classes, and to conduct question and answer
sessions with students. The students and faculty will visit Parker Hannifin each
year to conduct experiments at Parker's Oxford, Michigan facility. The results
will also be linked to the &lt;br/&gt;AICHE Particle Technology Forums website
for Educational Resources for Particle Technology (ERPT). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;