* 0310576
* Individualized Exercises for Assessment and Self-Assessment of Programming Knowledge
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Peter Brusilovsky, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 08/31/2006
* USD 98,923.00

Computer Science (31) This project involves systematically exploring the use of
individualized questions and exercises in the context of programming-related
courses. This approach is adapted from the Michigan State CAPA system that has
been used in teaching physics. That system demonstrated its potential to help a
larger percentage of the students to complete the course successfully as well as
to help female students to bridge a traditional gap with their male classmates.
A proof-of-concept system, QuizPACK, has already been developed. In the course
of this project, the prototype system is being expanded in several aspects, and
a series of studies will be run to find the most effective way of using this
technology in programming-related courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of
intellectual merit, the project will extend the understanding of the role and
place of individualized questions and exercises as an educational tool in
programming courses as well as provide guidelines to researchers and
practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under broader impact, this project may
provide an improvement in teaching programming-related courses (similar to the
one achieved by CAPA in physics courses). These courses serve as the basis in
computer science, information science, and information technology programs that
have a critical value for the economy and security of our country. The PI hopes
to influence the teaching of programming-related courses through dissemination
of the research results and availability of the QuizPACK system to the
community.&lt;br/&gt;