* 0310467
* Formulated and Specify: Using Visual Programming to Enable Web-based Biodiversity Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Jennifer Leopold, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gerald F. Guala
* 08/31/2003
* USD 19,626.00



Biological collections document the occurrence and distribution of life on
earth. A vast amount of taxonomic and ecological information is associated with
the estimated three billion specimens in museums worldwide. The informatics
challenges the biodiversity research community faces with collections data are a
consequence of numerous autonomous database systems and an absence of software
tools to track and analyze changes in those databases. Time series and regional
analysis of biodiversity, based on actual collections data within a distributed
computing environment on the Internet, represent the grand challenge for the
biodiversity research community. The distributed computing framework developed
herein will provide a powerful infrastructure for the integration of data
sources and for the data analysis objectives of biodiversity research.

This project will create tools that assist in research analysis and synthesis,
and which can, by design, respond to the high levels of data flux within the
discipline. To accomplish one requires (1) support of heterogeneous, network-
based, distributed computing environments, (2) the ability to track changes at
different servers without having to manually issue one time queries on a
repeated basis, and (3) empowerment of biodiversity researchers to build
automated retrieval and analysis functions through a network interface without
any specific knowledge of programming tasks.

From a Computer Science perspective, the problem is to provide a facility for
biodiversity scientists which makes possible meaningful analyses over a network
of heterogeneous, constantly-updated data sources. This is termed the
Biodiversity Community Analysis (BCA) problem. The BCA problem differs from the
general Universal Access problem in two ways. First, the user community is
restricted to biodiversity researchers. Second, the level of access required
goes beyond simply accessing data; in addition, users must be able to construct
meaningful biodiversity analyses using such data, and without becoming trained
programmers.

An Internet-based system specifically for facilitating the development of
biodiversity analyses using information obtained from databases on the Internet
will be developed. The main distinction between this system and existing
Internet facilities to retrieve information and assimilate it into computations
is that this approach will provide the necessary facilities to develop and
maintain dynamic links such that computations and reports automatically maintain
themselves. A further distinction is that the system proposed is specifically
designed for users of spreadsheet-level ability, rather than professional
programmers.

The investigators include leaders from the Biodiversity community, including
the project managers for the Specify collections management project and the
joint KU-SDSC KDI project in earth system sciences, and from the user interface
and public programming language community. The proposed system builds directly
on years of prior work. It is made feasible by systems already in place as a
result of this prior work and builds on our collateral development activities.

The ability to easily formulate temporal ad hoc analyses of biological
collections data distributed across national and international networks will
leverage 300 years of biological earth inventory by engaging species information
in a national analytical and computational infrastructure.



