* 0310360
* Linking Assessment to Science Achievement
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Min Li, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 06/30/2006
* USD 287,457.00

&lt;br/&gt;This two-year investigation on Linking Assessment to Science
Achievement (LASA) will be conducted by researchers at University of Washington.
The investigators will address cognitive validity of large-scale science test
items by developing a working definition of science achievement and applying it
to analyze test items. In particular, the LASA project will explore what
assessment methods are best suited to measure different aspects of science
achievement by attending to the supports (affordances) and constraints embedded
in assessment items, comparing students' performance on items, and investigating
examinees' cognitive activities when they respond to those items. Classroom
observations and the analysis of students' work will also be performed in order
to explore the application of the model to classroom-level
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will include three research
components: (1) a logical analysis will examine the assessment items
conceptually and then use a coding theme to identify what affordances and
constraints each item offers to examinees and accordingly classify the item by
the type(s) of knowledge it taps; (2) a cognitive analysis will analyze
concurrent and retrospective verbalizations of examinees (varying in proficiency
level) while they respond to the assessment items in order to determine whether
examinees' inferred cognitive activities and their strategies correspond to the
item classifications; and (3) a statistical analysis will examine and compare
statistical models of item scores to determine whether items classified as
measuring one type of knowledge will cluster together and whether the knowledge
factors will be associated with variations in instructional
practices.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed
framework for science achievement draws upon three branches of the literature
((1) research on science curriculum and standards addressing what students
should know and be able to do in science, (2) research on cognitive psychology
addressing how students learn science, (3) and research on educational
measurement addressing how students' science learning should be measured) to
fully address the connections between standards, learning and instruction, and
assessment. Specifically, the investigators conceptualize science achievement as
four interdependent types of knowledge: (1) declarative knowledge, (2)
procedural knowledge, (3) schematic knowledge, and (4) strategic knowledge. The
investigators assert that, in order to assess science achievement validly, tests
varying in their methods for eliciting students' performance regarding different
types of knowledge should be examined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The investigators believe that the
proposed project will have significant impact for science assessment in
specific, and educational research and practice in general. The knowledge gained
from LASA will inform researchers, educators, test publishers, and policymakers
about new theoretical and practical approaches to conceptualizing and assessing
students' learning in the domain of science. In addition, this proposed work
will contribute to studies of human cognition and learning by exploring how test
takers use knowledge and strategies to solve problems in the assessment
context.&lt;br/&gt;