* 0310161
* Planning Visit to Korea:  Model Reconciliation and Estimation in Rotating Machinery
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Eric Maslen, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/2004
* USD 3,000.00

0310161&lt;br/&gt;Maslen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a one-week
project planning trip to Seoul, Korea for Eric Maslen of the Department of
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering of the University of Virginia. Professor
Maslen intends to finalize the details of a collaborative research relationship
with Professor Dong-Chul Han of the School of Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering of Seoul National University. The two institutions recently agreed
on a program that facilitates research visits to Virginia by Korean graduate
students. These have led to a familiarity and confidence that warrants a more
substantive research partnership. The mutual interest of the two faculty members
is the dynamic modeling of rotating machinery through a combination of
engineering analysis and experimental data. Their recent research experience and
expertise is complementary, and they expect to collaborate through a coordinated
division of labor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond generating new knowledge, the
anticipated research will have educational value through the international
experience to be gained by participating U.S. graduate and undergraduate
students. Furthermore, rotating machinery is the largest "consumer" of both
fossil and nuclear fuels worldwide. The research being planned should lead to
improvement in machine design for greater efficiency and lower fuel use, which
carries with it obvious environmental and economic benefits. &lt;br/&gt;