* 0310589
* Verification of Properties of Geometric Structures and Reconstruction of Geometric Objectsfrom Partial Information
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Karen Daniels, University of Massachusetts Lowell Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 05/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

DMS-0310589 Karen Daniels, Daniel Klain, Koonstantin Rybnikov

This is a CARGO incubation award made under solicitation
http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2002/nsf02155/nsf02155.htm. The investigators will
develop new techniques and algorithms for solving a collection of problems that
address the verification and reconstruction of geometric objects from partial
information. The approach is to have two stages: first, verify if the partial
information is consistent with the desired outcome. Second, if the answer is
positive, reconstruct the object. If the answer is negative, find an
approximation to the desired reconstruction. The group will focus on four major
types of problems. The first type is a general class of NP-hard containment,
covering and packing problems. Although complete information about the objects
may be available, partial information will be used due to the hardness of the
problems. In addition to strengthening existing algorithms for polygonal shapes,
this work will design the first containment and covering algorithms using
objects bounded by spline curves. For the other three problems only partial
information about the objects is available. The second problem is the
verification of convexity and reconstruction of convex polyhedra and convex
smooth shapes from partial data. Reconstruction of convex polytopes from partial
data is a fascinating classical problem going back to Maxwell, Steinitz, and
Minkowski. While much work has been done on recognition and reconstruction of
convex polyhedra from projections, reconstruction of smooth convex shapes with a
given discrete set of parameters is a problem that has not been adequately
addressed. Our work will emphasize reconstruction of convex smooth bodies using
splines. The third problem is that of statistical determination of topological
properties of a body, such as the Euler characteristic, from a finite set of
sample points. The fourth problem, tightly related to the third one, is the
determination of the topology of a non-convex body from its projections on a
finite number of planes. Dissection and subsequent use of valuations, i.e.
finitely additive probability measures, will play an especially important role
in the third and fourth problems. The team of mathematics and computer science
investigators will combine computational geometry techniques, mathematical
programming approaches, methods of graph theory and discrete geometry, methods
of convexity theory, and work on multivariate splines to design verification and
reconstruction algorithms.

In addition to their significance in the context of pure mathematics and
theoretical computer science, these problems are important to applications of
computational geometry and geometric software design. For example, verification
of metric and topological properties of geometric software outputs is important
for implementing and testing geometric algorithms. Containment algorithms are
useful in 2D packing and layout for manufacturing. Containment for 3D shapes is
applicable to modeling tasks such as molecular docking and to medical treatment
planning. Covering problems arise in practical settings such as military sensor
coverage and targeting, telecommunications, spatial query optimization, and
graphics. Work involving splines is applicable to CAD and design of numerical
methods. Determination of the topology of a body from finite samplings,
projections, and sections is a hard problem important for computer tomography
and pattern recognition.