* 0310627
* Integration Of Microscopy And Biochemistry Technologies To Enhance Quantitative Experimental Cell Biology Within An Inquiry-Based Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Shubhik DebBurman, Lake Forest College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/2007
* USD 70,939.00

Undergraduate educators face important challenges in preparing diverse graduates
for a technologically sophisticated and scientifically interdisciplinary
community. Lake Forest College Biology Department is meeting this challenge with
inquiry-based pedagogy that supports a diverse student-centered learning
community. We expect students to develop scientific process and master content
by progressing through increasingly sophisticated hypothesis-driven
investigations that require collaborative research, critical thinking, and
diverse forms of communication. Currently, both courses that anchor our cellular
curriculum, introductory Cell Biology and advanced Molecular Genetics, feature
DNA-based investigations. Other cellular-level technologies feature prominently
in biomedical discoveries. Intellectual Merit: We are creating a more
comprehensive cellular curriculum by redressing existing deficiencies in cell
culture, microscopy and protein biochemistry. We are adding investigative
experiments in these areas by restructuring introductory Cell Biology and adding
two more advanced courses. Inquiry-conducive experiments successful at the
College of the Holy Cross that require quantitative microscopy of cells and
tissues and biochemical analysis of proteins are being adapted and implemented.
To implement these changes, instrumentation for cell culturing, histology,
microscopy, and biochemical analysis is being acquired. The introductory course
incorporates investigations in cell culturing and protein characterization.
Advanced course students are expanding their investigative independence and
technical repertoire by developing hypotheses based on current literature and
conducting investigations featuring cell culturing, histology, fluorescent
microscopy, and protein biochemistry. These additions also support other courses
and help establish interdisciplinary biochemistry and neuroscience majors.
Broader Impact: We aim to graduate diverse individuals thoroughly trained to
succeed in a variety of scientific careers, provide innovative K-12 outreach,
and nationally disseminate innovations.