* 0310330
* Melt-Rock and Fluid-Rock Reaction in the Petrogenesis of Archean Subcontinental Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* David Bell, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 102,770.00

EAR-0310330&lt;br/&gt;Bell&lt;br/&gt;Archean subcontinental mantle is commonly
enriched in Si with respect to other regions of the upper mantle and is also the
virtually exclusive source of natural diamond. It has been proposed that both
these phenomena are the result of metasomatism, yet the nature and origins of
the metasomatic agents and the details of their reaction with the mantle
lithosphere remain poorly understood. The proposed research will attempt to
quantify the chemical and mineralogical reactions accompanying the deposition of
Si and C into Archean mantle peridotite and constrain the compositions, origin
and timing of the metasomatic fluids.&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of this
work are to determine the spatial variations in chemical composition of veined
harzburgites and to characterize the mineralogy, texture and chemical features
of carbonaceous harzburgite xenoliths. These results will be used to calculate
the stoichiometry of chemical reactions producing enstatite-rich veins in
subcalcic garnet harzburgite, to assess the petrologic context of carbon
deposition in refractory harzburgite, and to test the hypotheses that the two
processes are genetically related and responsible for metasomatism on a craton-
wide scale. &lt;br/&gt;The problem will be approached by the analysis of mantle
xenolith samples from the Bultfontein kimberlite, Kimberley, South Africa. These
include refractory harzburgites selected for their lack of evidence of Mesozoic
overprinting and unusual veined examples interpreted as persuasive textural
evidence for fluid reaction. Mineral major and trace element compositions will
be determined by EMP and LA-ICP-MS analysis and bulk compositions calculated
from chemical maps of large thin sections. Compositions of added components will
be determined by digital spatial analysis of chemical maps of veined samples.
Mineralogical evidence for carbonate will be examined using EMP, SEM, XRD and
TEM. Abundance and distribution of diamond in subcalcic garnet harzburgite will
be evaluated by X-ray tomography. A young age for diamond-forming metasomatism
will be tested by examining garnet for trace element heterogeneity. Protolith
ages will be constrained using Re-Os isotope analysis and source of
metasomatizing fluids by mineral trace element, and Sr and Nd isotope
compositions. &lt;br/&gt;Quantifying metasomatic effects allows a clearer window
into the history of Archean mantle and an increased understanding of
petrogenesis that is the key to continent stabilization in the early Earth. It
is anticipated that the results of this study will have important implications
for the Archean craton formation and evolution, mechanisms of volatile and trace
element storage and transport in the mantle, and the evolution of the global
carbon cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;