* 0310954
* Sustainable Reform for General Chemistry: Phased Implementation of Lecture-Based Reforms and Peer-Led Guided Inquiry
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Jennifer Lewis, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 07/31/2007
* USD 99,957.00

Chemistry (12) The goal of our project is to revamp General Chemistry I course
at the University of South Florida through the phased implementation and
evaluation of a set of curricular reforms. To achieve our goal, we are adapting
ConceptTests championed by the NSF-funded systemic efforts at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison during lectures, peer-led guided inquiry session in place of
one lecture each week, and Web-assisted homework to improve student problem
solving skills. The project impacts nearly 1100 students per year who take
General Chemistry I at USF. Chemistry learning achievements for the students in
this reformed General Chemistry I curriculum are being measured by administering
the ACS general chemistry concept exam at the end of the semester and grades in
General Chemistry II. We are also collecting additional data regarding the
reforms and chemistry itself via the web-administered Student Assessment of
Learning Gains (SALG) Instrument. The evaluation results are provided to the
instructors each year in order for them to assess their own efforts in
implementing the reforms and decide whether to continue with the reforms both
during and after the project. Further, we plan to disseminate the results of our
project broadly via publications and presentations to the national community
interested in effective science education reform. On the basis of a
departmentally funded Fall 2002 pilot project, we expect both partially and
fully reformed curricula to improve overall performance and attitudes in general
chemistry. In addition, we expect this project to provide necessary data for
evaluating the effectiveness of lecture-based reforms (ConceptTests, web-
assisted homework) as opposed to reforms based on small group learning (peer-led
guided inquiry). By design, all phases of the reform are maintained during the
project to ensure the effective evaluation of both types of reforms.