* 0310902
* Enhancing Science Education and Undergraduate Research Through Geochemical Studies Using the ICP-OES
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Kimberly Hannula, Fort Lewis College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2006
* USD 107,673.00

Geology (42) The Department of Geosciences at Fort Lewis College has one of the
best natural laboratories in the world, but the program lacks an analytical
instrument for chemical analyses of rock, soil, or water samples. The capability
of the ICP-OES to routinely measure a spectrum of elements in various media
makes it the ideal instrument for use in geochemical and environmental
curriculum and research. We are adapting exercises developed by Professor Kurt
Hollocher at Union College
(http://www.union.edu/PUBLIC/GEODEPT/hollocher/pedagogy/mineral_dissolution.htm
and http://www.union.edu/PUBLIC/GEODEPT/hollocher/pedagogy/partition_coefficient
s.htm). Acquisition of an ICP-OES is enriching our program by: 1) allowing the
development of field- and laboratory-based analytical projects in introductory
and advanced-level undergraduate courses in geology and environmental studies;
2) expanding the opportunities for independent undergraduate-student research in
these fields; 3) allowing future K-12 educators to collect and analyze
geochemical data in courses required for Education majors and use this
information to develop science curriculum; 4) giving students opportunities to
incorporate geochemical data into local research projects, both in classes and
senior thesis research; and 5) providing increased opportunity for faculty
development at a small public baccalaureate-granting institution. The broader
impacts of this study include the: 1) increased opportunities for a significant
Native American and Hispanic population to participate in undergraduate research
throughout the curriculum, from class projects to independent research; 2) use
of the instrument by future K- 12 educators in required courses for secondary
education degrees, and 3) involvement of undergraduate students in a greater
variety of scientific studies to further develop the philosophy and process of
scientific discovery. Finally, because this is the only analytical instrument of
this type in the Four Corners region, it is serving the larger community,
including community colleges such as Dine College and San Juan Community
College, local K-12 educators, environmental consulting firms, and the oil and
gas industry.