* 0310988
* Bridging the Compiler-Simulator Gap:    Faster and Easier Hardware/Software Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* J. Eliot Moss, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2007
* USD 312,000.00

Making computers go fast requires optimizing software that exploits
the&lt;br/&gt;hardware. Exploring new hardware ideas requires hardware
simulators, AND&lt;br/&gt;optimizing software matching the imagined hardware. It
is time-consuming&lt;br/&gt;and error-prone to build these and get them to
match. The CoGenT project is&lt;br/&gt;automating the building of simulators and
matching software tools, so that&lt;br/&gt;more people can explore more ideas,
more quickly, for modern computers and&lt;br/&gt;programming
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoGenT, which stands for Co-Generation of
(simulation and compilation)&lt;br/&gt;Tools, with machine descriptions. From
instruction format, execution, and&lt;br/&gt;timing information, we produce
predictive simulators for Java programs on&lt;br/&gt;the described hardware. The
Java system includes optimizing and&lt;br/&gt;non-optimizing compilers, and we
retarget both compilers to the target&lt;br/&gt;hardware. We do this by using
the same description forms for the compiler's&lt;br/&gt;abstract machine as for
the hardware target. We generate code generation&lt;br/&gt;rules by searching
for target instructions to match each possible abstract&lt;br/&gt;code fragment.
We are also concerned with automated construction of the&lt;br/&gt;rest of the
compiler back end, and with efficiency of the simulators we
build.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While certain hardware innovations clearly demand
entirely new techniques&lt;br/&gt;to exploit them effectively, we automate those
aspects addressed in the&lt;br/&gt;existing optimizing compiler. Our
contributions lie in the increased degree&lt;br/&gt;of automation and
integration of the techniques, and in improved simulator&lt;br/&gt;performance.
While the primary setting is simulation, the results are&lt;br/&gt;useful in
compiler retargeting, dynamic binary translation, and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;