* 0310178
* Surface Chemistry of Electronic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Jeffrey Schwartz, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2006
* USD 764,431.00

The foci of this research are threefold. First, ultra-high vacuum (UHV) surface
science will be used to understand details of bonding between substrate surfaces
and surface modification reagents. Second, new surface modification methodology
will be developed to enable strong, stable bonding of organics to oxide coated
surfaces of Si and GaAs and of ITO. Third, the fabrication of new types of
sensor devices and diodes based on the surface modified materials will be
carried out by this collaborative project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award,
the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program and the Solid State Chemistry
Program are supporting the research of Dr. Jeffrey Schwartz and Dr. Steven L.
Bernasek of the Department of Chemistry at Princeton University. This
collaborative effort will focus on several topics that bear on the processing of
surfaces of various types of electronic materials. The goal of the project is to
develop methodology for surface modification to enable the preparation of
stable, designed interfaces between dissimilar materials. In terms of broader
impacts, the project has potential for the development of designed bio-medical
materials or sensors. The project also provides an excellent setting for the
multidisciplinary training of graduate students and postdoctorals&lt;br/&gt;