* 0310055
* U.S.-Polish Collaborative Research: Multidimensional Nonlinear Fractal Dynamics in Continuous Media
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Wojbor Woyczynski, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 07/31/2008
* USD 55,656.00

This is a U.S.-Polish cooperative research project that will investigate
analytical and computational tools for multidimensional nonlinear fractal
dynamics in continuous media. Nonlinear and nonlocal advection-dispersion
equations involving generators of continuous-time random walks will also be
studied. The tools from both probability theory and the theory of nonlinear
partial differential equations will be utilized, including theoretical results
on critical nonlinearities for Levy conservations laws obtained under prior NSF
support. The principal investigators are Dr. Wojbor Woyczynski from Case Western
Reserve University and &lt;br/&gt;Professor Grzegorz Karch from the University
of Wroclaw. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact resulting from the proposed
activity is assured by the fact that the dynamics to be studied reflect behavior
of a variety of complex systems of a large number of nonlinearly interacting
components which operate in uncertain environments and with imperfect
information about their initial states. Examples of such systems are networks of
servers on the internet, power grids distributing electric power, environmental
systems in the presence of turbulent atmosphere and complex oceanic flows, and
chemical vapor deposition systems for manufacturing thin semiconductor
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in mathematics research fulfills the
program objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and
Central/Eastern Europe to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis of equality,
reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.