* 0311776
* Collaborative Research:  Sediment Nanomagnetism and Environmental Change:  The Microbial Mineral Link
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Kenneth Nealson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2007
* USD 104,095.00

Mineralogical and chemical signatures of environmental change, left behind in
the earth's sediment archives, provide immensely valuable baseline records
against which current and future global change an be successfully recognized.
Conversion of these qualitative measures to quantitative numerical values of
past temperatures and rainfall is the next major challenge in global
environmental change research. One successful but qualitative approach has been
to observe changes in environmentally sensitive iron oxyhydroxide microcrystals
utilizing transmission electron microscopy (TEM), electron emission loss
spectroscopy (EELS) and synchrotron x-ray analysis, e.g., extended absorption
fine structure (EXAFS). However, it has proven difficult to relate these results
from 1-100 nm-sized individual nanocrystals to 100 - 200 mg aliquots of natural
sediments. We show that a multi-proxy approach involving whole sample magnetic
and Mossbauer effect measurements at low temperatures (4.5K - 300K) and high
magnetic fields (3-5 Tesla), combined with TEM/EELS/EXAFS studies of synthesized
nanoparticles of goethite, can lead to more precise calibrations for temperature
and Eh/pH of the mineral formation environment. We will expand our research into
ferrihydrite, nanohematite and nanomagnetite. In particular, dissimilatory iron
reducing bacteria (DIRB) will be identified from field experiments on soil
profiles and also used as cultured bacteria in in vitro experiments to determine
how past temperature, rainfall, and also the length of summer growing season can
be obtained from magnetically estimated nanomagnetite in modern soils and
ancient soils (paleosols). Our research, it is hoped, will lead to the first
controlled experiments on the role of microbes (DIRB) in nanomagnetite
mineralization, and a search for iron isotope signatures in microbial
nanomagnetite in soils.