* 0311487
* Towards an Integrated Polymer Education:  Development of Biodegradable Polymer Laboratory Unit
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Keith Schimmel, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Lee Gentili
* 08/31/2004
* USD 97,374.00

Engineering - Chemical (53)&lt;br/&gt;A current research area of significant
environmental, economic, and scientific importance is biodegradable polymers.
This interdisciplinary biotechnology area requires the expertise of chemical
engineers, material engineers, polymer engineers, biochemists, and
microbiologists. Biodegradable polymers is an area that has great promise for
being used to integrate life science into programs that do not traditionally get
life-science exposure. To this point, however, high quality laboratory manuals
on biodegradable polymers have not been developed. Therefore, a laboratory unit
titled "Biodegradable Polymer Characterization" has been developed and has been
separately packaged to meet the needs of K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students. The experiments we included in the manuals have been adopted from
techniques used in academic and industrial research on biodegradable polymers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our laboratory unit has been designed to provide a unique
hands-on educational experience to students by exposing a variety of polymer
samples to simulated biomass environments and characterizing the samples against
the exposure time. The students determine relationships between polymer
structures and biodegradation properties. They are challenged to use statistical
methods to determine which polymer physical and chemical property measurements
best correlate with biodegradability. Through this process, students will
develop a vivid understanding of fundamental principles of polymer science, as
well as the important of societal and environmental issues with polymer
materials design, manufacturing, and applications. Pedagogy that has been
demonstrated to be effective in improving student learning, e.g., cooperative
learning, formative assessment and feedback, and reflective writing, will be
incorporated into the laboratory materials to be developed. Some parts of our
experiment have been adapted for use in internet-based laboratories. The CCLI
project #0126910 of Dr. Lipscomb (Chemical Engineering, University of Toledo)
that involves the development and analysis of three internet-based unit
operations experiments will be consulted in the development of the remote
experiments. Assessment methods that this project is using to compare remote and
hands-on experiments will be adapted for the biodegradable polymer project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To facilitate use by other faculty members, the laboratory
unit will be documented as a laboratory manual complete with introductory
material, detailed experimental procedures, cooperative learning exercises,
formative assessment exercises, reflective writing exercises, and supporting
reference materials. Our manual will be presented at professional conferences,
posted on the worldwide web, and sent nationally to departments that may have
interest in it.&lt;br/&gt;