* 0311333
* Approximation Algorithms and Applications in Network Games
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Eva Tardos, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 150,000.00

Large communication networks, such as the Web or the Internet, give rise to
&lt;br/&gt;a number of challenging algorithmic questions. Our increased
dependence on&lt;br/&gt;networks means that reliability and availability of the
communication&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure is becoming more critical than ever. This
project will consider&lt;br/&gt;some of the algorithmic question raised by such
networks. The goal of&lt;br/&gt;the project is to develop algorithms with
provable performance guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on two
closely related issues. Over the last 20 years or &lt;br/&gt;so, many powerful
techniques have been developed for approximation algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on developing new algorithmic techniques, and aims to
&lt;br/&gt;develop new techniques for approximation algorithms, and obtain large
improvements &lt;br/&gt;in the achievable solution quality for a number of
important problems, &lt;br/&gt;where the previous techniques
failed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second goal of the project is to develop
algorithmic techniques for the &lt;br/&gt;distributed, and selfish environment
of large networks, like the Internet. &lt;br/&gt;In such settings the
traditional approach of algorithm design is not &lt;br/&gt;appropriate: there is
no single entity that has the information or the power &lt;br/&gt;to run such an
algorithm. While centralized algorithms cannot be used directly &lt;br/&gt;in
such selfish environments, there are very strong ties with certain
&lt;br/&gt;algorithmic techniques and some of the central questions in
algorithmic game &lt;br/&gt;theory. This project considers two of these issues,
cost-sharing and the&lt;br/&gt;price of anarchy. The project will develop new
methods for designing&lt;br/&gt;cost-sharing algorithms, and understanding what
environments lead to&lt;br/&gt;low price of anarchy. The cost-sharing problem is
closely related to the &lt;br/&gt;primal dual method of approximation
algorithms. Evaluating the price of &lt;br/&gt;anarchy is closely related to
approximation algorithms based on local search.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;