* 0311270
* Crystal Growth: A Research Module for the Undergraduate Organic Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Jennifer Swift, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 01/31/2005
* USD 46,681.00

Chemistry (12) The specific goal of this project is to creatively integrate
teaching and research efforts by developing and implementing a new problem-based
crystal growth module in the organic laboratory curriculum. The project adapts
international research efforts to achieve chiral separations by means of crystal
growth in gel media to an undergraduate laboratory course. In the module being
developed here, each student is participating in an authentic research study in
which modified PVA polymers are synthesized, their gelation behavior
qualitatively assessed, and the gel's ability to effect crystallization-based
chiral separations quantitatively investigated. This sequence takes students
through a natural scientific learning process where straightforward textbook
synthesis leads to inquiry-based problem solving and then to real-world
application. Because this interdisciplinary module is ideally suited to large
(&gt;150 student) introductory organic courses, each student is afforded the
opportunity to be an active participant in a real research project at an early
stage of their education, a key factor for retaining student interest in
science. A comprehensive evaluation plan consisting of anonymous surveys and
focused interview sessions for this project is being executed with the help of
colleagues at Georgetown's Center for New Designs in Learning and Scholarship.
Broad dissemination of the outcomes of this module will be achieved through
conference presentations, publications, and free online access to all written
materials pertaining to the module. Undergraduate students are playing an
integral role in the module development and well over a hundred are benefiting
from its initial implementation alone. The easy modifiability of PVA and
unlimited number of crystal systems to investigate ensures that this module can
be used repeatedly over multiple years, both at Georgetown and at other
undergraduate institutions, each time generating novel research-quality data.
The cumulative scientific data generated by the module will help to address key
questions regarding crystal growth in viscous media and is certain to have a
broad and positive impact on the field of solid state chemistry as a whole.