* 0311259
* FASEB Conference on Genetic Recombination, to be held in Snowmass Village, Colorado on July 26-31, 2003.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Susan Lovett, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 06/30/2004
* USD 4,000.00

The 2003 FASEB Summer Research Conference on "Genetic Recombination and Genomic
Rearrangements" will be held July 26 through July 31 at Snowmass Village,
Colorado, and will be the tenth of a highly successful series of bi-annual
conferences on genetic recombination. These conferences join investigators
studying many diverse aspects of genetic recombination in a range of biological
systems and with different experimental approaches. Presentations will introduce
new and unpublished work on timely questions in the field and will encourage
discussion from all participants. Eight plenary sessions will involve topics
such as recombination mechanisms, properties of prokaryotic and eukaryotic
recombination, meiotic processes, the role of recombinational processes in
repair of DNA damage, site-specific recombination and transposition, and genomic
rearrangements. Over forty speakers, among the best experimentalists and
thinkers in these particular areas, have agreed to present their most recent and
unpublished work. Approximately 160 other participants will be chosen from among
the applicants to the conference. While maintaining rigorous standards of
excellence in selecting participants, every attention will be paid to achieving
a balanced representation of age, gender, race and geography. All will be
encouraged to participate in discussion, workshops and poster sessions. There
will be a workshop on a controversial topic, the role of the Mus81 complexes in
recombination intermediate processing. Two poster sessions, each lasting two
days, will provide an additional forum for presentation of current work. By
emphasizing truly exceptional research in a modestly sized conference setting,
the FASEB conferences provide unique opportunities for the exchange of
information, technology and perspective among new and established investigators
in the recombination field. NSF funding will allow participants in need of
financial support to attend this important conference. This group is expected to
include new investigators, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. The NSF
support will ensure the future vitality of this important field of
research.&lt;br/&gt;