* 0311198
* Multiuser Detection for WDM Long-Haul Fiber-Optic Communication Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Maite Brandt-Pearce, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 06/30/2006
* USD 317,953.00

Fiber-optic links have the potential of terabit per second transmission. Long-
haul links, such as transoceanic and transcontinental data-trunks, have
demonstrated a need for such high data throughput. System designers are able to
provide the high data throughput using a technique known as dense wavelength
division multiplexing (WDM), where multiple lower rate signals are combined unto
a single fiber by using several wavelengths of light. Long-haul
WDM&lt;br/&gt;fiber channels are performance limited by linear dispersion and
nonlinear crosstalk. The nonlinear effects create a correlation between the
signals received at different wavelength channels. In this research multiuser
detection schemes to exploit this dependence and jointly demodulate multiple
channels are developed. Multiuser detection has attracted enormous attention in
RF multiuser communications in the last twenty years. They are powerful at
combating the harmful effects of interference from other users in the system. In
so doing they allow the channel capacity per user to&lt;br/&gt;increase from
that possible in single-user communications. The same advantages are suspected
to persist in applying these detectors to WDM fiber systems. Many aspects of the
physical model of the fiber system differ from the RF model. Because of the
fiber nonlinearities and the photodetector processing, the interference and
dominant noise are signal dependent, giving a very different statistical
description of the received signal. Moreover, the modulation and the signal
detection act only on the intensity of the signal, prohibiting the use of the
signal phase at either end.&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, multiuser detectors developed
for RF communications cannot be used directly for the fiber
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, optimal and suboptimal detectors
such as maximum likelihood, linear, quadratic, and decision feedback detectors
are designed to suit fiber-optic systems. Special attention is placed on the
hardware requirements of each design to ensure that it can be implemented at 10
or even 40 gigabits per second, as required for these types of systems. A system
of small simultaneous detectors over small groups of adjacent channels allows
the most significant nonlinear crosstalk to be cancelled without requiring a
prohibitive computational complexity. Detectors must also&lt;br/&gt;operate on
data with very coarse resolution. The performance of these detectors can be
measured using variants of minimum distance, bounds on the error probability,
calculations of the asymptotic multiuser efficiency, and simulation. By using
these techniques, system designers will be able to increase the span length
between fiber amplifiers to more than the 100 km currently possible, increase
the channel density by decreasing the channel spacing to below the
current&lt;br/&gt;20 GHz limit, and improve the quality of service of each
channel to below an error-rate of 10- 12 .