* 0311610
* A Methods Course to Prepare Preservice Biology Teachers to Use Inquiry: Adapting the Focal Ecosystem Model.
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Sharolyn Belzer, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 06/30/2007
* USD 97,629.00

Biological Sciences (61) This project addresses the need for the integration of
content knowledge and pedagogy in science teaching methods courses. The project
adapts elements from two successful NSF CCLI projects. These are the Westminster
College, Utah "Great Salt Lake Project"
(http://www.westminstercollege.edu/education_gslp/) and the University of
Arizona "Integrated, Thematic Approach to Biology Methods for Teacher Training,"
(https://www.ehr.nsf.gov/pirs_prs_web/search/RetrieveRecord.asp?Awd_Id=0088855 )
both of which use their local ecosystem as a focal point for developing inquiry-
based lessons. The current project is adapting these model projects to the local
needs of both the university and the K-12 schools by integrating discipline-
based content knowledge, experimental methods, and pedagogical methods within a
"Biology Teaching Methods" course. In this way they provide a rich experience
for teachers-in-training that allows them to implement inquiry-based lessons
during their student teaching internships. Students, primarily secondary
education biology majors, are guided through the process of developing inquiry-
based experimental modules focused on the regional ecosystem. They then gain
practical experience teaching these inquiry-based lessons in the classroom as
part of their K-12 internships. The project also enables students to implement
experimental biology lessons in K-12 schools through an equipment-lending center
that supplements the resources of the rural K-12 schools in which they are
student teachers. The project benefits university students and their
current/future pupils, thereby offering a significant and long-lasting
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;