* 0311383
* Analysis of Cycle Stealing and Other Multi-Server Problems via New Dimensionality Reduction Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Mor Harchol-Balter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 150,000.00

Stochastic processes are a very powerful tool for analyzing the performance of
computer systems. However there are still some very fundamental computer systems
problems which remain largely intractable. One example is the simple cycle
stealing problem, where one server can steal another server's idle cycles under
a switching cost overhead. Cycle stealing pervades applications ranging from
Webserver farms, to networks of workstations, to disk arrays, to databaseserver
clusters, and yet very simple questions like quantifying the benefit of cycle
stealing, or understanding under what conditions cycle stealing is profitable
are not yet understood. Another example is the long standing open problem of
finding and analyzing the optimal policy for task assignment in a server farm.
Interestingly, these problems and other open fundamental computer systems
problems are difficult for the same reason: they all have a Markov chain
representation which grows infinitely in two or more dimensions (2D). While a
one-dimensional (1D) infinite Markov chain with repeating structure can be
solved via computational approaches, these 2D infinite chains can
not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a new approach for attacking
problems such as those above, resulting in a 2D infinite Markov chain. The idea
is to transform the 2D infinite chain into a 1D infinite chain which can be
analyzed, without removing the relevant problem information. This is achieved by
using Markov chain transitions to denote the durations of various types of busy
periods. The project will entail a mathematical exploration of the general
applicability of this technique, the application of the technique to specific
problems, and the implementation of the analytical solutions within real
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting from the proposed
activity include: a workshop on scheduling in server farms; online availability
of all source code generated from the work along with documentation; a highly-
accessible set of lecture notes on queueing theory applications which evolves
yearly to reflect the current research aims of the author; collaborations with
the Pittsburgh Supercomputer Center to implement ideas in this proposal; and
undergraduate research opportunities in scheduling. The project involves 1
faculty member (1summer month only) and 0.5 graduate students over the course of
3years.&lt;br/&gt;