* 0311671
* Balancing Privacy and Analysis in Data Sanitization
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Karl Levitt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* David Du
* 07/31/2006
* USD 220,000.00

CCR-0311671

Balancing Privacy and Analysis in Data Sanitization

Matt Bishop

When handling an intrusion, one organization may need to share logs and network
traces with other organizations. However, the data to be shared may contain
sensitive information that the first organization does not wish to disclose to
the other parties. The solution is to sanitize the data by removing information
from the data. This protects the privacy of the organization. However, the data
removed may be essential for the analysis of the data that the other
organizations must perform. This research explores the tension between privacy
and security analysis. The goals of this research are to: (1) develop a
sanitizing language to describe the requirements for privacy and security
analysis in such a way that the requirements can be automatically checked for
inconsistencies; (2) determine the conditions under which "perfect sanitization"
can occur, if any; and (3) examine the problem of sanitizing a dynamic data set
that changes as the sanitization proceeds. This will involve developing and
testing the sanitization language on both data extracted from a network, and on
files containing student grades. The former will provide examples of both static
and dynamic data. Perfect sanitization will be studied by translating the
sanitization process into functions and analyzing their ranges and domains.

The significance of this work is in the balance of privacy and security.
Previous work focuses on sanitizing data in an ad hoc manner, rather than
analyzing the balance between privacy and security and allowing the sanitizers
to choose among particular requirements when the needs of privacy and security
analysis conflict. Its impact is that if successful, the results can be used in
a wide variety of fields in which privacy and analysis (not just security
analysis) must be balanced.