* 0311485
* System Security through Fault-Tolerant Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Yevgeny (Gene) Itkis, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Karl Levitt
* 07/31/2006
* USD 366,664.00

NSF CCR-0311485 Title: System Security through Fault-Tolerant Cryptography PI:
Gene Itkis and Leonid Reyzin

The research addresses the task of protecting large multi-user systems
collecting and managing sensitive data, in which individual system components
may be compromised by attacks. Typically, data confidentiality and integrity are
ensured with the help of cryptographic tools, whose security relies on secrets,
such as passwords and keys. However, in a hostile cyber-environment, these
secrets themselves are subject to inevitable exposure. Thus, there is a need to
ensure that leakage of secrets will have minimal negative effect: in other
words, in order to secure the system, cryptography itself must be made fault-
tolerant.

This need for cryptographic fault-tolerance is addressed through development and
use of intrusion-resilient and tamper-evident techniques. Intrusion-resilient
cryptography enables quick recovery from local security breaches. Tamper-evident
cryptography provides externally detectable evidence of security breaches even
when all the secrets are stolen by the attacker (and thus common cryptographic
tools are rendered helpless).

The above techniques are applied to a specific system that collects and manages
vast amounts of sensitive video data. Such systems have important potential
benefits, from providing environments that assist the disabled to helping law
enforcement. The research addresses serious privacy and security concerns that
hamper their development and deployment.