* 0311695
* Collaborative Research: Adapting and Evaluating Online Materials for Undergraduate Statistics Using LON-CAPA Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2003,10/31/2005
* Jennifer Boldry, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 10/31/2005
* USD 47,125.00

Social Sciences - Other (89)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This joint project is designed
to adapt and expand educational materials developed for undergraduate statistics
courses for use with the LON CAPA system, which is being developed with support
from the NSF's Information Technology Research program. CAPA (Computer Assisted
Personalized Approach) is a type of course management system developed in the
early 1990s and now used in a number of universities. LON (Learning Online
Network) is a new technology designed to work with CAPA to create an integrated
system for online learning and assessment. LON CAPA consists of a learning
content authoring and management system allowing new and existing content to be
used flexibly, a course management system, an individualized homework and
automatic grading system, data collection and data mining system, and a content
delivery system. This collaborative project is adapting this new system to the
teaching of statistical methods in the social sciences. CAPA has been used for
several years for this purpose. The new LON CAPA system is expected to be more
flexible and better suited to connecting departments with common interests to
share learning materials and assessment results. The new system allows more
personalized attention to the learning problems of individual students. It can
more effectively connect students to resources that they can use to overcome
learning barriers in undergraduate statistics. We are translating the existing
statistics problem library of over 600 problems from CAPA into LON CAPA format.
We are also creating multimedia class material designed to help students learn
the concepts underlying the assigned problems, and this material is being woven
into their homework assignments. After implementing the LON-CAPA system in the
fall semester of 2003 and refining our materials, we plan to collect student
performance data during spring and fall of 2004. These data will be used to test
the greater efficacy of LON CAPA relative to CAPA. An extensive database of
student performance information already exists for the statistics material from
courses in statistics for the social sciences that have been using CAPA.
Equivalence in examination content can be maintained after the LON CAPA system
is in place, making a direct test of whether students have benefited from the
adapted materials possible.