* 0311460
* Hierarchical Hybrid Control of Multi-Vehicle Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Rafael Fierro, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 02/28/2006
* USD 92,000.00

Multi-vehicle systems can be viewed as hybrid systems that exhibit both discrete
and continuous behaviors. These systems become harder to develop due to
increasing complexity and functionality. Furthermore, these systems are
frequently used in safety critical environments, and thus, require high
assurance in reliability. The design and implementation of distributed hybrid
systems remains a challenging task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates key technologies (software tools for hierarchical modeling, and
optimization-based hybrid control) for analysis and synthesis of cooperative
unmanned vehicles. Multi-vehicle systems need to adapt to the task in hand and
commands from a remote user. To facilitate the design of this class of hybrid
systems, the following research thrusts are addressed: (1.) Hierarchical
modeling of multi-vehicle systems. This thrust focuses on developing a software
toolkit for modeling distributed multi-vehicle systems. This toolkit allows a
modular and hierarchical approach to programming deliberative and reactive
behaviors in distributed autonomous operation. Formal definitions for sequential
composition, hierarchical composition, and parallel composition allow the
bottom-up development of complex hybrid systems. (2.)Distributed hybrid control
and optimization. This thrust addresses hybrid control of a team of vehicles
using optimal control graphs and model predictive control (MPC). Determining the
proper level in the control hierarchy at which MPC should be imposed is
important. In the extreme, MPC can be used for the entire system; however this
may not be advantageous when local controllers for vehicles have already been
well established. In evaluating this trade-off, the complexity of the algorithm,
computation time, and stability are considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
software and analysis tools developed under this effort have a broader impact,
as they can also be applied to other domains such as distributed power plants,
transportation systems, and formation flight systems. Furthermore, these
methodologies have the potential to be applicable for commercial, military and
civilian applications like mining industry, firefighting and disaster relief
operations, search and rescue missions, and DoD missions such as next generation
battle warfare, and homeland security. The educational goals of this project are
to integrate the research findings into undergraduate and graduate courses and
to train a new generation of students on hybrid and embedded systems with cross
disciplinary expertise of this unique flavor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;