* 0311522
* The InvestiGATOR
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Fred Taylor, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 07/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

Electrical Engineering (55)-The University of Florida's (UF) undergraduate
Digital Signal Processing (DSP)-track consists of a junior Discrete-Time Signals
and Systems and a senior DSP courses. An assessment of these courses would lead
one to conclude that they are academically strong by engineering science
standards. They are, however, in danger of failing to provide the technology-
centric learning experience requested by students and employers alike.
Fortunately there are reforms underway within the engineering education and
training community that may provide the means of making UF's DSP program more
relevant and effective. First, a studio-based content delivery strategy,
championed by Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), has been demonstrated
effective in delivering technology-centric material. Secondly content delivery
frameworks developed in the private sector to train practicing engineers, has
been successfully used to impart specific skills in minimal time. A studio-based
learning environment, combined with a professional training framework defines
the proposed InvestiGATOR innovation in the context of the NSF's CCLI/A&I
program. Studio instruction is being reintroduced into the UF DSP curriculum
using the recently developed Interactive DSP Teaching Laboratory as an enabling
instrument. The DSP courses are being delivered in a studio format support along
with new supplemental structured DSP micro-processor (TI C'6000 DSK) and MatLab-
centric learning material designed to support in-class studio activities as well
as hands-on authentic laboratory studies. A formative evaluation using a CIPP
model is being used to track student's preparation and attitudes attributable to
an InvestiGATOR experience. Supporting this project is cost-shared contributions
from Texas Instruments and Mathworks.

The InvestiGATOR has broad and important impact on engineering, science, and
technology education. The studio-based and training material format will be
exported to many universities and disciplines. InvestiGATOR material will be
distributed via Internet downloads, the educational outreach programs of our
industrial partners, and through follow-on publications.