* 0311850
* Interactions between Algebra, Algebraic Geometry and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Rajesh Kulkarni, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 04/30/2006
* USD 65,474.00

In this proposal, the investigator and collaborators study problems
in&lt;br/&gt;algebra, algebraic geometry and topology. Three of these
projects&lt;br/&gt;study families of noncommutative algebras arising naturally
in various&lt;br/&gt;branches of algebra. The first project is to study finite
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;irreducible representations of Clifford algebras of forms
of higher&lt;br/&gt;degree. The approach in studying these algebras is to work
on a&lt;br/&gt;reformulation of the questions in terms of moduli spaces of
certain&lt;br/&gt;reflexive sheaves on hypersurfaces. Another goal is to
investigate&lt;br/&gt;arithmetic applications of these results. The second
project (joint&lt;br/&gt;with D. Chan) is continuation of previous work on
sheaves of maximal&lt;br/&gt;orders on complex, projective, algebraic surfaces.
The main goal is to&lt;br/&gt;classify various classes of such sheaves of
maximal orders. This work&lt;br/&gt;follows recently developed ideas in
noncommutative algebraic&lt;br/&gt;geometry. The third project (joint with A.
Ram) is to investigate&lt;br/&gt;whether the Springer correspondence can be set
up for rational&lt;br/&gt;Cherednik algebras along the lines of single graded
Hecke&lt;br/&gt;algebras. Another goal is to investigate whether these algebras
can be&lt;br/&gt;related to N. Wallach's approach to the Springer
correspondence. The&lt;br/&gt;last project (joint with M. Banagl) is to
investigate whether there&lt;br/&gt;exist self-dual sheaves compatible with the
intersection chain sheaves&lt;br/&gt;on reductive Borel-Serre compactifications
of locally symmetric spaces&lt;br/&gt;associated to semisimple algebraic groups
defined over rational&lt;br/&gt;numbers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last few
decades, the interaction between various branches of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics and
theoretical physics has proved to be especially&lt;br/&gt;enriching for all the
fields. One important thread in these&lt;br/&gt;connections has been algebraic
geometry, a very old subject that dates&lt;br/&gt;back at least to ancient
Greece. Algebraic geometry is the area of &lt;br/&gt;mathematics that studies
solutions to multi-variable polynomial &lt;br/&gt;equations as geometric
objects. It has found applications not only in&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, but also
in computer science, coding theory, robotics and&lt;br/&gt;string theory in
physics to name a few areas impacted by it. The first&lt;br/&gt;two projects of
this proposal use tools from this subject to study&lt;br/&gt;"algebras" that are
of interest to a wide range of mathematicians and&lt;br/&gt;physicists. It is
useful to describe the whole family of such classes&lt;br/&gt;of algebras as a
geometric object, and a goal of this project is to&lt;br/&gt;obtain such
descriptions. The third aspect of this research is part&lt;br/&gt;of a subject
called representation theory. The main objects of study&lt;br/&gt;here are
"representations", processes which encode information about&lt;br/&gt;symmetry
in nature. The last part of this proposal stands at the&lt;br/&gt;intersection
of three subjects: number theory (where number systems&lt;br/&gt;are studied),
representation theory, and topology. In topology spaces&lt;br/&gt;are studied to
determine which properties do not change under elastic&lt;br/&gt;deformations
such as twisting and stretching. The spaces to be&lt;br/&gt;studied in this
research encode number theoretic information. The goal&lt;br/&gt;is to
investigate whether there are invariants of these spaces
which&lt;br/&gt;themselves satisfy some symmetry.