* 0311814
* Femtosecond studies of the influence of solvent on chemical reaction dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Stephen Bradforth, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2007
* USD 438,543.00

&lt;br/&gt;In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Bradforth will perform research on the
chemical reaction dynamics in liquid solutions by means of femtosecond ultra
violet pump-probe spectroscopy over the wavelength range from 215 to 300
nanometers. The objective is to characterize how solvents modify and control the
reactivity of embedded small molecule solutes by dynamical effects such as
caging and energy dissipation. The project consists of several tasks, including
1) development of benchmark information on the electronic spectra and
reorientation dynamics of equilibrated radicals such as CN, I, and I*; 2) the
investigation of solute vibrational coherences initiated by electron ejection
via the charge-transfer-to-solvent detachment of the doubly-charged copper
bromide anion and related copper systems; and 3) photodissociation studies of
ICN and BrCN to explore the nature of bond breaking and thus how the large
rotational energy release of the fragments is initially dissipated. The proposed
work is directed toward the larger goal of testing fundamental theories of
solution kinetics, and providing a molecular picture for reactions in complex
media. This research will be conducted with students and postdoctoral research
associates.&lt;br/&gt;