* 0311257
* Vitalizing Electromagnetic Concepts To Enhance Relevancy: VECTOR
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* James West, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 07/31/2007
* USD 100,000.00

Electrical Engineering (55)-The Department of Electrical Engineering (ECEN) is
developing and implementing a two-course sequence in electromagnetic (EM) fields
based on proven teaching methods called VECTOR (Vitalizing Electromagnetic
Concepts To Obtain Relevancy). VECTOR is being built around three exemplary
modules: Module #1, "Electromagnetic Fields and Waves", is adapted from a model
developed at the University of California at Berkeley; Module #2, "Radio
Communication Circuits", is adapted from a model developed at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; and, Module #3, "Wireless and Circuits and Systems
Design", is adapted from a model developed at the University of South Florida.
Project goals are to make EM relevant to students. This is being done by
utilizing modern engineering tools and techniques to teach fundamental concepts,
by pipelining students into the electromagnetics-photonics curriculum, and by
evaluating VECTOR as a test-bed for future development of exemplary curricular
materials. This project meets a substantial number of the criteria that show
intellectual merit. VECTOR engages student teams in the design-build-test
development of a realistic product by ensuring relevancy of the activities by
including realistic product concepts and characteristics in the undergraduate EM
fields curriculum. Furthermore, VECTOR addresses the target audience by adapting
active learning techniques that are suitable for use in classes with large
enrollments, and by emphasizing the fundamental physical concepts of EM fields
rather than focusing only on rote analytic solutions. Assessment methods are
directly correlated with project goals. That is, multiple assessments are being
employed throughout the project period. For example, assessment of both student
learning and project implementation processes are aiding in determining critical
issues involved in the long-term sustainability of the VECTOR model. The
involved faculty has expertise in education, assessment, and the specific
pedagogies adapted. Thus, they are fully qualified to carry out the tasks of
this project. The broader impact of this project is addressed in specific
identified problems that exist at local and national levels, and by adapting
active learning techniques that have been demonstrated to increase the retention
of women and minorities in STEM degree programs. A modular approach is used in
the dissemination of the exemplary teaching materials.