* 0311945
* Mechanisms of Carbonate Dissolution By Boring Cyanobacteria
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Ferran Garcia-Pichel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2009
* USD 504,680.00

Among the many interactions between living organisms and the mineral world, the
formation and destruction of carbonates stands as one of the most conspicuous
and widespread, from microscale calcification in biofilms to the accretion of
coralline atolls. Biogenic carbonate precipitation has received the most
attention, but its dissolution can also be mediated by organisms, and by
microorganisms in particular. Fungi, microalgae and cyanobacteria that actively
bore into calcareous substrates have been known for more than a century, and
have been leaving fossils and trace fossils since the Precambrian. These boring
microorganisms are centrally implicated in a variety of geological phenomena,
ranging from the erosive morphogenesis of coastal limestones, the destruction of
coral reefs, the reworking of carbonaceous sands and the cementation of
stromatolites. But for all their significance, the mechanism by which they can
excavate carbonates in a controlled manner remains to be studied. The most
common hypothesis as to their action mechanisms has been that they dissolve
limestone by excretion of acids. However, we contend that, in the case of
photosynthetic organisms like cyanobacteria, their activity constitutes an
apparent paradox, since the dissolution of carbonates runs contrary to the well-
known geomicrobial effects of oxygenic photosynthetic metabolism, which will
tend to make the surrounding medium alkaline and therefore promote
calcification, not carbonate dissolution. One can say that boring cyanobacteria
are intriguing. We will test three alternative models than can explain
cyanobacterial boring and still be consistent with thermodynamic, physiological
and mineralogical constraints. Two models are based on the separation of
photosynthetic and respiratory activities (either temporally or spatially). The
third model is based on localized and directed cellular calcium transport. We
will undertake a three-tiered experimental approach using cultivated
microorganisms and well characterized mineral substrates that should offer
evidence regarding the validity of each of these models. We will use: a) long-
term monitoring of the rates of growth and boring with manipulations of various
environmental parameters, b) short-term studies of microscale mass transfer in
actively boring systems, including the effects of specific inhibitors, using
microsensors , and c) advance microscopy studies of active mineral /microbe
systems that offer both visual and micro-chemical information: laser scanning
confocal microscopy and secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS). The project also
entails significant educational and outreach activities. It calls for the
development of geomicrobiology materials for High School and K-12 educators, a
web page for the general public, and participation in yearly outreach
activities.