* 0311313
* Infusing Technology into Psychology:  A Bio-Psycho-Social Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Richard Straub, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2005
* USD 48,640.00

Psychology (71) (72) This project is creating enhancements in the psychology
curriculum to nurture students' appreciation of psychology as a science. It is
addressing several needs: (1) giving large and varied numbers of students
exposure to the scientific method by actively engaging them in research
demonstrations; (2) providing majors an opportunity to carry out research using
technical instrumentation actually employed by researchers; and (3) giving all
students the opportunity to understand psychology as an integrated set of sub-
disciplines. To achieve these goals, the department has acquired equipment for
three interconnected laboratories, one for each representative sub-discipline of
psychology. Each lab is being used to examine the same psychological phenomenon
from the unique perspective of its sub-discipline. Through this "bio-psycho-
social" approach, students are developing an improved understanding of the
interdisciplinary nature of psychology. The first demonstration module is using
eye-gaze to explore the relationships among physiological measures, non-verbal
cues, and empathic indicators of another's thoughts. As a result, students
develop competence in hypothesis generation, data collection, data analysis, and
report-writing, all while utilizing sophisticated technological instrumentation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is adapting the results of a similar project
at Carleton College carried out under NSF funding by Neil Lutsky and Julie
Neiworth (Grant number 9751519) to create demonstration modules for their
introductory and upper level psychology students using PC-based simulations and
connections to other related materials via the world-wide web. This project is
modifying the Lutsky and Neiworth approach by using laboratory equipment in
demonstrations and research rather than computer simulations. It is following
the American Psychological Association guidelines for improving undergraduate
education in psychology [J. S. Halonen et al., "National Guidelines and
Suggested Learning Outcomes for the Psychology Major," APA, Washington DC,
2002.] Among its intellectual merits, this project is invigorating the interest
of undergraduates in the conduct of scientific inquiry. Lower-level students are
now able to observe how measures in psychology are operationalized, analyzed,
and interpreted. Majors are developing more expertise in general methodology and
an improved understanding of psychology as a multidisciplinary science. This
project also is strengthening the relationship between teaching and research.
The early involvement of undergraduate majors in research is increasing their
motivation and knowledge to develop into independent researchers who will
eventually make scientific contributions in their own right. &lt;br/&gt;