* 0311121
* Fundamental Concepts for Information Gathering in Sensor Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Christian Scheideler, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2006
* USD 150,000.00

Wireless networks of sensors will be widely deployed in the future because they
greatly extend our ability to monitor and control the physical environment from
remote locations. One of the most important communication primitives that has to
be provided by sensor networks is information gathering: information from the
sensors has to be forwarded to a single point for evaluation. Since sensors will
exist with the ratio of thousands of nodes per user, it is impossible to pay
attention to any individual node. Hence, it is important to use communication
methods in sensor networks that are extremely simple - to allow a verification
of their correct implementation - and self-reconfiguring - to allow automatic
adjustments to changes in the sensor network or sensing tasks. Furthermore,
since sensors are simple devices with limited processing power, storage
capacity, and energy, it is important to develop routing strategies that can
support information gathering as efficiently as possible. Whereas many
heuristics have already been suggested for resource-efficient information
gathering in sensor networks, almost no rigorous theoretical work has been
performed in this area yet. Therefore, the goal of this project is to explore
fundamental concepts for self-reconfigurable and resource-efficient information
gathering in wireless sensor networks.

This project concentrates on networks of static sensors (i.e. sensors do not
move around, which is commonly the case). However, the observer may move around.
Also, connections between sensors may be available or unavailable depending on
the underlying medium access control protocol or temporary problems such as
obstacles. In addition, sensors may fail permanently due to energy problems. To
ensure that the network protocols developed in the project will work under any
circumstances, models are used in which the injections of packets, the status of
the edges, and the movements of the observer are assumed to be under adversarial
control. The challenge is to find distributed online protocols for this case -
i.e. protocols performing online decisions that can be executed locally at every
sensor - that have a near-optimal throughput using a near-minimum amount of
energy and storage. Simple protocols with these properties have recently been
developed and analyzed by the PI for specific cases (such as specific topologies
of sensors and a static observer), and the research goal of the project is to
establish analytical and experimental results for much more general cases.

A broad impact of the project is ensured by disseminating the research results
via lecture notes, conference and journal publications, presentations, and
publications on the Web. Furthermore, sensor networks is a highly
interdisciplinary field. It involves people from many different areas:
integrated circuits, signal processing, operating systems, and theoretical
computer science. The project will stimulate interactions of the PI with people
from these fields, which may lead to exciting interdisciplinary projects in the
future. Finally, since no standards have been set yet for communication in
sensor networks, a potential consequence of the project with high social benefit
will be to provide valuable contributions to future standards.