* 0311856
* Phantom Bursting Models and Complex Bursting Patterns in Pancreatic Islets
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Richard Bertram, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2007
* USD 127,298.00

Bertram&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and his colleagues study the behavior
of&lt;br/&gt;insulin-secreting pancreatic beta-cells. These cells display
a&lt;br/&gt;wide range of complex dynamics that are best understood with
the&lt;br/&gt;aid of mathematical modeling and analysis. The investigator
has&lt;br/&gt;recently developed a new mathematical model for beta-cells
that&lt;br/&gt;postulates an intracellular calcium subspace compartment
located&lt;br/&gt;between the endoplasmic reticulum and the cell membrane.
This&lt;br/&gt;model is based on recent data from a collaborating lab, and
is&lt;br/&gt;being further developed as new experiments are performed.
One&lt;br/&gt;direction of development involves the investigation of
complex&lt;br/&gt;electrical bursting patterns that are often observed
in&lt;br/&gt;pancreatic islets and isolated beta-cells. The
investigator&lt;br/&gt;determines, through mathematical modeling, whether these
complex&lt;br/&gt;rhythms are due to oscillations in glycolysis -- that is,
whether&lt;br/&gt;the coexistence of a membrane-driven bursting oscillator and
an&lt;br/&gt;endogenous glycolytic oscillator is consistent with the
published&lt;br/&gt;data, and with data from collaborating labs. One key
question&lt;br/&gt;that is addressed is whether these oscillators
involving&lt;br/&gt;glycolytic rhythms can be synchronized by electrical
coupling.&lt;br/&gt;This is a necessary condition since beta-cells are
electrically&lt;br/&gt;coupled in islets. Finally, the effects of stochasticity
through&lt;br/&gt;channel noise are investigated in both single-cell and
islet&lt;br/&gt;models. Channel noise is evident in the electrical patterns
of&lt;br/&gt;single beta-cells, and suppression of this noise
through&lt;br/&gt;elecrical coupling may play a key role in the more regular
and&lt;br/&gt;slower bursting patterns observed in islets.&lt;br/&gt; The study
of pancreatic islets, composed of beta-cells, is&lt;br/&gt;important for a
number of reasons. From a clinical viewpoint,&lt;br/&gt;they are key players in
normal glucose homeostasis. Because&lt;br/&gt;beta-cells are the only cells in
the body that make and secrete&lt;br/&gt;insulin, their malfunction leads to
type II or late-onset&lt;br/&gt;diabetes, the most prevalent form of the
disease. To understand&lt;br/&gt;what makes the cells malfunction, one must
first understand their&lt;br/&gt;normal functioning, which is the primary aim of
this work. From a&lt;br/&gt;biological viewpoint, beta-cells are of great
interest as the&lt;br/&gt;focal point of a number of biochemical and cellular
processes.&lt;br/&gt;They are similar in many ways to neurons, but have more
complex&lt;br/&gt;biochemical regulatory mechanisms. Thus, information gained
from&lt;br/&gt;the study of beta-cells largely transfers over to neurons,
as&lt;br/&gt;well as other secretory cells. Finally, from a
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;viewpoint, beta-cells display rich dynamics that can only
truly&lt;br/&gt;be understood with the aid of mathematics. Modeling and
anlysis&lt;br/&gt;of beta-cells has led to new mathematics, most of which can
and&lt;br/&gt;is being applied to the study of other bursting nerve
and&lt;br/&gt;endocrine cells. The investigator involves graduate
and&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students in the project, providing them
with&lt;br/&gt;research opportunities at the important interface
between&lt;br/&gt;biological and mathematical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;