* 0311398
* High Data Rate Wireless Networks: A Power Efficiency Perspective
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Behnaam Aazhang, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 06/30/2007
* USD 473,525.00

High Data Rate Wireless Networks: A Power Efficiency
Perspective&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;B. Aazhang and A.
Sabharwal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Rice University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last five
years, there has been a cultural shift from wired landlocked connectivity to
pervasive wireless information access. Most emerging mobile devices are now
equipped with some form of embedded wireless radio. The expectations of high
data rates and increased battery longevity have put tremendous pressure on all
aspects of wireless system design. To meet the challenges of next generation
wireless systems, there is a need for fundamentally new understanding in cross-
layer design as well as new methods which exploit all available dimensions for
optimizations. The following agenda outlines the key elements of the research
framework we are pursuing to &lt;br/&gt;achieve increased power efficiency while
simultaneously increasing system wide throughput.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
Fairness, delay and power efficiency: Traditionally network protocols address
throughput fairness&lt;br/&gt;among users and delay requirement of applications
while communication algorithms address location dependent reliability,
transceiver power, and channel access. This project develops a framework to
systematically analyze and design power efficient access and scheduling
protocols. Using short time scale channel variations along with source
burstiness, the minimal power opportunistic scheduler will meet delay
requirements while maintaining a system wide statistical
fairness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Scalable space-time codes: To achieve the
gains from packet and flow scheduling, it is critical that the physical layer
coding be able to serve the scheduled data rates. At the same time to achieve
high levels of spectral and power efficiency, it is important that the coding
methods exploit as much information available regarding the channel at the
transmitter. Thus, the design space targeted by this research project covers a
wide range of mobile speeds and channel conditions. In particular, space-time
codes are designed that have either imprecise or no channel information at the
receiver with no information at the transmitter, covering high to medium mobile
speed communications. And for low speed mobiles, the project addresses the
fundamental issues in the design of efficient feedback channels for space-time
coding methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Integration into wireless research
platform: The strong theoretical innovations for low power&lt;br/&gt;design are
tested on the rapid prototyping platform for multiple antenna systems at Rice
University. The end-to-end system design and development is stress tested, and
the power and spectral &lt;br/&gt;efficiency of the overall system is
quantified.&lt;br/&gt;The ongoing research paves the way to understand the
fundamental relationships among spectral efficiency, algorithm complexity, and
power consumption to increase the utility of wireless capable mobile devices and
to directly impact their emerging market. The broader impact of the project on
education is ensured by engaging a large number of undergraduate and graduate
students in projects in our laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;