* 0311592
* Collaborative Research:  Module-Based Computer Security Courses and Laboratory for Small and Medium Sized Universities
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Morris Liaw, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 05/31/2006
* USD 149,669.00

Computer Science (31) This collaborative project between the University of
Houston at Clear Lake and the University of Houston Downtown establishes a
curriculum model for the flexible adoption of computer security courseware by
nationwide computing programs. The curriculum model especially benefits
computing programs in smaller colleges/universities, where resources tend to be
limited. Intellectual merit is present in the model which consists of an array
of security modules, a majority of which are developed by this project and the
Distributed Computer Security Laboratory (DCSL), which consists of two remotely
connected labs. The labs are insulated from their respective campus backbone and
equipped with state-of-the-art instrumentations, including wireless and mobile
networks. The DCSL provides a shared platform where distributed security can be
rigorously studied. This model is an adaptation from the Information Systems and
Internet Security (ISIS) Lab at Polytechnic University of New York. The ISIS Lab
supports two courses: Computer Security and Network Security. Extensions to the
ISIS model include a module-based approach and new subject areas, such as
Wireless Security and Database Security. The broader impacts of the project
include: creation of the module-based model, enabling universities to select
modules and supporting courseware to create customized curriculum; and the
distributed lab model, enabling universities to build a distributed security lab
without interfering with their campus network.