* 0311055
* Signal Processing for Random Access: A Cross Layer Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Lang Tong, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2007
* USD 444,097.00

Abstract 0311055 Tong, Lang Cornell University - Endow

This research aims to develop novel random access techniques for two emerging
wireless applications: high data-rate wireless LAN for hot-spot access and
information extraction in large-scale and low-power sensor networks. For both
applications, conventional medium access control that assumes simplistic channel
model is one of the major performance bottlenecks The investigators explore new
cross-layer design strategies by exploiting tight interactions between signal
processing at the physical layer and the medium access control sublayer. The
research has two major themes. The first involves developing optimal medium
access strategies that capitalize the multi-packet reception capabilities of the
physical layer and provide capacity achieving random access. Signal processing
techniques are developed to maximize the stable throughput of users. Rate
allocations, quality of service requests, and pricing structures are designed
based on the characterization of the capacity and stability region of optimal
random access protocols. The second theme focuses on low power and energy
efficient random access for large-scale sensor networks. The cross-layer design
approaches take the form of utilizing channel state information at the physical
layer. Distributed, scalable random access protocols with low complexity are
investigated for th e sensor reach-back problem. Novel signal processing
techniques at the sensor node and the mobile access point are developed for
energy efficient medium access.