* 0311807
* Recovery Type A Posteriori Error Estimates
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Zhimin Zhang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 172,500.00

Zhang&lt;br/&gt; The investigator studies a posteriori error estimates
for&lt;br/&gt;the numerical solution of partial differential equations.
He&lt;br/&gt;develops general mathematical theory for recovery type
a&lt;br/&gt;posteriori error estimates and explores a new gradient
recovery&lt;br/&gt;technique and associated error estimator that has
better&lt;br/&gt;properties than the existing ones. Some recent
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;theory in finite element superconvergence, asymptotic
regularity,&lt;br/&gt;as well as improved interior analysis, is employed in
the&lt;br/&gt;project.&lt;br/&gt; Numerical solutions of differential equations
are essential&lt;br/&gt;in all areas of science and engineering. But the
numerical&lt;br/&gt;solutions are often less accurate than one desires. It
is&lt;br/&gt;therefore important to estimate the error and to use
that&lt;br/&gt;estimate to improve the accuracy. Error estimation is
essential&lt;br/&gt;for effective and reliable computation. Recovery type
a&lt;br/&gt;posteriori error estimates are post-processing techniques
that&lt;br/&gt;use a numerical solution produced by some base method to
produce&lt;br/&gt;approximations that are of higher order of accuracy than the
base&lt;br/&gt;method solution, and that combine the two solutions to
estimate&lt;br/&gt;the error in the approximate solution. The techniques are
common&lt;br/&gt;but not theoretically understood or justified, especially
for&lt;br/&gt;nonuniform meshes. The investigator studies these methods
and&lt;br/&gt;develops a new kind of recovery type error estimator that
offers&lt;br/&gt;some advantages over present alternatives. The project fills
a&lt;br/&gt;gap between engineering practice and mathematical
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;development. The project includes training of graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;There are interdisciplinary connections with engineers and
other&lt;br/&gt;scientific computing disciplines, and with
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;