* 0312479
* ITR:  Graphical Navigation of the Earth in Space and Time
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* William Thompson, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2007
* USD 367,830.00

Graphical Navigation of the Earth in Space and Time&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
explosion is occurring in the availability of on-line data relating to
archeology and related disciplines such as paleontology, geology, and
paleohydrology.&lt;br/&gt;Much of this is geometric information, either scanned
from the real world or hand-modeled. Our research aims at utilizing a variety of
tools from computer graphics to allow access to this data in a natural manner.
Our specific interest is in developing novel methods for displaying how cultural
artifacts change over time and space. Ultimately, we envision what amounts to a
spatial/temporal graphical browser for data related to the
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A session with the hypothetical system&lt;br/&gt;A
user's browser displays the view from the University of Utah over Salt Lake City
with the Great Salt Lake visible on the horizon. The images have the pen-and-ink
and watercolor style of architectural \presentation graphics" with detail and
texture indicated with just a few strokes, and most colors muted to make the
lines prominent. This is the same style used in most manuals and textbooks. The
user first moves across the rendered city in the air, looking down at the
bustling people and traffic. A particular building catches the user's eye. The
user clicks the mouse and a web browser brings up information known about the
building, such as its being built in 1870. The user adjusts the time indicator
back to 1870. Over the course of thirty seconds (based on the user's preference
settings and heuristics) the adjacent buildings come and go, and a trolley
system appears and disappears in front of the building.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The user is now in 1870 and has a much clearer view of the
lake to the west. The user moves to the lake, and can see moving water and small
amounts of human activity. The user now more aggressively moves backward in time
to 9000 B.C. and watches the shores of the lake fluctuate widely as the water
rises and falls. Now the user asks the system to "flag" areas where the database
has high densities of unsynthesized data. A flag appears to the west of the
lake. The user zooms to this and sees two caves. A click on the caves opens a
browser window that indicates the caves are the oldest known inhabited sites in
Utah, and were used over several thousand years by paleoindians. The user enters
Danger Cave, and observes a group of paleoindians preparing food over a
fire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The user now turns selects "uncertainty rendering".
Here objects in the database that are stored with a high confidence are rendered
with clean lines and detailed textures. Objects stored with low confidence are
drawn with sketchy lines and no color. For example, the petroglyphs near the
mouth of the cave still exist and thus have high confidence. Petroglyphs in the
back of the cave, if they existed, have been destroyed by rock fall and erosion.
They have been created speculatively by the archeologist based on other sites,
and are thus drawn with low confidence. Note that the system merely accesses
archaeologic data. More sophisticated archaeologic uses would be done by other
programs, just as the current Web is not used for general data manipulation. The
user now exits the cave and asks for the nearest significant events in the past
and future near the cave. In the future is shown the arrival of agriculture in
the area around 200 A.D. In the past is shown the draining of Lake Bonneville
around 10,000 B. C. Here the ancestor of the Great Salt Lake, spanning most of
the state of Utah and having an average depth of hundreds of feet, lost most of
its water volume through a collapsed narrow pass into the Snake River. The user
selects the beginning of the past event and can see the shores of the giant
lake, and a variety of wildlife including mammoths and giant land sloths. Still
in uncertainty mode, there are also a few sketchily drawn humans; it is debated
whether paleoindians were present in Utah that early in time. A visual flag
indicates an interesting feature to the North. The user can go witness the site
of the landslide.&lt;br/&gt;By selecting the end of the flood, the user over
thirty seconds can watch the inland sea drain, and the shorelines vastly
contract. Finally, the user can zoom back to the present day to see the current
cultural features and distant lake.&lt;br/&gt;