* 0312439
* Supercooled Large Drop Formation by Ultragiant Particles in Wintertime Stratiform Clouds during the Second Alliance Icing Research Study (AIRS II)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Sonia Lasher-Trapp, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 201,089.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;ATM-
0312439&lt;br/&gt;Lasher-Trapp, Sonia&lt;br/&gt;Purdue
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Supercooled Large Drop Formation by Ultragiant
Particles in Wintertime Stratiform Clouds During AIRS
II&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports the participation of Dr. Lasher-
Trapp in the AIRS II project (second Alliance Icing Research Study), a
collaboration of American, Canadian, and European agencies and institutions
motivated by the important practical problem of aircraft icing. The AIRS field
program is scheduled for the winter of 2003-04 and based at Mirabel Airport,
north of Montreal, Canada, where a surface observing network and ground-based
remote-sensing equipment will be located. Dr. Lasher-Trapp and her colleagues
will be responsible for cloud microphysical observations aboard the NSF C-130
aircraft operating out of Cleveland, Ohio. The main scientific objective is to
explain the circumstances by which regions of supercooled cloud can form and
continue to exist though ice crystals may also be present. The C-130 will be
equipped for measuring the water content and ice content of clouds; the
concentration, size, habit, and density of ice crystals; the concentration of
ice-forming nuclei; the activity spectrum of cloud condensation nuclei (CCN);
and the concentration and characteristics of aerosol particles both within the
project area and in the air upstream of where the clouds of interest form. Dr.
Lasher-Trapp will work with various optical and impaction particle sensors to
determine the concentration, sizes, and composition (solid or liquid) of
"ultragiant" particles (UGP) - those with equivalent spherical diameters greater
than about 10 micrometers. Such particles are known sometimes to play a part in
the formation of rain by the condensation-coalescence process in clouds that are
too warm to contain ice, but they have not been systematically studied or even
observed in clouds containing ice crystals or supercooled water. It has been
conjectured that UGP may account for recently reported observations of
supercooled drops larger than 50 micrometers in wintertime clouds - drops large
enough to be a major cause of aircraft icing. Measurements are planned in AIRS
II that will provide information on particles ranging from smaller than 10
micrometers up to 0.6 mm. The data will be analyzed to determine if there is a
correspondence between the concentration of UGP measured outside of the cloud
and the concentration of large supercooled drops within. If so, the presence of
UGP may explain how supercooled drops can grow to large size even at the
supercooled temperatures where they might be expected to freeze or, if ice
crystals are also present, to evaporate as the crystals grow by diffusion from
the vapor. The research contributes not only to the fundamental understanding of
the microphysical structure of supercooled clouds but also to the advancement of
aviation safety.&lt;br/&gt;