* 0312019
* Computational Fluid Dynamics in Chemical Reaction Engineering III Conference; Davos, Switzerland; May 25-30, 2003
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2004
* Rodney Fox, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2004
* USD 25,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Despite the widespread use of Computational Fluid Dynamics
(CFD) in industry, there is still a lack of fully validated predictive CFD
models of many relevant transport phenomena in Chemical Reaction Engineering
(CRE), especially in the field of multiphase flows and complex reacting flows.
The CFD in CRE conferences provide a unique forum for cross-fertilization
between CFD model developers and industrial practitioners in order to advance
the state of the art and prioritize research needs. CFD in CRE conferences are
the only scientific meeting that focuses on CFD research in chemical
engineering, in general, and chemical reaction engineering, in particular. Thus,
it provides a unique and valuable forum for U.S. academic, governmental and
industrial researchers to discuss limitations of current CFD models and to
explore new research avenues and application areas with colleagues from around
the globe. Promoting the exchange of ideas among leading researcher groups in
this field will not only favorably impact the future growth of CFD in the U.S.
chemical and pharmaceutical industries, but should ultimately result in more
efficient and cleaner technologies and an improved way of life for the society
as a whole.

Broader Impact: NSF.s travel support for CFD in CRE III to be held in Davos,
Switzerland, May 25- 30, 2003, will make it possible for up to twenty young
researchers from the USA to attend the meeting by covering travel costs. NSF
funding will allow these young researchers to profit by listening to state-of-
the-art review talks and research papers and from the opportunity to interact
with their fellow researchers in the area. The public at large will
significantly benefit by the advancement of CFD tools for the chemical reaction
engineering field as a whole and the use of the new ideas generated for the
development of more efficient and environmentally friendlier technologies for
the production of fuels, materials and chemicals.