* 0312173
* SBIR Phase I:  A Bioinformatics System for GCxGC-MS (Comprehensive Two-Dimensional Gas Chromography)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Stephen Reichenbach, GC Image, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a bioinformatics system for analyzing data from comprehensive two-
dimensional gas chromatography with mass spectrometry (GCxGC-MS). Comprehensive
two-dimensional gas chromatography (GCxGC) is an emerging technology that
provides a multiplicative increase in separation capacity over traditional GC.
Mass spectrometry (MS) is a promising tool for computer- assisted and automated
analyses of the incredibly complex GCxGC separations, but there is no
bioinformatics software designed for working with the data generated by GCxGC-
MS. The Phase I project will undertake both experimental and theoretical
investigations of graphical user-interfaces for GCxGC-MS data; methods for on-
line handling of large GCxGC-MS data-sets ; a language for manipulating GCxGC-MS
data ; and schemes for structuring GCxGC-MS data and metadata. A prototype
system will demonstrate the significance of GCxGC-MS data analyses for
identifying toxic chemicals in complex environmental and health-care
assays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial application of this
project is in the area of scientific software for GC x GC-MS. Commercial
applications of GC include analyses of petroleum and chemical processing,
environmental samples, foods and beverages, fragrances, health-related tests,
pharmaceuticals, and toxins (including chemical warfare agents). The
availability of software for computer-assisted and automated recognition of
chemical components from GCxGC-MS data will facilitate adoption of GCxGC
technology in laboratories using traditional GC and will contribute to the
development of new markets which require superior separation
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;