* 0312503
* ITR:  Collaborative Research:  Reconfigurable Architectures for Bio-Molecular Detection:  Modeling, Experimentation, and Optimization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Julie Stenken, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2007
* USD 72,026.00

Project Title:

Principal Investigator (Duke University): Krishnendu Chakrabarty Co-Principal
Investigator (Duke University): Richard B. Fair

Principal Investigator (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute): Julie Stenken

Abstract:

The scope of this project includes the high-level modeling of biosensors and
detectors, laboratory experiments on bio-molecular detection, and optimization
techniques for system design. An optimized, system-level architecture is being
incorporated into a chip design that will demonstrate a bio-chemical assay
sequence to identify a specific target. Research is focused on high-speed
fluidic and molecular transport of a variety of biological and chemical
substances by surface-tension actuation in the form of micro-droplets, as well
as subsequent detection of these substances through array or decision-tree
architectures. A series of simple tests are being devised to rapidly narrow the
set of possible bio-chemical agents. Techniques are being developed to map these
tests and the associated control/decision mechanism on a droplet-based
microfluidic architecture. The project is planned as a collaborative, multi-
disciplinary effort involving Duke University and Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute. Researchers at Duke University are investigating modeling,
optimization, and microfludics-based on-chip bio-chemical assays. Researchers at
Rensselaer are studying enzymatic assays and assay chemistry for a limited set
of target analytes.

The outcome of the proposed research is expected to be a set of reconfigurable,
droplet-based biomolecular detection microsystem architectures with bio-
molecular detection sites and a collection of detection criteria allowing a
decision flow path to be programmed into the system by a set of decision rules.
Advances in system design will lead to the availability of inexpensive
microsystems that offer an early warning capability to combatants and citizens
alike, before they take their next breath. The proposed research can also
contribute to heath care, e.g., through field clinics that can provide rapid
detection and identification of harmful pathogens. Finally, this project serves
as an important bridge between three different research communities:
microfluidics, circuit design, and analytical chemistry, and it fosters
interdisciplinary research and collaboration.

