* 0312407
* ITR Computational Design and Optimization of Novel Multiferroics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Nicola Spaldin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2007
* USD 240,000.00

This award was made on a 'small' category proposal submitted in response to the
ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports computational and theoretical research
and education aiming to elucidate novel phenomena in multifunctional materials.
Based on the understanding obtained, the PI will attempt to design new materials
with specific functionality. Research will focus on magnetoelectric materials,
in particular magnetically ordered ferroelectrics. Specific questions that will
be addressed by this work include: (1) What is the origin of the unusual
ferroelectricity in the antiferromagentic hexagonal perovskite manganites? (2)
Are these 'alternative' ferroelectric materials more widespread, and can our
understanding of them be used to design novel ferroelectric materials? (3) Does
a self-interaction corrected exchange-correlation functional predict the
properties of magnetic materials accurately within the density functional
formalism? Among the methods that the PI will use is a combination of standard
density functional theory and density functional linear response
implementations. The PI will contribute to extensions of density functional
theory methods, including developing a self-interaction-corrected improvement to
the exchange-correlation functional and incorporating spin-orbit coupling into
the plane-wave pseudopotential formalism. Computer codes developed in the course
of this work will be made available to the broader materials community. %%% This
award was made on a 'small' category proposal submitted in response to the ITR
solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports computational and theoretical research and
education on a class of multifunctional or smart materials that are at once
ferroelectric and magnetic. The research will use computational methods and
involves developing new algorithms to extend and improve density functional
theory based methods. Resulting computer codes will be made available to the
broader materials science community. Magnetoelectronic multiferroic materials
have potential applications to spintronics and computer memory media and may
impact future generations of information technology. This award involves
graduate level education and helps to train the next generation of computational
materials scientists. ***

















