* 0312724
* ITR Collaborative Research: Compressed Search and Retrieval for Very Large Text and Image Repositories
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Amar Mukherjee, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2007
* USD 246,000.00

We propose to develop efficient techniques for search and retrieval for very
large text and image repositories. We will develop algorithms to perform
compressed domain exact and approximate pattern matching on text and images,
when the compression is based on the family of algorithms that depend on sorted
contexts. We will also investigate compressed pattern search for context-based
predictive image compression schemes, although the contexts used by these
algorithms are not sorted contexts. We will develop search-aware compression
schemes that will support compressed-domain search directly on the compressed
data with minimal or no decompression of the compressed data. We will also
develop software tools and create an integrated global compression/search
utility website for lossless compression of text and images and for efficient
search of large collections directly in their compressed form. We will develop
compressed domain search engines using compressed keywords or inversion
dictionaries to expedite search operations for terabyte scale text and image
repositories. The broader impact of the proposed activity of this research will
be efficient utilization of storage, computation and communication resources.
Graduate students will be trained in doing research and state-of-the-art
knowledge in data compression and information retrieval technology will be
transferred to classrooms