* 0312668
* ITR:    Web Development by Nonprogrammers
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,10/31/2003
* Mary Beth Rosson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 10/31/2003
* USD 225,750.00

EIA - 0312668&lt;br/&gt;Mary Beth Rosson&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Virginia
Polytechnic Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Web Development by
Nonprogrammers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ITR small award provides
support to study web development by nonprogrammers and to develop and evaluate a
web development tool for nonprogrammers. Particular emphasis in the evaluation
is placed on determination of differences as a function of gender including an
analysis of gender related characteristics of user needs and expectations for
end-user programming and an assessment of the extent to which males and females
respond to the end-user programming tools that are developed. Pilot studies have
shown that substantial numbers of workers without programming skills are
involved in web-based development and that many of the nonprogrammers are
limited by the difficulties inherent in interactive web development. This
project addresses this situation by analyzing nonprogrammers' needs and
expectations and then developing and evaluating a web development tool for
nonprogrammers in which construction and the use of the web application are
interleaved and seamless. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project lies in its sound conceptual basis and its focus on nonprogrammers
rather than the more prevalent analyses and tools that are oriented towards
programmers. The investigators have a solid track record with significant prior
work on which to build this study. The most important results may be the
research findings that characterize needs and use patterns of the non-programmer
user groups for developers and project managers. The evaluative research and the
resulting tools have the potential to inform or influence the development of new
commercial products oriented towards the non-programmer user
class.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has broader impacts in many areas beyond
the transferability to commercial product development. The studies on gender
differences in needs and tool use are fundamental to providing workplace support
for a large sector of the workforce. Many non-programmers are routinely required
to participate in projects with web development components. This research could
lead to the development of tools and workplace environments that are more
inclusive of individuals without significant programming expertise. This would
allow a broader sector of the population to contribute their expertise and
visions in meaningful ways through web media as productive members of the
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a problem and area of
real need. Currently there are few tools geared towards nonprogrammers despite
the growing demand for them by many sectors of the workforce. The research
should show developers how nonprogrammers think and operate and thus help them
optimize tools to support this sector of the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;