* 0312791
* ITR:  Quantum Information and Communication Using Massive Etanglement of Collective Variables
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Nicholas Bigelow, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 08/31/2006
* USD 433,000.00

Central to the concepts of quantum information (QI), communication and
computation is the idea of quantum entanglement. An important task for the QI
field is to develop the ability to control and transmit an unknown quantum state
from one system to another and to create entanglement between separate quantum
systems, particularly for the case where the second system is at some distant
location. Most current quantum information network schemes rely on coupling
quantum information flow through photonic channels while using massive particle
systems for quantum information storage and manipulation. Recently, a great deal
of attention has turned to a new possibility: the use of continuous, collective
quantum variables for quantum information applications. An atomic entanglement
scheme based on this concept has the attractive feature that continuous variable
entanglement is realized in a vapor of many millions of atoms using simple set-
ups using only coherent laser light generated from simple diode lasers. The
research project supported by this award is based on such a scheme, the
entanglement of spins of ground-state neutral atoms. The work is dedicated to
studying various fundamental aspects of the entanglement process and its
application to problems such as entangled wavelength multiplexing.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;As optical and electronic systems are miniaturized to smaller and
smaller scales, it is natural that quantum mechanics will become an essential
feature of information engineering. Hence, studies of quantum systems must be an
integral part of the national goal of developing tools for nanoscience
information technologies. &lt;br/&gt;