* 0312680
* Simulations of Strongly Correlated Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Mark Jarrell, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2008
* USD 496,000.00

The focus of this theoretical research is on strongly correlated systems,
together with courseware development and the dissemination and documentation of
research related codes. The research will involve the continued development of
cluster mean field techniques and will focus on unconventional superconductors
such as the cuprates and organic superconductors, the effect of disorder, spin-
orbit coupling and correlations in the spintronic material GaMnAs, and the
effect of non-local correlations on exhaustion and ferromagnetism in heavy
Fermion materials. The related calculations will be carried out on massively
parallel computers. Related scientific courseware will continue to be developed.
Scientific and educational results will be readily accessible on the web.

The research addresses areas of significant scientific and social impact.
Superconductivity has important applications, such as medical diagnostic
equipment and ultra-high-performance electronic communication filters. Many more
uses are possible if the transition temperatures are high enough. Ferromagnetic
semiconductors have great promise for the development of spintronic devices
where both the electronic charge and spin are used in devices with new
functionalities. The role of exhaustion and origin of ferromagnetism in heavy
Fermion materials remain topics of great interest and even controversy. The
cluster mean field formalism being developed has broad applications from
correlated ordered systems to disordered materials.

Apart from the publication of results in physics journals, the impact of this
research is enhanced through the development of new computational algorithms
with broad applications, and more directly through the distribution of examples
of these codes on the PI's website and on public repositories of scientific
software such as the MCC Software Archive. Distributed codes include Maximum
Entropy codes for analytic continuation, and dynamical mean field and dynamical
cluster Quantum Monte Carlo codes.

Education is heavily integrated into this project, both through the support of
graduate students, encouraging them to attend meetings, and more importantly
through the development of NSF-sponsored courseware distributed on the website.
Two complete courses are available, which are used to teach both upper-level
undergraduate courses as well as introductory graduate courses in Solid State
Physics and Electrodynamics. In addition to the usual materials, these courses
emphasize modern computational techniques.

Courseware that demonstrates the most basic use of computers in science is being
developed for middle and high school. Inner-city public school teachers who
participate in the "Physics by Inquiry" programs at Cincinnati will learn to use
it during the summer, and bring it back to their students in the fall, assisted
by NSF-supported graduate students. %%% The focus of this theoretical research
is on strongly correlated systems, together with courseware development and the
dissemination and documentation of research related codes. Education is heavily
integrated into this project, both through the support of graduate students,
encouraging them to attend meetings, and more importantly through the
development of NSF-sponsored courseware distributed on the website. Courseware
that demonstrates the most basic use of computers in science is being developed
for middle and high school. ***