* 0312097
* Theoretical Studies of Inhomogeneous Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Glenn Fredrickson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2006
* USD 324,000.00

A comprehensive theoretical and computational investigation of the equilibrium
properties on inhomogeneous polymers will be carried out. The research will
build on the recent developments by the PI and co-workers on the field-theoretic
computer simulation (FTS) method, enabling numerical investigations of field
theory models of polymers and complex fluids without any simplifying assumptions
such as the mean-field approximation. The research will have the following
components: (1) Foundations of the FTS method: This will include development of
improved algorithms for solving the complex diffusion equation central to the
method and development of efficient numerical schemes for time integration of
the complex Langevin equations used to implement chemical potential field
updates. Real-space renormalization group theory will also be applied to isolate
lattice cutoff effects and to enable systematic coarse-graining of polymer
solution models. (2) Micelle phases in copolymer alloys: The FTS method will be
applied to investigate micelle formation in block copolymers-homopolymer blends
near mesophase unbinding transitions, where mean-field theory is expected to
fail. (3) Block and graft copolymer systems with chemical disorder: Simplified
models of poydisperse star-block and graft-block copolymers will be constructed
in which both annealed and quenched disorder averages can be exactly carried
out. The models will be numerically and analytically investigated to study the
differences in self-assembly behavior between systems with the two types of
disorder, the role of fluctuation effects, and the existence of compositional
glass transitions. The overall objective is to gain a fundamental understanding
of how chemical disorder, unavoidable in commercial copolymer materials,
influences structure and thermodynamics. (4) Defect control in thin copolymer
films: Translational and bond-orientational order will be examined in FTS
simulations of block copolymer films with special perimeter boundary conditions.
The results will be used to assess the efficacy of graphoepitaxy for creating
defect-free copolymer films that can be used in ultra-high density patterning of
advanced electronic, optical, and magnetic devices. The research will be closely
coupled with experiments in the laboratory of E.J. Kramer at UCSB.

The research will involve training of graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers. The fundamental understanding gained through this project will be
leveraged through a new Complex Fluids Design Consortium at UCSB, an industry-
national lab-academic partnership that will address computational design of
industrial polymer and complex fluid formulations. %%% A comprehensive
theoretical and computational investigation of the equilibrium properties on
inhomogeneous polymers will be carried out. The research will involve training
of graduate students and post-doctoral researchers. The fundamental
understanding gained through this project will be leveraged through a new
Complex Fluids Design Consortium at UCSB, an industry-national lab-academic
partnership that will address computational design of industrial polymer and
complex fluid formulations. ***