* 0312611
* ITR Collaborative Research:  Modeling and Mitigation of Communication-Delay Effects on Load Balancing in Large-Scale Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Chaouki Abdallah, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Jie Wu
* 12/31/2006
* USD 192,246.00

This is a collaborative proposal between The University of New Mexico (UNM) and
The University of Tennessee-Knoxville (UTK) for modeling, optimization and
testing of a innovative load balancing strategies in large-scale, distributed-
computing systems consisting of geographically-distant computational elements
(CEs).

Intellectual Merit: With the emergence of large-scale distributed-computing
systems that utilize a shared communication medium between the CEs, there is a
need for accurately understanding the effect of delay in information transport
on the functionality and control of these systems. Such distributed systems may
include networks of mobile CEs, CEs that are connected through the Internet, or
CEs that are distributed over different states or countries (representing
various data bases, for example). Due to the physical distance between nodes in
large-scale distributed systems, communication and load-transfer activity among
the nodes is infested with tangible, random delays. This behavior is unlike what
is ordinarily assumed in localized distributed systems, for which the
constituent CEs are within proximity of each other, benefiting from a dedicated
fast communication medium. Both intuition and our Monte-Carlo simulation
definitively indicate that the presence of such communication and load-transfer
delays in distributed systems can lead to the failure of traditional load
balancing algorithms. Thus, a delay-inclusive analytical framework is needed for
the dynamics of task computing, and it is within such a framework that the
development and optimization of delay-inclusive load-balancing policies can be
realized.

The objectives of this program are to develop a general analytical framework for
modeling the stochastic dynamics of delay-infested distributed systems and
utilize it to develop load-balancing strategies that mitigate the performance
degradation or failure caused by communication and load-transfer delays. The
modeling is developed within a novel, regeneration-based queuing framework, and
the load-balancing optimization will be carried out by means of statistical
learning and stochastic prediction. The load-balancing strategies developed in
this program will be tested in a physical distributed-system environment with
realistic delays. To do so, a distributed-computing test-bed will be developed
and deployed connecting existing data searching computers at UTK with a
miniature clone system to be developed at UNM.

Broader Impact: The work proposed here is motivated by (but not limited to)
practical, pressing issues arising in the current work done by the Co-PIs (at
UTK) on The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) National DNA Index System
(NDIS) and its Combined DNA Index System (CODIS) software. The projected growth
of this NDIS database and in the demand for searches of its contents
necessitates migration to a parallel computing platform, and potentially to
large-scale distributed systems, where the database is distributed or duplicated
over geographically distant centers which are connected by means of a bandwidth-
limited shared communication medium. The outcomes of this program will not only
benefit the above systems but also a broad range of public, private and
government database systems that perform searches over distributed sites. The
proposed research will also be utilized to improve the operation of large-scale
virtual laboratories. The Electrical and Computer Engineering Department at UNM
has created an efficient way for the remote control of instruments and
simulations over the Internet. This approach is applicable to both industry and
distance education, and it is currently operational and accessible for
designated users. However, this platform has not been tested with a large number
of users in a real, distributed environment. The methodology in this research
will be applied to enhance the performance of the existing educational platform
and scale up its reach to a large network of institutions worldwide. This
activity will also provide tremendous training opportunities in state-of-the-art
information technology for graduate and undergraduate students.