* 0312718
* Macromolecular Structure Database (MSD)
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Helen Berman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2009
* USD 30,053,422.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Protein Data Bank (PDB) is the single international repository
and primary source for information about the structure of biological
macromolecules. As such, it is a key research resource and a central component
to our understanding of living systems. The PDB serves a broad community of
experimental, structural and computational scientists and serves as a resource
for educators at all levels. PDB access is provided through primary web and ftp
sites (www.pdb.org, ftp.pdb.org) or via 7 mirror sites distributed worldwide.
The goal of the Research Collaboratory for Structural Biology (RCSB) in managing
PDB is to provide a single, searchable archive of accurate and well-annotated
data on experimentally determined macromolecular structure. Systems developed by
RCSB are currently being used for data processing, archiving, distribution and
query, as well as maintenance of the physical archive. In the current project
period, new activities are planned as follows. First, data processing is being
improved by increasing accuracy and speed of processing, ensuring that the
entire archive is as uniform and error free as possible, and creating the
infrastructure to support automated data deposition and exchange functions.
Second, data archiving, distribution and query capabilities are being improved
by implementing a new system for distribution and archiving of all PDB data, and
enabling comprehensive structural data analyses regardless of geographic
location, local hardware, or software configuration. Finally, completion and
maintenance of a comprehensive physical archive is being undertaken to ensure
the preservation of primary data and of all records associated with the
transactions of the database including documents describing its evolution and
maintenance. The result of this effort will be a significant improvement in the
utility and value of the Protein Data Bank for both specialists and non-
specialists alike. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanisms for increasing the broader
impacts of this work include the following: a series of workshops and meeting
sessions, active participation in scientific meetings, a regular newsletter, the
on-going use of a help desk to increase the access and utility of PDB for the
specialist and non-specialist research community, and use of focus groups to
insure maximum usability of PDB data. Participation in graduate and
undergraduate coursework design and implementation and in structured research
opportunities is being used to increase the impact of PDB on university-level
education. Participation in teacher training workshops and a collaborative
effort to launch a teacher development program provide opportunities to bring
PDB resources to the K/12 environment. The general public is being made aware of
PDB efforts through a traveling art exhibit and through frequent news releases
and informational programs. Collectively, these efforts will extend the benefits
of PDB resources and activities to the broadest possible
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;