* 0312701
* ITR:    Post-Silicon Validation and Diagnosis Based Upon Statistical Delay Models
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Li-Chung Wang, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

As the manufacturing technologies move toward nanometer ranges, one of the major
challenges is to ensure consistency between the behavior expected of a design
and its actual behavior in a real silicon chip. Due to Deep Sub-Micron (DSM)
effects such as process variations, small defects, and electrical noise, it has
become increasingly difficult to predict the design's timing behavior on
silicon, or to guarantee such timing behavior before the design goes into
production. To avoid slowdowns in manufacturing, the industry needs novel post-
silicon validation and diagnosis tools that will effectively resolve the
inconsistency between a design model and its implementation on a silicon chip.
To meet the challenge, the PIs propose novel statistical approaches that will
better model, and more accurately simulate, the timing behavior of a device. The
PIs propose three research components in this project to be integrated with
their planned educational activities: (1) diagnosis of timing problems, (2)
post-silicon validation and debugging, and (3) prediction of timing quality. In
diagnosis, techniques will be developed to locate timing problems on faulty
chips, determining whether these problems may be due to manufacturing defects.
In validation and debugging, techniques will be developed to ensure consistency
between the timing behavior of models used to design a chip and that which is
observed during the manufacturing process. For the third component, prediction
of timing quality, techniques will be developed to draw statistical inference
about the timing quality level in the stages of mass production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will complement other research
efforts in the modeling of DSM circuits and process variations by taking the
analysis to a more abstract level. Rather than dealing directly with transistors
and wires, the proposed tools will operate on correlated random variables that
model the timing behavior of transistors and wires. This project will facilitate
the development of practical tools for large and complex designs. When the
proposed statistical tools and methodologies become available, chip designers
can relax the metrics of various parameters in order to obtain the best design
tradeoff, thus pushing manufacturing technologies to the cutting edge. When
silicon's timing problems can be more effectively detected and better
understood, companies can avoid wasting resources in struggling with
manufacturing uncertainties and devote these resources to more productive
uses.&lt;br/&gt;