* 0312471
* ITR:     Extraction and Interpretation of Information from Large-Scale Hyperspectral Data for Mapping and Monitoring Wetland Ecosystems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Melba Crawford, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 07/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This award will provide for the development of a comprehensive system that can
efficiently and intelligently extract, analyze and manage very large
hyperspectral datasets used for classifying a large variety of land covers in
environmentally sensitive ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hyperspectral data
provide unprecendented spectral resolution which can translate to far superior
characterization of remotely sensed areas, but pose significant challenges
because of the large data volumes, high dimensionality, little labelled data and
large number of potential land cover types or classes. These challenges are
being addressed by new adaptive feature space reduction methods that exploit
spectral correlations, by semi-supervised and active learning methods for
dealing with small training sets, and by knowledge reuse and transfer mechanisms
that adapt models developed for one area to new regions with related
characteristics. In parallel, a knowledge repository that helps rapidly identify
the most pertinent features/classes for a given area, will be built to
substantially reduce data storage requirements and processing
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This inter-disciplinary project requires tight
interaction between data acquisition and processing/analysis, and will provide
insights for other engineering problems as well. The visual nature of results
from analysis of remotely sensed data make it a powerful modality of introducing
the general population to issues of broad concern, such as the impact of global
warming and disaster management. Finally, the knowledge transfer mechanisms will
be useful for rapidly adapting existing solutions to somewhat different but
related problems, thus substantially increasing the utility of existing point
solutions in several application domains.&lt;br/&gt;