* 0312189
* X-Ray Microbeam Studies of Electromigration
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2008
* George Cargill, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 12/31/2008
* USD 505,375.00

The grant explores to advance understanding of electromigration in copper-based
conductor lines similar to those used in advanced integrated circuits through
studies based on x-ray microbeam diffraction and fluorescence and other
experimental techniques, together with microstructure-dependent, grain scale
models, and numerical simulations. The objective of the study is to investigate
the role of interface and grain boundary structure, composition, grain
orientations, and strain in electromigration. The aim is to examine if the
phenomenological descriptions of electromigration, which have been widely
applied to electromigration in Al-based conductor lines, are also valid for
electromigration in Cu-based conductor lines. Along with exploring the role of
impurities in electromigration for Cu-based conductor lines, the research
includes detailed, three-dimensional models at the grain scale to test model
assumptions by comparison with experimental results. In addition, the relevance
will be examined of currently available ab initio calculations of Z* to
electromigration phenomena which are now experimentally accessible in Cu-based
conductor lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research results are applicable to
advanced microelectronic packaging utilizing Cu-interconnects. Through
cooperation between research groups at Lehigh University and at Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, and through contacts with various collaborators at IBM
and at Oak Ridge, Brookhaven, and Argonne National Laboratories, graduate
students will gain experience with theoretical and experimental methods used in
studying electromigration, and they will learn to work in university,
industrial, and government laboratory environments. Undergraduates will
participate through a research option course at Lehigh for seniors who are
considering graduate studies, a computational methods course at RPI, and as
summer interns at Lehigh and RPI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;The grant explores to advance understanding of electromigration in
copper-based conductor lines similar to those used in advanced integrated
circuits through studies based on x-ray microbeam diffraction and fluorescence
and other experimental techniques, together with microstructure-dependent, grain
scale models, and numerical simulations. The objective of the study is to
investigate the role of interface and grain boundary structure, composition,
grain orientations, and strain in electromigration. The aim is to examine if the
phenomenological descriptions of electromigration, which have been widely
applied to electromigration in Al-based conductor lines, are also valid for
electromigration in Cu-based conductor lines. Along with exploring the role of
impurities in electromigration for Cu-based conductor lines, the research
includes detailed, three-dimensional models at the grain scale to test model
assumptions by comparison with experimental results. In addition, the relevance
will be examined of currently available ab initio calculations of Z* to
electromigration phenomena which are now experimentally accessible in Cu-based
conductor lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research results are applicable to
advanced microelectronic packaging utilizing Cu-interconnects. Through
cooperation between research groups at Lehigh University and at Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, and through contacts with various collaborators at IBM
and at Oak Ridge, Brookhaven, and Argonne National Laboratories, graduate
students will gain experience with theoretical and experimental methods used in
studying electromigration, and they will learn to work in university,
industrial, and government laboratory environments. Undergraduates will
participate through a research option course at Lehigh for seniors who are
considering graduate studies, a computational methods course at RPI, and as
summer interns at Lehigh and RPI.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;