* 0312279
* Novel Components of Brassinosteroid Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Jia Li, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2006
* USD 324,323.00

Brassinosteroids are plant hormones that perform a fundamental role in
coordinating growth and development. The Arabidopsis gene, Brassinosteroid
Insensitive 1 (BRI1), encodes a receptor-like protein kinase (RLK), which is a
critical component in brassinosteroid-mediated signaling. Using activation
tagging, we identified a gene can suppress the growth defects of a mutant bri1
allele. This bri1 suppressor, BRS1, is predicted to encode a secreted serine
carboxypeptidase. Elevated expression of BRS1 suppresses two bri1 alleles that
have mutations in their extracellular domain, but not a kinase domain mutation.
Genetic and physiological data strongly suggest BRS1 regulates an early step in
brassinosteroid signaling. In many signal transduction pathways proteolytic
processing plays an important role in regulating signal perception and
transduction. We hypothesize that BRS1 is involved in a proteolytic processing
step in the BRI1 signaling pathway. To test this hypothesis, we propose to
undertake a detailed characterization of BRS1, including its cellular and
subcellular localization, and analysis of its enzymatic activity. In addition,
BRS1 is a member of a gene family. To examine a possible involvement of BRS1 and
the BRS1-like genes in BRI1 and other RLK signaling pathways, we will use
genetic approaches to investigate their function. These studies will contribute
to our understanding of brassinosteroid signaling and other RLK mediated
processes that control growth and development in plants.