* 0312223
* PDE-based Image Restoration:  Efficient Numerical Algorithms and Software Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Sung Kang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 110,520.00

Proposal: DMS-0312223&lt;br/&gt;PI: Seongjai Kim
[skim@ms.uky.edu]&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Kentucky&lt;br/&gt;Title:
ITR: PDE-based Image Restoration: Efficient Numerical Algorithms and Software
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the field of
image processing (IP) requires higher levels of reliability and efficiency,
mathematical IP has become an important component. In particular, mathematical
frameworks employing recent powerful tools of partial differential equations
(PDEs) have been extensively studied to answer fundamental questions in IP. Such
PDE-based methods turn out to allow researchers not only to introduce innovative
mathematical models but also to analyze and improve traditional algorithms most
of which have been developed heuristically. Developing appropriate numerical
techniques for the PDE models is another important component for the PDE-based
approaches. The proposal is concerned with the development of numerical
algorithms for PDE-based image restoration and their applications to challenging
problems. The models to be solved include nonlinear PDEs representing motion by
mean curvature and Laplacian mean curvature flows, p-harmonic maps, and
curvature-based total-variation minimization. The main goals are (a) to develop
reliable and efficient numerical algorithms for image restoration, (b) to apply
those algorithms for noise removal, image enhancement, and inpainting for real-
life images such as medical imagery and satellite images, and (c) to construct
related software packages. The newly developed numerical algorithms are expected
to deliver large impact on mathematical image analysis; the resulting software
packages must be applicable to various interesting problems dealing with
images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many applications in the modern digital age are
based on images and therefore the resulting achievements must rely on their
quality. Since images are not always in a good quality due to various types of
noise, e.g., natural noise, defects in the sensors, and transmission problems,
it is important to eliminate the noise automatically. Such image restoration is
historically one of the oldest concerns and still a necessary processing step.
As the field requires higher levels of reliability and efficiency for the last
two decades, mathematical (PDE-based) image restoration has become an important
component; it has been extensively studied to answer fundamental questions in
image processing and to analyze/improve traditional methods. The proposal is
concerned with the development of reliable and efficient computational
algorithms for mathematical image restoration, their applications to real-life
images, and the construction of software packages. The research emphasis will be
on the computational aspects, trying to achieve truly practical algorithms based
on the PDE models. Such reliable, efficient, practical algorithms will be
implemented for software packages, which will be applicable for critically
important problems including medical imaging, security control, crime scene
investigation, and environmental watch. The proposed approaches and results can
surely deliver benefits not only to research and education in academia but also
to practitioners' image processing in industry. In particular, the software
packages will provide convenient sources that are easy to maintain and modify
for various applications. The investigators propose to explore mathematical
frameworks and software engineering techniques to produce reliable and efficient
numerical algorithms and related software packages which can support not only
research-and-development but also classroom
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;