* 0312376
* ITR:     Fast File Transfers Across Optical Circuit-Switched Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Bharat Rao, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* Kevin L. Thompson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 324,999.00

The PIs propose a network solution called Dynamically Reconfigurable
Ethernet/Ethernet-over-SONET (DREEoS) to enable end-to-end connectivity through
high-speed optical circuits. The primary application that is consider in this
project is large data transfers between businesses (B2B), and between businesses
and consumers (B2C). DREEoS is proposed as an add-on service to the primary
Internet access service. This can be achieved by equipping end hosts with second
(high-speed) Ethernet cards and connecting these cards to ports on an enterprise
Multi-Service Provisioning Platform (MSPP). Wide-area SONET circuits are
established dynamically between enterprise MSPPs and Ethernet signals from the
end hosts to the enterprise MSPPs are mapped to these wide-area circuits. An end
host with access to DREEoS service has to determine whether it is worthwhile
attempting a DREEoS circuit or not. Through analysis, it showed that an end host
should first attempt setting up a DREEoS circuit if (i) file sizes are large
(ii) file sizes are small but round-trip times (RTT) are large and (iii) file
sizes and RTT are small, then for files larger than some crossover file size.
The crossover file size and crossover RTT depend upon the probability of packet
loss on the TCP/IP path, link rates, RTT, and call blocking probability on the
optical circuit-switched path. The availability of the fallback TCP/IP path
allows DREEoS service to be introduced gradually into optical networks. At low
loads, the network can be operated at high call blocking probabilities to
achieve high utilization. As loads increase, the network can be engineered to
retain high utilization while simultaneously offering low call blocking
probabilities. In this project, the PIs plan to implement various software
modules, such as application software to trigger circuit setup, Optical
Connectivity Service (OCS) to allow an end host initiating a transfer to
determine whether its correspondent host can even be reached via a DREEoS
circuit, transport protocol software to allow for high-speed transfers, and
integrate these modules to demonstrate high-speed file transfers across the
university campuses of the PIs.

This work represents a significant advance in our current understanding of the
potential of circuit-switched networks. By using hardware-accelerated signaling
engines the network can support calls with short holding times. This means
applications can exploit the delay benefits of circuit-switched networks,
critical for interactive applications, without compromising utilization. This
work will reopen our thinking on circuit-switched networks enabling new
research. For example, the PIs are considering replacing the call blocking mode
used in this proposal with a call queueing/scheduling mode. This will remove the
impact of propagation delay by allowing for staggered configuration of switches,
a feature that is important for very small call holding times. This work has a
clear application in Science and Engineering, where distant collaborations
require massive file transfers in short durations.

Our educational and diversity goals will be met through the involvement of
students, including minorities and women, from both engineering and management
schools. The multidisciplinary nature of this project will help prepare our
students better for future industrial jobs.

The expected major contributions of the proposed research include (i) the
dissemination of our software modules, which will be useful to other research
teams working on similar optical network concepts, (ii) demonstrations of the
viability of this service model for commercial deployment through our economic
and market analysis, and (iii) research papers enhancing the role of optical
circuit- switched networks.