* 0312212
* Amygdala and Affective Modulation of Multiple Memory Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2010
* Mark Packard, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Cedric L. Williams
* 07/31/2010
* USD 624,875.00

PI: Mark G. Packard, Dept. Psychology, Texas A &amp; M
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research investigating the neurobiology of
memory has revealed that memory is not a unitary phenomenon that involves a
single "center" in the brain. Rather, memory is organized in multiple brain
systems, and these systems acquire different types of information. A "cognitive"
memory system that includes a brain structure termed the hippocampus acquires
information concerning relationships among various stimuli in the environment,
and allows for flexible goal-directed behavior (e.g. if car traffic is bad,
taking an alternative route may help one arrive at their destination earlier).
An independent "habit" memory system that includes a brain structure termed the
caudate nucleus acquires information concerning invariant or fixed associations
between environmental stimulus and appropriate behavioral responses (e.g. push
the car brake pedal when the light turns red). A third brain structure termed
the amygdala is involved in emotional processing, and activation of this
structure can influence the strength of memories acquired by the cognitive and
habit learning systems. In a given situation in which new information is
acquired, the cognitive and habit memory systems are simultaneously activated.
Although it is clear that emotions can impact the strength of various memories,
the manner in which emotional activation of the amygdala modulates the relative
use of cognitive and habit memory is not well understood. The research in this
project will use behavioral testing methodologies in lower animals to
investigate the neurobiological mechanisms by which the amygdala mediates the
influence of emotion on the use of multiple memory systems. The research is
expected to increase understanding of the neurobiological bases of emotion and
memory. The proposed research will provide support and research opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate training in the Behavioral
Neurosciences.&lt;br/&gt;