* 0312294
* ITR:      Adaptive Signaling and MIMO Precoding for Rapidly Time-Varying Fading Channels
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2007
* Alexandra Duel-Hallen, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 12/31/2007
* USD 415,934.00

This project investigates feasibility of transmitter optimization for rapidly
time varying fading channels encountered in wideband mobile radio communication
systems. Adaptive transmitter optimization methods have the potential to
significantly improve performance in wireless channels by adjusting the
transmitted signal-to-fading conditions. However, rapid channel variation makes
application of these closed-loop techniques difficult in wireless systems.
Previous investigations demonstrate that it is not sufficient to utilize the
outdated Channel State Information (CSI) in adaptive transmission algorithms
when vehicle speeds are significant. Prediction of the channel coefficients
several tens-to-hundreds of symbols ahead is essential to realize these methods
in practice. A novel adaptive, long-range fading channel prediction algorithm
(LRP) was previously developed by the PI and her collaborators for narrowband
wireless channels. In this research, the long range fading prediction capability
is extended to frequency selective fading channels with antenna arrays. These
methods are utilized in adaptive modulation and coding techniques for
multicarrier and multiple antenna systems and in novel precoding methods and
joint transmitter/receiver optimization techniques for Multiple Input Multiple
Output (MIMO) wideband mobile radio systems. This research contributes to the
development and realization of adaptive transmission and precoding methods that
are essential in reliable high rate wireless communication. Moreover,
collaboration with industry benefits graduate students involved in the project.
Broader participation of underrepresented groups is enhanced since the PI and
the graduate students are females. The infrastructure for research and education
is enriched by incorporating the methods investigated in this research in senior
and class projects and by integrating with wireless communications activities at
NC State. &lt;br/&gt;The first component of this project focuses on utilization
of prediction methods in interference cancellation for the MIMO channels that
arise in multicarrier, multiple antennae and the downlink of multiuser Direct
Sequence Code Division Multiple Access (DS/CDMA) channels. While the sources of
interference depend on the application, these systems can be described with a
single underlying MIMO model. Novel Tomlison-Harashima precoding methods are
developed for this model. These methods are expected to improve significantly on
previously proposed linear precoding techniques. Moreover, they distribute
computational resources between the transmitter and the receiver as dictated by
the application. For the downlink of the DS/CDMA channel, novel low complexity
linear techniques that have the potential to significantly simplify precoding at
the base station and detection at the mobile station are investigated. The
proposed interference cancellation techniques are combined with adaptive
modulation and coding. Since these precoding and adaptive transmission methods
depend on accurate CSI in the transmitter, reliable LRP and the underlying
prediction error statistics are essential in the design and the performance
analysis of the proposed methods. In the second component, joint prediction for
multiple subcarriers in multicarrier systems and antenna array elements in
multiple antenna channels is investigated. Novel linear and nonlinear approaches
to long-range prediction are explored. A statistical model of the prediction
error is developed and utilized in the design of reliable adaptive modulation
and coding methods. Flexible prediction methods that trade spectral efficiency
for complexity and feedback requirements are explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;