* 0312087
* Midwest Several Complex Variables Conference at Syracuse University
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Evgeny Poletsky, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2004
* USD 13,900.00

A Midwest Several Complex Variables Conference will be held on October
10-12,&lt;br/&gt;2003, at Syracuse University. This will continue the long time
tradition of Midwest&lt;br/&gt;Several Complex Variables Conferences which
became one of the highest quality and&lt;br/&gt;most successful conference
series in Complex Analysis. There have been many new&lt;br/&gt;interesting
developments in different fields of this area in recent years, especially
in&lt;br/&gt;Complex Geometry, Complex Dynamics, Partial Differential Equations
and Pluripotential&lt;br/&gt;Theory. The conference will provide a forum to
exchange and to stimulate&lt;br/&gt;new ideas from these disciplines, and to
formulate new challenging problems that will&lt;br/&gt;have important scientific
impact. It is expected that this will result in increased
understanding&lt;br/&gt;of the deeper mathematical issues in Complex Analysis.
The conference&lt;br/&gt;speakers include: Thomas Bloom (University of Toronto),
Araceli Bonifant (SUNY at&lt;br/&gt;Stony Brook), Jeffrey Diller (University of
Notre Dame), Peter Ebenfelt (University of&lt;br/&gt;California, San Diego),
Vincent Guedj (University Paul Sabatier, Toulouse), Sergei&lt;br/&gt;Ivashkovich
(Universit des Sciences et Technologies de Lille), Imre Patyi
(University&lt;br/&gt;of California, San Diego), Jean-Pierre Rosay (University
of Wisconsin, Madison), Rasul&lt;br/&gt;Shafikov (SUNY at Stony Brook), Mei-Chi
Shaw (University of Notre Dame), B.&lt;br/&gt;Alan Taylor (University of
Michigan), Sophia Vassiliadou (Georgetown University),&lt;br/&gt;Brendan
Weickert (Washington and Lee University), Jan Wiegerinck (University
of&lt;br/&gt;Amsterdam).&lt;br/&gt;Complex Analysis is an interdisciplinary
field involving complex numbers to solve&lt;br/&gt;problems in mathematics. The
conference will explore the interplay of research which&lt;br/&gt;has taken
place in a number of broad areas: Complex Geometry, Complex
Dynamics,&lt;br/&gt;Partial Differential Equations and Pluripotential Theory.
Many of the developments&lt;br/&gt;in these disciplines found new applications
outside their traditional area. We believe&lt;br/&gt;that hosting such a high
level conference will greatly benefit the US mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;It is
especially helpful in educating our graduate students and recent Ph.D.'s,
providing&lt;br/&gt;them with the opportunity to be in touch with the leading
experts working on&lt;br/&gt;the frontier of the field. We will give special
attention to attracting young scientists&lt;br/&gt;among the participants and
speakers. A significant part of the conference budget is&lt;br/&gt;allocated
especially for this. An effort will be made to increase the number of
women&lt;br/&gt;who will attend the conference. To disseminate the information
about the conference&lt;br/&gt;the organizers created a web site (address:
http://web.syr.edu/ dcoman/SCV/),&lt;br/&gt;where abstracts of talks and
suggested problems will be found.