* 0312432
* ITR - Remote Reality: 4-D Audio-Visual Reconstruction and Compression from Multiple Sensors
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Douglas Jones, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2007
* USD 332,735.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0312432&lt;br/&gt;Douglas Jones&lt;br/&gt;U of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current audiovisual recording,
communication, and playback provides a single, two-dimensional
perspective&lt;br/&gt;of the world as it varies through time. Humans live in a
\four-dimensional" world, in which they move about&lt;br/&gt;(in 3-D space over
time) at their own volition to experience the world from any perspective.
Advances in&lt;br/&gt;sensor, computer, and networking technologies now make
possible new systems that employ multiple cam-&lt;br/&gt;eras and microphones
together with sophisticated processing algorithms to deliver unprecedented
immersive&lt;br/&gt;recording and viewing capabilities. Sufficient sensing,
networking, and computing power to practically ad-&lt;br/&gt;dress this vision
already exists; the critical gap in achieving it is the lack of the necessary
signal processing&lt;br/&gt;theory and algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;This research will
develop new signal processing techniques for reconstruction of the audio and
visual&lt;br/&gt;recording at an arbitrary location in space and time from
multiple acoustic and video sensors, by extending&lt;br/&gt;recent research in
adaptive beamforming, multisensor signal processing of non-stationary signals,
and fun-&lt;br/&gt;damental new advances in multi-dimensional signal
representation. Practical four-dimensional audiovisual&lt;br/&gt;recording,
transmission, and playback, or \remote reality", will be demonstrated with low-
cost, conven-&lt;br/&gt;tional sensors attached to networked computers, thus
confirming the practicality of the proposed methods&lt;br/&gt;and applications.