* 0313492
* Arabidopsis 2010: Integrating Gene Expression With Biochemical Phenotype in Plant-Insect Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Arthur Jones, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 12/31/2006
* USD 800,000.00

Studies of the molecular bases of plant responses to enemies have focused more
on microbes than on insects, despite the great ecological, evolutionary, and
economic impacts of herbivores. Research on plant responses to insects has been
limited mainly to phenotypic (chemical) defenses. Little attempt has been made
to link molecular and chemical responses to either type of pest to understand
the mechanisms underlying plant defense. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
employ microarrays of approximately 2500 stress-responsive genes (developed by a
previous NSF Plant Genome project) plus critical genes in the glucosinolate
biosynthetic pathway. Gene expression and glucosinolate profiles will be
developed for plants responding to insect species and pathogens representing
chewing and sucking feeding types and a range of specialization on Brassicaceae.
The major goal of this limited proof-of-concept project is to demonstrate that
gene function can be inferred by using multivariate statistical treatments to
link array results to defense metabolite response profiles and to ecological
outcomes. "Gene function" in terms of defense will be inferred in terms of
expression pattern in relation to known functions (e.g., in signaling pathways,
metabolite synthesis) and in the context of the ecological outcome (e.g., impact
on insect, resistance to herbivory) using standard multivariate clustering
techniques, concordance analysis, and Mantel covariate statistics. Identities
and functions of critical components of plant defense responses identified
statistically will eventually be confirmed using mutants and knockouts in
bioassays with specific insects and microbes under varying environmental
conditions. Images of expression patterns, metabolite profile data, integrative
results, protocol updates, and instructions for obtaining material will be
posted monthly at the following TAIR-linked URL: http://schultzlab.cas.psu.edu/
. Metabolomics data will be archived at the Genomic Arabidopsis Resource Network
(http://www.york.ac.uk/res/garnet/beale.htm) and functional genomics data at
TAIR (http://www.arabidopsis.org/info/2010_projects/ ).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arabidopsis 2010 objectives addressed by this project
include determining the functions of genes in the context of plant defense,
producing a stress microarray and chemical analytical protocols as tools useful
to a wide range of investigators, and developing statistical protocols molecular
ecologists can use to link genotypic and phenotypic responses. In addition, the
project will be coordinated with 2 existing Arabidopsis 2010 programs (Wurtele
et al. "Visual informatics tools" and Lewis et al. "Phenylpropanoid metabolite
networks") and establishes an international collaboration with the Max Planck
Institute for Chemical Ecology (Jena, Germany). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of the limited project will include training 3 graduate students,
exploiting existing K-12, teacher, and undergraduate research experience links
that already exist in the PSU College of Agricultural Sciences and Chemistry
Department, and developing platforms for using Arabidopsis responses as a
teaching tool in the K-8 environment. &lt;br/&gt;