* 0313934
* Micro and Macroscale Measurement of Thermal Properties for Cryobiological Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* John Bischof, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

Two important biomedical applications of freezing are cryopreservation, the
preservation of material in the frozen state, and cryosurgery, the use of
freezing to destroy tissue. These both are part of the larger field of
cryobiology or low temperature biology. In both of these applications heat
transfer prediction of biomaterial thermal response (i.e. cooling rate, end-
temperature, dwell time and thawing rate) is important for the effective
planning of protocols where thermally mediated events within the biomaterial
such as intracellular ice formation, cellular dehydration, eutectic formation,
(de)vitrification, and/or lipid and protein phase changes are important to the
determination of outcome (i.e. survival or death). &lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately the
database of biomaterial thermal properties necessary to make accurate heat
transfer prediction of thermal response in the cryogenic regime is quite
limited. Specifically, latent heat, thermal conductivity and specific heat
properties are available only for a few biomaterials and little if any data is
available below -40 C or in the presence of chemical additives. The thermal
diffusivity of ice, an abundant component of frozen biomaterials, changes by
essentially an order of magnitude between 0 and -150 C. Preliminary results show
more modest thermal property changes in tissues, but even greater thermal
property changes in frozen salt solutions than ice. The addition of other
chemicals (i.e. cryoprotective agents or cryoadjuvants) in order to more
effectively preserve or destroy the biomaterial may further alter the thermal
properties in a manner which remains to be determined. This proposal aims to
make both bulk and microscale measurements of thermal properties for a variety
of solutions and native/artificial tissues with and without chemical additives
down to a temperature of -150 C. Bulk measurements will be carried out with a
pulse-decay thermistor apparatus for thermal conductivity measurement and a
Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) for specific heat and latent heat
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, directional thermal conductivity
(anisotropy), which depends on microscale ice crystal structure and orientation,
will be measured with a new apparatus which allows visualization of ice crystal
growth during freezing on a directional stage followed by thermal conductivity
measurements directly on the sample visualized. It is anticipated that the
presence of microstructure at the level of the individual crystals, eutectics
and glass (vitrified material) may have a strong anisotropic nature which can be
measured and incorporated into predictive models. Ultimately, the properties
measured will contribute significantly to the expansion of a cryogenic
biomaterial thermal property database thereby allowing improved predictive
modeling for a variety of cryobiological applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;