* 0313823
* Dissertation Research: Living Arrangements and Well-Being of the Elderly in Bangkok, Thailand: Impacts of Low Fertility, Life Events, and Non-Marriage
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Patricia Johnson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/2004
* USD 11,966.00

A rapid decrease in fertility and the increase in life expectancy observed in
Asia over the last several decades are expected to lead to problems associated
with aging populations. With these demographic changes, as in many other parts
of the world, planners are concerned over the future of family care of the
elderly. Assuming that the traditional co-residence has been providing a safety
net for the elderly, continuation of co-residence is often expected and
encouraged. This dissertation project will focus on the determinants of living
arrangements of the elderly in Bangkok, Thailand, and examine the relationship
between the living arrangements and well being of the elderly with a special
attention to the characteristics of their children. In combination with
ethnographic methods of participant observation and in-depth interviews, a
questionnaire schedule designed to better follow the life history of respondents
will be utilized to collect data from a large number of representative subjects.
The project will make a contribution to the scientific community as an attempt
to collect representative data in a more culturally sensitive way and with a
close connection to the history of each respondent. Such data help us to better
analyze and understand the problems of aging societies.&lt;br/&gt; Broader
Impacts: Given the social, economic, and political impacts of population aging,
the project will contribute to providing culturally meaningful baseline data for
the Thai government and related agencies to better prepare for the coming aging
society. Beyond Thai society, the study will also serve as comparative reference
information for other countries expected to face the similar aging problems in
near future.&lt;br/&gt;