* 0313626
* Structural Controls on Magma Transport and Vertical Coupling in the Continental Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2004
* Keith Klepeis, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 02/29/2004
* USD 13,500.00

An international field forum in Fiordland, New Zealand (April 26 to May 6, 2003)
is providing members of the Solid Earth Science community with an opportunity to
examine the mechanisms by which magma is generated, segregated and transported
through continental crust and how these processes affect the mechanical
evolution of the lithosphere. The Fiordland location is significant because few
field sites allow geoscientists to examine directly structural and magmatic
features that evolved simultaneously within large sections of the lower crust.
Fiordland contains rare exposures of high-pressure migmatite and lower crustal
structural features that formed at unusually deep levels of a Cretaceous
mountain system (25-50 km paleodepths). The spectacular preservation of features
at this site are stimulating new ideas and are providing a basis for evaluating
the processes of melt generation and escape from the lower crust and how
migrating magma interacts with deformation at the lithospheric scale. Specific
issues addressed include: 1) evidence of rapidly evolving thermal and structural
regimes in the lower crust and effects on lithosphere evolution; 2) evidence of
fluid and melt sources and changing mechanisms of magma segregation and
transport through the lower crust; 3) feedback mechanisms among crustal melting,
granulite facies metamorphism and deformation; 4) effects of crustal melting and
magmatism on vertical coupling/decoupling processes within the lithosphere; 5)
flow patterns in natural lower crustal shear zones and their relationship to
deformation and magma transport processes; 6) space-time controls on deformation
partitioning and strain localization processes in the lower crust.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique geologic setting of Fiordland allows 30
geoscientists to exchange current knowledge and new ideas that are well
expressed by the geology of specific field sites. This project also partially
supports 5-8 students and a post-doctoral associate to attend the meeting. The
participation of young scientists provides opportunities for students to meet
other geoscientists conducting research in the same or similar fields of
interest, but with different expertise. It also allows them to interact with
mature scientists and an opportunity to study some spectacularly exposed deep
crustal processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;