* 0313143
* ITR: Statistical Electronics and Soliton Electronics - Two Novel Paradigms for High-Performance High-Speed Wireless Transceivers Design in Silicon
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Donhee Ham, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2006
* USD 179,998.00

RF transceivers are one of the most critical parts of the high-speed wireless
networks. Their silicon implementation will expedite global deployment of the
wireless networks due to its low cost. For this reason, design of silicon RF
transceivers has been a dynamic field of research past years. Despite the severe
limitations imposed by the silicon technology, the research endeavor
significantly advanced the state-of-the-art. Looking back on this past advance
and anticipating the further advancement, it is deemed necessary now to address
the fundamental limits and their underlying physical mechanisms in the silicon
RF transceiver design, with which the proposed research is concerned. This
research on statistical and soliton electronics, involving both theory and
experiment, is ultimately aimed at leveraging the physical understanding to
cutting-edge circuit innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statistical electronics
spans circuit design and statistical physics to tackle noise problems in RF
receivers. Harnessing stochastic physics for innovative circuit design, the
proposed research will focus on a novel phase noise self-quenching effect and
its application to low noise oscillator design. On a fundamental level, the PI
will undertake research on thermodynamics of oscillators and data converters.
The research also includes application of stochastic resonance to design of
wireless transceivers, where noise will play a constructive
role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soliton electronics concerned with overcoming speed
limitations is an interdisciplinary investigation in the borderline of nonlinear
science and circuit engineering. Soliton electronics utilizes pulse squeezing
and soliton propagation in nonlinear transmission lines (NLTL) to generate and
control ultra sharp pulses. The specific objectives consist of the NLTL
characterization and design of NLTL-based self-sustained ultra sharp pulse
generators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research lies in
providing understanding of the fundamental difficulties facing the continued
expansion of the wireless networks. The proposed research will also add a new
dimension to the integrated transceiver design, and high-speed electronics in
general. The research is expected to broadly impact scientific instrumentation
requiring ultra sensitivity such as LIGO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator plans to train undergraduate and graduate students at
interdisciplinary work in the area of statistical electronics and soliton
electronics. The aim is to educate students to view progress in science and
engineering from a broader perspective, appreciating the relationships across
the disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;