* 0313193
* ITR: Weighted Dynamic Programming for Statistical Natural Language Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Jason Eisner, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2007
* USD 424,998.00

Dynamic programming is a core algorithmic technique that is commonly used to
find the optimal interpretation of ambiguous data (language, speech, genetics,
music, vision, etc.) or an optimal response to data (such as a translation,
route, plan, or proof). This project is developing a programming language and
compiler for weighted dynamic programming. The user writes a simple
specification of how to build bigger hypotheses from smaller ones. The compiled
code automatically handles many issues such as efficient representation,
efficient indexing, fast estimation of trainable parameters, hypothesis pruning,
and decisions about which hypothesis to try extending next (based on probability
estimates or learned heuristics). The compiler also carries out automatic
program transformations that can improve the asymptotic efficiency of a dynamic
program. In general, the research considers algorithmic tricks known for
particular problems, and generalizes them so that they can be applied to
arbitrary dynamic programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system is being applied to
various natural-language tasks such as parsing, syntax induction, and
statistical machine translation. Such tasks benefit from the ability to
experiment quickly with new models of language and hence with new dynamic
programs. Concrete tasks also provide a testbed for improving the language and
compiler.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system will be widely shared. By letting
researchers and students execute declarative specifications directly, using the
most efficient techniques available, this work will make it much easier to
build, train, and experimentally modify large-scale intelligent
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;