* 0313250
* Information Flow in a Heterogeneous Distributed System:  Biomimetic Approaches to Embedded Coordinated Control
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Kristi Hill, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 12/31/2006
* USD 399,868.00

ITR: Information Flow in a Heterogeneous Distributed System: Biomimetic
Approaches to Embedded Coordinated Control&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
NSF-0313250&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kristi A. Morgansen&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Julia
K. Parrish&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Daniel Grunbaum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work in this project focuses on the development of systems-level biomimetic
control-theoretic models and motion control algorithms. Specifically these tools
will be used to address embedded, emergent coordinated behavior of multiple
underwater robots using biological systems (fish schools) as models. We will
address the limits of how information transmission in coordinated groups can be
effected through local sensing when the dynamics of the individual elements are
not homogeneous but are allowed to be nonuniform and additionally are
intentionally modified to act as control parameters. The methods to be used in
this work fundamentally integrate techniques and tools from both biology and
engineering, and the results have the potential for high impact in a broad range
of applications. The particular applications that will be addressed in this
project are emergent behaviors in mixed species schools of fish and coordinated
control of autonomous underwater vehicles propelled in the carangiform style of
locomotion. The long-term goals of this research are (1) an understanding of how
collectives can gather and process information depending on inputs (sensory
systems) and rules of individual interaction, and (2) design of collective
systems to accomplish a wide range of tasks not currently feasible with
autonomous vehicle systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary approach
between engineering and biology used in this work provides a broad range of
opportunities not only for advances in basic science but also for the purpose of
education within and between the two disciplines. The initial stages of the
program described here have already proven to be of interest to graduate and
undergraduate students from a range of engineering disciplines. As the work
progresses, stronger ties between biology and engineering will be developed
through material introduced in introductory engineering and science courses,
dissemination of research results, and similar means to positively influence
general public perception and awareness of the impact of engineering and biology
on societal concerns. &lt;br/&gt;