* 0313383
* ITR:     Objective Methods for Predicting and Optimizing Synthetic Speech Quality
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Jan van Santen, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2007
* USD 410,000.00

The goal of this project is to improve the quality of text-to-speech synthesis.
Text-to-speech synthesis is an increasingly more widely used technology that
plays a core role in automated information access by telephone, and universal
access for individuals with visual or other challenges, and educational
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on how humans perceive
acoustic discontinuities in speech. Current text-to-speech synthesis technology
operates by retrieving intervals of stored digitized speech from a database and
splicing ("concatenating") them to form the output utterance. Unavoidably, there
are acoustic discontinuities at the time points where the successive speech
intervals meet. For reasons that are currently poorly understood, many of these
acoustic discontinuities are not audible even when they seem large by any
objective measure. This relative insensitivity of human hearing is the reason
that concatenative synthesis works at all. However, conversely it also often
occurs that seemingly small discontinuities are audible. These facts raise the
scientific question of how one can construct an objective acoustic discontinuity
measure that accurately predicts from the quantitative, acoustic properties of
two to-be-concatenated speech intervals whether humans will hear a
discontinuity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This question is not only of interest for a
better understanding of human hearing, but is also of immediate practical
relevance. Many text-to-speech synthesis systems select speech intervals at run
time from a large speech corpus. During selection, the systems search through
the space of all possible sequences of speech intervals that can be used for the
utterance and selects the sequence that has the lowest overall objective cost
measure, such as the Euclidean distance between the final frame and initial
frame of two successive intervals. However, research has already shown that this
method and related methods do not predict well whether humans will hear a
discontinuity. The current research, by being explicitly focused on perceptually
optimized objective cost measures, will directly contribute to the perceptual
accuracy of cost measures and hence to synthesis quality.&lt;br/&gt;