* 0313605
* Continued Lidar and Numerical Investigation of the Internal Boundary Layer Observed During Lake-Ice
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Edwin Eloranta, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 517,192.00

Much of the energy that drives atmospheric circulations is obtained through
exchanges of heat, moisture, and momentum with the surface. To study these
processes over the Great Lakes, a project known as the Lake-Induced Convection
Experiment (Lake-ICE) was held over Lake Michigan in the winter of 1997/98. The
University of Wisconsin Volume Imaging Lidar acquired a unique data set during
the Lake-ICE field project. These data will be used to validate the performance
of a microscale model of the atmospheric boundary layer in a continuation of the
research begun during Lake-ICE. The University of Wisconsin Nonhydrostatic
Modeling System will be used for the model simulations. Model results will be
compared directly to the structural features of the boundary layer observed by
the VIL using verification techniques developed under prior NSF support.

This work is an effort to simulate both the evolution of the large-scale flow
and the microscale flow structures, forced by local topographical and land use
features. There is a great deal of interest by the public, private and military
sectors in such forecast products. Currently little is known about the validity
of model simulations of specific microscale structures. Moreover, understanding
of the flow dynamics on this scale has been limited to mostly studies that focus
on statistical properties of steady flow, rather than the direct simulation of
specific evolving structures, which may be tied to specific topographic features
such as hills, buildings, and lakeshore geometry. This is a unique effort to
validate model simulations of microscale features against very high-resolution
observations.

Project goals are to (1) assess the ability of a microscale model to simulate
the local response to predicted large scale flow evolution and (2) increase
understanding of the forcings and dynamics leading to the observed coherent
structures. The Principal Investigator will concentrate on two observed
phenomena: (a) the genesis of Lake-ICE rolls and (b) the coastal front observed
on 21 December.

If successful, this research will advance knowledge of atmospheric boundary
layer systems and develop analysis methodologies useful in studying such
systems. This potentially could lead to better understanding and forecasting of
such phenomena as the transport and diffusion of pollutants through complex
terrain.