* 0313928
* Doctoral Dissertation: Into Arabia: Exploring Early Upper Pleistocene Range Expansions Into Oman
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Anthony Marks, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2004
* USD 11,967.00

The Central Oman Pleistocene Research program (COPR) will be conducted by
Jeffrey I. Rose under the supervision of Dr. Anthony E. Marks. This project,
funded by an NSF dissertation improvement grant, will investigate the source and
development of stone tool technologies in South Arabia during the Upper
Pleistocene period (128,000-18,000 BP). It is during this time the first
anatomically modern humans appear in Africa and rapidly disseminate throughout
the globe. The COPR fieldwork will focus on excavating archaeological material
within caves and rockshelters to obtain samples from undisturbed, buried
deposits. Focusing on these well-preserved contexts will help establish a
developmental sequence of lithic technology in this
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of stone tool manufacture in southern
Arabia will help shed light on a region that is terra incognita in Middle Stone
Age/Middle Palaeolithic research. Until recently, scholars have been prevented
from studying this corridor of early human migration because of restrictive
socio-political conditions. South Arabia is particularly important in that it
may have served as the primary route of dispersal for the first anatomically
modern humans expanding from Africa sometime during the Upper Pleistocene, as
well as a marginal zone for hunter-gatherer range expansions during episodic wet
phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If hunter-gatherers did disperse from Africa during
the Upper Pleistocene, it is likely there will be recognizable technological
affinities along the corridor of migration. Understanding the nature of lithic
industries in Oman will allow us to evaluate possible connections with East
Africa, thus, testing an important facet of the 'Out-of-Africa' model of human
origins. Recent work in the field of genetics has added credence to this
hypothesis. Our research has the potential to add further corroboration by
providing the first direct archaeological evidence for this expansion outside of
Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By funding archaeological research in the Arabian
Peninsula, this dissertation improvement grant has secondary, albeit important
political consequences. The project will be a joint venture with the Omani
Ministry of Heritage, and is planned as the first season of a long term project.
Oman is unique among much of the Arab world in its support and encouragement of
scientific research; therefore, COPR will serve to cultivate these values by
providing training for Omani archaeologists in the field of Palaeolithic
studies. In this politically sensitive time, it is vital to maintain cooperation
and continue building bridges between the rifting worlds of Islam and the West.
&lt;br/&gt;