* 0313829
* Linkages Between Large-scale and Mesoscale Dynamics, Land-atmosphere Interactions, and Convective Rainfall
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Christopher Weaver, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/2005
* USD 166,176.00

The Principal Investigator will study the role of mesoscale land-atmosphere
interactions - both their control by large-scale meteorological conditions and
their aggregate impact at large scales. The goal is to determine the impact of
the scale interactions on warm season convective precipitation in the
continental U.S. with a focus on links between soil moisture and rainfall. The
underlying hypothesis is that nonlinear interactions between scales may be a
source of important feedbacks that might help control the joint evolution of the
land and atmosphere. The methodological approach is to use a state-of-the-art,
high-resolution, coupled land-atmosphere modeling system to investigate the
following primary research questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o How do
precipitation systems driven by large-scale dynamics scale down to mesoscale
heterogeneity in soil moisture and surface fluxes, and what is the evolution of
this heterogeneity over monthly to seasonal timescales?&lt;br/&gt;o How does
this evolving mesoscale surface heterogeneity scale up to influence convective
clouds and precipitation at larger scales, and how important is the aggregate
impact of these mesoscale effects over a larger-scale region?&lt;br/&gt;o Can we
identify feedbacks between the large-scale and mesoscale processes? &lt;br/&gt;o
How do these downscaling and upscaling processes and feedbacks vary
intraseasonally, as a function of synoptic dynamical regime?&lt;br/&gt;o How do
these downscaling and upscaling processes and feedbacks vary interannually, as a
function of variations in hydrological regime (e.g., dry vs. wet
years)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this investigation are expected to
contribute to a more unified picture of land-atmosphere coupling across spatial
scales from mesoscale to synoptic, and across timescales from hourly to
seasonal. Improved understanding of the factors that control continental
rainfall is crucial for applications such as managing water resources and
planning for weather-related emergencies. Furthermore, estimating changes in
regional climate and hydrology resulting from the combined influence of changing
atmospheric composition and natural or anthropogenic land cover change will
require improved representations of land-atmosphere interactions in models.
&lt;br/&gt;