* 0313219
* ITR:    Efficient Algorithms with Implicit Input Data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Artur Czumaj, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2006
* USD 150,000.00

The main objective of this research is to establish methods for theoretical
study of algorithms for which the access to the input data is provided in an
implicit way. Such models of computations arise naturally in the context of
algorithms working with large data sets. The implicit input may correspond
either to a partial data in situations when the entire data cannot be directly
accessed (for example, because it is prohibitively expensive), or it may
correspond to compressed or coded data. It happens when only such data is stored
in the system and no direct access to the real data is provided or is available.

Traditionally, complexity theory deals with the classical definition of the
explicitly given input data: the input is given explicitly and the generally
accepted standard is to search for algorithms having the complexity linear, or
at least polynomial in terms of the input size. Such algorithms are viewed
usually as the most efficient. However, this significantly changes if we deal
with massive data. It is sometimes necessary to find good algorithms which deal
with implicitly given data and access only small part of the data (e.g., a
random sample), or small compressed or encoded representation of the data. The
information which we have about the data is now of size which would be
substantially much smaller than the size of the whole original input. In the
extreme situations it can be even constant (small sample sufficiently well
approximating, with high probability, the exact output).

The main theme of this research is to understand the relation between the
complexity of the problems in the classical model (where the access to data is
given explicitly) and the problems in the model in which the access to the input
is implicit. The main focus is on study algorithms for one- and two-dimensional
compressed texts, algorithms for property testing, and sampling-based
approximation algorithms. In case of texts the implicit input is the compressed
version of the input and in the case of property testing the reduced input is
usually a small sample of the input. In the latter case, the we also deal with
the problems on preprocessed input: an oracle provides fast answers to some
basic structures underlying the input data, e.g., (in geometric setting)
orthogonal range queries. In this case the implicit access to the input is
constrained by range of allowable queries and by the input data representation.
The goals for this research are to advance the state-of-the art in algorithms
with restricted access to the input data in general, in particular algorithms
for compressed texts and sampling-based property testing and approximation
algorithms.

The intellectual merit of this proposal is wide and it involves advances in
computational complexity of new classes of problems: pattern-matching in
compressed or fully compressed one and two-dimensional texts, property testing
with access only to a small portion of the input data and abstract combinatorial
algorithms dealing with implicit input data. It is a belief of the investigators
that new aspects of the algorithmic efficiency explored in this research may
initiate an important and novel area of computer science. This would be of great
importance in time and space effective processing of massive data, as well as of
great importance in pure theory. The end-result of this research effort are an
understanding of the effects of special access to the input data on the
efficiency of related algorithms.