* 0313238
* ITR: Development of an Integrated Tool for Modeling Quasi-static Deformation in the Solid Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Charles Williams, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 09/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This project is providing a complete modeling environment for solving quasi-
static problems in geophysics. The goal is to provide a tool that is easy to
use, open-source, and able to solve problems of all scales, including large-
scale problems that are not presently solvable. With this tool, users are able
to address problems on time scales ranging from days (e.g., postseismic
relaxation following a large earthquake, magma chamber expansion/contraction
beneath an active volcano), to years (e.g., models of interseismic stress/strain
accumulation to evaluate seismic hazard), to hundreds or thousands of years
(e.g., multi-earthquake simulations of an active seismic zone), to millions of
years (e.g., evolution of tectonic features). Ease of use is aided by
incorporating the code into the Pyre framework being developed at Caltech. By
using this framework, users automatically gain access to other tools already
included in Pyre, including the ability to couple different codes. Use of the
Pyre framework also greatly reduces the complexity of creating a model,
exploring parameter space, and visualizing the results. Comprehensive
documentation and a suite of test problems are also being provided as a starting
point for new users, allowing them to rapidly develop their own models. The core
of this project is a version of the finite element code TECTON, which has been
specifically designed to solve tectonic problems. In addition to incorporating
the code into the Pyre framework, the code is also being parallelized using the
PETSc parallel libraries. The parallel implementation will allow the code to be
used on a wide range of computer architectures, including serial (single
processor) machines, shared memory (multiprocessor) machines, networks of PC's
or workstations, or specially-designed workstation clusters. Thus, users will be
able to solve problems of all scales, depending on the available computational
resources