* 0313280
* Travel Grant for Third Chemical Engineering Conference for Collaborative Research in Eastern Mediterranean (EMCC-3)
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Jacques Zakin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2008
* USD 48,361.00

Jacques L. Zakin Ohio State Research Foundation

"Travel Grant for Third Mediterranean Chemical Engineering Conference for
Collaborative Research."

This grant supports travel funds for U.S. academic representatives to attend the
3rd Chemical Engineering Conference for Collaborative Research in Eastern
Mediterranean (EMCC-3) to be held in Thessaloniki, Greece, May 14-16, 2003. The
participating countries are Turkey, Greece, Israel and the U.S. Academic
chemical engineers from other Eastern Mediterranean countries will also be
invited. The purpose of the Workshop is to acquaint researchers from the
participating countries with current research in five areas in chemical
engineering: Advanced Materials and Processes, Chemical and Catalytic Processes,
Bioengineering, Transport Phenomena and Separation Processes, and Process
Systems Engineering, in order to promote collaborative research among them.
These areas were selected as they are key topics in research in all of the
countries. The major theme of EMCC-3 will be Nanoscience in Chemical
Engineering.

This is the third conference. The two previous successful conferences were at
the Technion, in Haifa, Israel in March 1999 with representatives from Turkey,
Israel and the U.S. and in Ankara and Istanbul in May, 2001 with participation
by chemical engineers from Greece as well as the other three countries.

Prof. Andreas Acrivos of the City College of the City University of New York
will be Honorary Chair of the Conference. Three distinguished U.S. chemical
engineers will be Plenary Speakers: Prof. Matthew Tirrell of the University of
California, Santa Barbara, Prof. George Stephanopoulis of MIT and Prof. Ignacio
Grossman of Carnegie Mellon University. In addition, 25 U.S. speakers will be
invited from the 5 areas, a blend of senior researchers and promising young
investigators. There will be five Keynote Lecturers from the U.S, one in each
research area. Distinguished invited speakers from the other three countries
have committed to participate and 20 speakers from each country will be invited.
There will also be poster presentations from these countries, some presented by
graduate students. In addition, several researchers who developed collaborations
since the first Conference will be invited to participate in a special session
in order to help encourage other future collaborators. Special travel
supplements also will be provided to 5 participants to visit and lecture in
countries other than Greece--Turkey and Israel-to develop and/or promote
collaboration. Other US participants are expected to attend with approval from
the organizers and with support from other financial sources.

Broader Impacts: The two previous EMCC Conferences have had major impacts in
acquainting US, Turkish, Israeli and Greek academics with each other and with
their research interests and capabilities and in fostering research
collaborations. The proposed third conference will provide further opportunities
and especially with the many Greek researchers expected to attend.

The added benefit of these conferences is the exposure they have provided for
large numbers of graduate students from the three countries to interact directly
with both seasoned and young faculty researchers from the US and the other
countries. Another benefit has been the fruitful discussions on curriculum
issues among faculty of the participating countries. The U.S. will benefit from
this program by virtue of the productive relationships that are expected to
emerge leading to the transfer of expertise.

Draft reports summarizing the activities in each research area will be prepared
at the meeting by the U.S. Leaders in each research area with the help of their
counterparts from the other three countries and will then be circulated for
editing and to prepare the final report. This report will be posted on a general
EMCC Web Site to be developed. In addition, it is expected that about 30 papers
from the proposed Conference will be published in Chemical Engineering
Communications as for EMCC-2.