* 0313737
* Biocomplexity in the Environment/GEN-EN: Response of Host and Symbiont Genomes to Environmental Stress and its Ecological Consequences
* BIO,EF
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2009
* Katrina Mangin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2009
* USD 1,876,675.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Nancy Moran and Katrina Mangin of the
University of Arizona, and Dr. Anthony Ives of the University of Wisconsin to
address the role of symbiotic infections in determining tolerance of insects to
heat stress, both at the molecular and ecological levels. The complete genome
sequence of a facultative bacterial endosymbiont of aphids will be determined.
Approaches exploiting this and other genomic data will be used, including
measures of expression of heat stress genes of both hosts and symbionts under
different thermal environments. These studies will reveal how heat sensitivity
is affected by symbiont distributions among hosts as well as by genetic
variation in stress responses. In addition, the ecological consequences of
variation in thermal tolerances will be examined under field environments; these
experiments will reveal how heat tolerance interacts with additional biological
factors, such as predators and parasites, to determine population density and
persistence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chronic infection is a normal part of the
life cycle for most animals, including humans and insects, but it is not known
how such infection affects tolerance to changing environmental conditions. At
the same time, the forces that maintain symbiotic associations are dependent on
the joint effects of genetic and environmental factors, but no studies have
addressed these together. In this project, researchers with expertise in both
ecology and molecular biology will apply methodologies from both fields to
obtain answers to these issues. By illuminating the molecular and ecological
mechanisms through which heat affects animal populations, the findings will
demonstrate how geographic ranges and abundances of individual species are
impacted by changes in climate over time. Results will be particularly relevant
to insects that are agricultural pests and vectors of disease, a large
proportion of which have symbiotic associations similar to those of aphids. In
addition, a substantial educational program will introduce Arizona secondary
school teachers to the use of state-of-the-art molecular tools for analyzing how
organisms interact with environmental stress. &lt;br/&gt;