* 0313902
* Collaborative Project: Capacity Building in Information Assurance and Computer Security
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2003,01/31/2006
* Ronald Gatterdam, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Diana L. Burley
* 01/31/2006
* USD 197,333.00

As the electronic collection, storage, and retrieval of data becomes an ever
more pervasive part of modern life, there is an associated need for increased
Information Assurance (IA) awareness and expertise in order to secure evolving
systems. This project leverages the Information Assurance expertise of Purdue
University to build a framework in Alaska that will address the IA needs of the
academic, commercial, legal, and law enforcement communities. The initial focus
is aimed at determining the current level of IA awareness and needs in the
state. The project then continues to develop the UAF- IA curriculum specifically
tailored to fit the learning needs of the state's geographically diverse
population with an emphasis on distance education. Results of the project will
include a statement of the current IA awareness and needs level in the state, a
new IA curriculum, and development towards and application for the Center of
Academic Excellence (CAE) certification for UAF. A secondary goal of this
proposal is to further develop the capacity of Purdue University to meet the
needs for computer forensics expertise. Purdue University is benchmarking an
undergraduate computer forensics course offered at the University of Alaska at
Fairbanks; Purdue University is also developing and pilot testing a computer
forensics course at the undergraduate level.