* 0313432
* Arabidopsis 2010: Functions of the XTH Proteins of Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Janet Braam, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2009
* USD 918,000.00

This research is a functional analysis of the xyloglucan
endotransglucosylase/hydrolase (XTH) genes of the model plant Arabidopsis. XTHs
are capable of modifying xyloglucan, a major component of the plant cell wall,
and yet the physiological functions of these enzymes are not understood. The
wall is a fundamental structure of plant cells that controls cellular shape,
size and integrity, and plays a role in signal transduction. Enzymes that modify
wall polysaccharides likely play critical roles in plant morphogenesis and
physiology.

A broad-based integrative approach will be taken to elucidate the biochemical
and physiological functions of XTHs. Mutations within XTH genes will be sought
and mutant phenotypes characterized with respect to growth, development and
overall fitness, in addition to wall properties and ability to adapt to diverse
environments. Expression patterns of XTHs will be determined. Reporter gene
analyses will shed light on tissue, organ, and developmental specificity of
expression. Enzymes will be produced with heterologous systems and their
properties, such as substrate preferences and reaction conditions, will be
compared among the different isozymes. Completion of these experiments will
improve concepts of how plant cell walls are formed, maintained and modified,
and how these properties impact the overall fitness, development and physiology
of plants.

Research results will be disseminated through a website
(http://www.bioc.rice.edu/~braam/projects/xth.html), research publications, and
public presentations. Mutant seed stocks will be deposited in the ABRC at Ohio
State University for distribution to the community. In addition, this research
will enhance the infrastructure of research and training through the continued
support and laboratory training of postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate
students. The PI is committed to increasing the representation of women and
underrepresented minorities in science. Undergraduates will also participate in
the scientific discovery process through Rice University laboratory courses.
PCR-based screening methods and reporter gene expression analyses have been
optimized such that undergraduates can contribute to research through lab
courses. The students supported by this grant will be encouraged to participate
in conferences and teaching opportunities.