* 0313993
* Organic Catalysis: A Broadly Useful Strategy for Controlled Polymerization Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2007
* James Hedrick, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2007
* USD 547,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research involves the development of general
organocatalytic strategy for the living ring opening polymerization of strained
esters. Nucleophilic carbene catalysts from thiazolium, imidazolium and
imidazolinium families will be examined for the polymerization of strained
cyclic monomers and other monomer systems. Further, a variety of C-H insertion
reactions will be studied using imidazolin-2-ylidines with activated C-H bonds
to afford air stable carbenes. The in situ methodology used will provide for
rapid screening of libraries of catalysts to give basic understanding of
catalyst structure on polymerization rates, the degree of control, the substrate
tolerance and range of molecular weights accessible with these strategies.
Mechanistic investigations will address the relative rate of monomer activation
versus transesterification to define the kinetic window where well-controlled
polymerization can be expected. Extension of this organocatalytic method to the
ring opening of lactams and transesterification of phosphate esters will also be
investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
are supporting the GOALI project of Dr. Robert M. Weymouth of the Department of
Chemistry at Stanford University and Dr. James L. Hedrick of IBM Research. The
collaboration will focus research efforts on developing organic catalysts for
use in living polymerization processes. The project will develop new synthetic
methods for controlled polymerization reactions, obtain new insights into
nucleophilic catalysis of transesterification reactions and develop a new class
of organocatalysts for use in fine chemical synthesis. The project will enable
the training of graduate students and a postdoctoral in a highly
interdisciplinary, collaborative effort between an academic and an industrial
laboratory and there is further potential for broader impact of the work in
terms of creating a cleaner environment.&lt;br/&gt;