* 0313885
* CITADEL: Coordinated Information Techology and Assurance Development and Education Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2010
* Andrew Sung, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 05/31/2010
* USD 2,147,777.00

CITADEL provides an intellectual high ground for the education, training,
practical application of information security and assurance. CITADEL trains
students to become leaders, not merely practitioners, in the increasingly
important field of information assurance and security. It also provides faculty
enhanced opportunities to work with the best students and researchers at
government agencies. CITADEL coordinates the efforts of New Mexico Techs
CAE/IAE, Information Technology Program, the Computer Science Department, and
NMT's ICASA (Institute for Complex Additive Systems Analysis) division. Each
scholar's program will include the following: a customized course sequence to
match the scholar's area of interest and research in information assurance and
security; a research project and advisor in a research relevant area described;
his or her personal supervisory committee (including research advisor); travel
to a conference to present research results; travel to summer SFS workshop
(accompanied by both PIs); individualized placement in an OPM approved
internship position; individualized placement in an OPM approved service
position; professional skill development workshops and support; mentoring,
including regular interaction with both PIs. To support information assurance
and security in the CITADEL program, faculty have committed to providing the
following expertise for research and advising: Adaptive Control and Dynamic
Systems; Agent-based Financial System Modeling &amp; Simulation; Applications of
Soft Computing; Applied Mathematics; Non-financial Risk Modeling &amp; Analysis;
Complex Additive Systems Modeling, Simulation, and Analysis; Complex Systems;
Conceptual Modeling; Cryptography; Ethical Issues; Financial Systems;
Information Systems; Mathematical Programming; Network Security and Performance;
Parallel and High Performance Computing; Software Integrity; Well-posedness and
Sensitivity Analysis.