* 0313247
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: A Bioarchaeological Perspective on State Formation in the Nile Valley
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Phillip Walker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 06/30/2005
* USD 12,000.00

This research project is a bioarchaeological study of health status, genetic
affinities and ethnicity of the people buried at Tombos, a New Kingdom site in
Nubia (northern Sudan). Tombos was occupied during a period of social transition
in which the foundations of the Napatan Kingdom were laid. While some
researchers suggest that Egyptianized native bureaucrats provided the basis for
the rise of this powerful state during the New Kingdom, others instead argue
that Egyptian colonial administrators occupied the top echelon of Nubian
government, co-opting local leaders. Recently excavated materials as well as
museum collections will be used to address longstanding unresolved questions
concerning the identities of these people. Understanding the processes that
operate in situations of cross-cultural contact is not only a central goal of
anthropological research but also one of great practical significance. Answering
questions related to the nature of the interaction between the Nubian and
Egyptian polities is of anthropological importance because of its potential to
shed new light on larger theoretical issues concerning imperial strategies,
cultural contact, and regional interaction patterns. Because of its unique
historical context, the skeletal sample from Tombos has great potential as a
source of information on the socio-political process of state formation and
expansion. As a result, the proposed research will significantly increase our
understanding of the processes operating in culture contact situations. New
methods and research materials will be used to resolve longstanding questions
about the biological and cultural identities of Nubian New Kingdom colonial
administrators and determine the health consequences this period of socio-
economic transition had for the local population. Most of the documents dating
to this period are concerned with esoteric religious issues and the social
elite. Although many royal burials in Nubia and in Egypt have been studied,
little paleopathological research on lower status New Kingdom burials have been
published. The Tombos burials thus provide a unique opportunity to learn about
the population affinities, health status, and living conditions of an important,
yet little studied population. The broader impacts of this research include its
contributions to (1) graduate training and education, (b) fostering the
development of international scientific cooperation, and (c) conservation of
Nubian culture. The region of the Nile where Tombos is located is not well known
archaeologically. The rapid expansion of settlement and cultivation threatens
sites in this area, and makes their documentation imperative. Because of a lack
of funding and staff at the National Corporation for Antiquities and Museums in
Sudan, sites are left unprotected and uninvestigated. This study will assist the
people of Sudan in documenting the rapidly disappearing archaeological evidence
of ancient Nubian life and culture.