* 0313005
* ITR: A Cross-layer PHY/MAC Solution for Ad-hoc Networks with Multiple-element Arrays
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Mary Ann Weitnauer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 06/30/2007
* USD 477,226.00

Ad-hoc wireless networks lack the infrastructure of traditional wireless
networks; for example, they have no base stations or switching centers. Every
node in an ad-hoc network can act as a forwarder or router to the other nodes.
While ad-hoc networks were conceived primarily for military and emergency relief
applications, more recently, such networks are finding applications in regular
wireless packet data environments because they offer convenient deployment,
improved coverage, reduced energy consumption, and higher network capacity than
traditional infrastructure networks. Concurrent with the expansion of ad hoc
network applications, multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) links have drawn
tremendous interest for the extremely high data rates they can support in the
absence of interference. A MIMO link has multiple antennas at the transmitter
and multiple antennas at the receiver. The multiple transmit antennas are used
to transmit multiple parallel streams of data in the same channel; signal
processing on the outputs of the multiple receiver antennas separates the
parallel streams. In the presence of interference, closed-loop MIMO (CL-MIMO),
which requires that the transmitter have channel state information (CSI), is
known to significantly outperform open-loop MIMO, which does not use CSI. This
project investigates how MIMO can be used in ad-hoc wireless networks to
increase their throughput. Previous work by the authors has shown that network
throughput can be increased by up to 70% by allowing some CL-MIMO links to
interfere with each other, in other words, by allowing space-division multiple
access (SDMA) for CL-MIMO links. Control of the number of streams is the key to
this problem, because the same parallel stream feature that enables a MIMO link
to carry such high data rates also makes interference coming from a MIMO
transmitter especially degrading to an unintended receiver.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such sophisticated antenna technology necessitates
appropriate developments at the different layers of the network protocol stack.
Previous work by the authors has shown that existing multiple access control
(MAC) protocols, such as the MAC for the IEEE Standard 802.11, are incapable of
attaining the maximum throughputs possible with SDMA and CL-MIMO links. The main
objective of this project is to determine a cross-layer physical-layer/medium-
access-control solution for ad-hoc networks with MIMO links. "Cross-layer" means
that more than the traditional amount of information is shared between the
physical and MAC layers. For example, a receiver can estimate, at the PHY layer,
how many more streams (either desired or interfering) it can tolerate without
being overwhelmed. This information can then be used by the MAC protocol to
allow or disallow additional co-channel streams to be transmitted in the area.
Specific physical layer research activities include study of (i) the dynamics of
the joint-link adaptive process, including the effects of asynchrony of packets
and the constraints imposed by the MAC protocol, (ii) various learning
opportunities for the transmitter in order to speed convergence, (iii) how
nonlinear receiver processor algorithms effect stream control, (iv) realistic
channel models, and (v) alternative joint optimization algorithms. Also, the MAC
layer research activities in this project are focused on (i) formulation of the
medium access control problem in ad-hoc networks with CL-MIMO links, and
identification of the key optimization considerations, (ii) design and
development of medium access control algorithms and schemes that help achieve
the benefits of stream-control, address its drawbacks in the target environment,
incorporate the key optimization considerations, and use the unique flexibility
offered by the PHY layer in its operation, (iii) molding the resulting MAC
protocol to operate within practical and deployable protocol frameworks, and
(iv) the development of algorithms through a prototype implementation that