* 0313441
* Workshop on Group Theory and Numerical Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2003,11/30/2004
* Peter Olver, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 11/30/2004
* USD 13,400.00

The funds in this grant will be used to support U.S. &lt;br/&gt;researchers,
postdocs and graduate students to attend and &lt;br/&gt;present lectures and
posters in a Workshop on Group &lt;br/&gt;Theory and Numerical Analysis at the
Centre de &lt;br/&gt;Recherches Mathematiques, Universite de Montreal, during
&lt;br/&gt;the week May 26-31, 2003. The workshop features one &lt;br/&gt;aspect
of the emerging theory of "geometric integration," &lt;br/&gt;that advocates
incorporating known qualitative features of &lt;br/&gt;systems of differential
equations, such as invariants, &lt;br/&gt;symmetries, conservation laws, phase-
space dynamics, and &lt;br/&gt;symplectic structure, in their numerical solution
&lt;br/&gt;algorithms. In particular, the symmetry properties of a
&lt;br/&gt;system of differential equations have proven to be a very
&lt;br/&gt;powerful means of understanding the qualitative properties
&lt;br/&gt;of its solutions as well as facilitating the determination of
&lt;br/&gt;exact analytical solutions. Such special solutions often
&lt;br/&gt;serve as prototypes and govern the asymptotics for more
&lt;br/&gt;complicated situations, and also as useful testing grounds
&lt;br/&gt;for developing numerical integration schemes. The &lt;br/&gt;methods
of symmetry analysis and integrability for &lt;br/&gt;differential equations
have, more recently, been adapted &lt;br/&gt;with considerable success to
analyze discrete equations. &lt;br/&gt;On the other hand, the incorporation of
symmetry in the &lt;br/&gt;design of invariant geometric numerical schemes for a
&lt;br/&gt;variety of differential equations arising in applications has
&lt;br/&gt;recently been the subject of increasing research activity and
&lt;br/&gt;advances. The key objective of the workshop is to bring
&lt;br/&gt;experts on applications of group theory to discrete
&lt;br/&gt;equations together with practitioners of geometric
&lt;br/&gt;numerical methods, thereby stimulating a mutually
&lt;br/&gt;beneficial exchange of ideas and recent developments and
&lt;br/&gt;fostering a cross-fertilization between such closely related
&lt;br/&gt;subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Group theory is the mathematical
formalization of the &lt;br/&gt;concept of symmetry. Most interesting systems
that arise &lt;br/&gt;in applications in physics, engineering, chemistry,
&lt;br/&gt;computer vision, biology, etc., possess a rich variety of
&lt;br/&gt;symmetries. While exploiting the symmetries of &lt;br/&gt;continuous
systems has a long and distinguished record of &lt;br/&gt;achievement, only
recently have significant developments &lt;br/&gt;occurred within the discrete
regime. Indeed, standard &lt;br/&gt;numerical solution methods used by computers
typically &lt;br/&gt;fail to properly respect the underlying symmetry
properties. &lt;br/&gt;This workshop will build on recent developments in
&lt;br/&gt;symmetry analysis of discrete systems and the development
&lt;br/&gt;of symmetry-preserving numerical solution techniques. The
&lt;br/&gt;participants are experts in symmetry methods and in
&lt;br/&gt;geometric numerical integration. The workshop will &lt;br/&gt;promote
interactions and significant progress in both &lt;br/&gt;subjects, as well as
their applications in mathematics and &lt;br/&gt;the sciences. The results of
the workshop, as presented in &lt;br/&gt;the talks and discussions, will be
summed up in a book to &lt;br/&gt;be so focused as to be of permanent value. In
addition, an &lt;br/&gt;assessment of the current state of the art in the
subjects and &lt;br/&gt;new scientific opportunities stemming from this workshop
&lt;br/&gt;will be the focus of a panel discussion and white paper to
&lt;br/&gt;be distributed and posted on the web.