* 0314827
* RUI: Studies On The Cell Physiology of Insect Ovarian Follicles, Interactions Between Epithelium and Oocyte
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Richard Woodruff, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 204,415.00

For successful reproduction, most species of animals require the production of
mature ova. An essential feature of egg formation is the acquisition of yolk,
which serves as a nutrient supply during early development. In many species, the
proteins used for yolk are produced elsewhere, transported to the ovaries
through the blood and acquired by the developing egg via a process called
"receptor-mediated endocytosis." This process involves membrane bound receptor
molecules specific for the relevant proteins, allowing them to be concentrated
far beyond their concentration in the blood. For insects which require a blood
meal for yolk formation, an elegant story has emerged describing how each meal
triggers hormonally controlled support for a single round of egg formation.
However, there are myriad species in which several sequential rounds of egg
production are occurring simultaneously. How do these species regulate the
stages of egg development, particularly, the onset of yolk formation?&lt;br/&gt;
It has recently been shown for species from six different insect orders that
yolk formation is controlled by a signal sent to the egg from its surrounding
epithelial cells. Transmission appears to be through small cell-to-cell channels
called gap junctions. These channels are recognized across the animal kingdom as
providing "semi-private" communication among cells. The present research is
based on data suggesting that the epithelial cell-to-oocyte signal may be a
17,000 molecular weight protein called Calmodulin, and the study is designed to
assess this hypothesis. What is surprising is that Calmodulin is 5-8 times the
size of substances previously known to transit gap junctions, although its
elongated shape could explain this phenomenon. The possibility that such large
but elongated molecules can pass through gap junctions may have implications to
understand for cell-to-cell communications in general, as gap junctional
communication may be possible for other large but elongate molecules which
regulate and integrate cell physiologies throughout organisms. This project will
also support the education and training of undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;