* 0314404
* Biotechnology and the Political Ecology of Information in Andhra Pradesh
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Glenn Stone, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2007
* USD 165,637.00

The introduction of genetically modified (GM) crops into developing countries
has stimulated controversial reactions but little scientific research beyond
narrow cost/benefit analyses. Questions on the technology's larger effects are
relevant in India, particularly in cotton-growing areas, as India has recently
released BT cotton as its first GM crop. This project will take place in several
areas of Warangal District of Andhra Pradesh, a cotton area plagued by over-
reliance on chemical pesticides. The study will assess the economic performance
of the new GM cotton, but more importantly it will investigate how biotechnology
qualitatively changes the nature of information needed by farmers to make
agricultural decisions. This change may have impacts on local management skill
that is vital in smallholder farming. The project will analyze how technological
change in seed technology affects farmers' indigenous management skills; the
nature of the innovation-adoption process for such a highly politicized
agricultural technology, when both "payoff-related" and "biased cultural
transmission" models fail to fit a situation in which farmers are being
aggressively propagandized; and how GM crops, and the political forces attending
their introduction, affect "reskilling" in Integrated Pest Management programs.
&lt;br/&gt;Field research in Warangal will include agricultural ethnography in
two areas, including one with many poor, uneducated "tribal" farmers who are
relatively new to cotton cultivation. A sample survey of 150 households in each
site will get basic information on farm households, and more detailed farm-level
records on a smaller sample will be kept on inputs, labor and other farm inputs.
Intensive studies of indigenous management skill will be undertaken, and the
manipulation of public information will be charted closely during the next two
years as farmers confront the new technology for the first time. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Genetically modified crops stimulate strong
reactions from people across the world, both positive and negative. The
potential to increase output and improve local economic conditions is
counterpoised against the fear of unknown developments and loss of producer
knowledge and control. The new knowledge to be created by this project will thus
be of significant public interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;