* 0314525
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Comparing Capuchins and Coatis: What Can a Non-Primate Teach Us About Primate Socioecology?
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Charles Janson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/2004
* USD 9,140.00

Models relating primate behavior to ecology (socioecological models) may be
limited in their generality, as they are both developed from and tested on
living non-human primates. If we are to use these models to understand the
social systems of fossil primates and human ancestors, it is necessary to test
whether these models are robust to assumptions about reproductive, sensory, and
other characters that often differ between living primates and other mammals.
The robustness of primate socioecological models will be tested by comparing a
terrestrial carnivore, the ring-tailed coati (Nasua nasua), to an arboreal
primate, the brown capuchin monkey (Cebus apella), living in the same habitat.
Both of these species have a similar feeding ecology (fruit and invertebrates)
and group sizes, thus socioecological models predict that their social systems
will be similar. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study will investigate how the
social systems of coatis may differ from that of the monkeys because of 1)
living on the ground vs. in trees, 2) relying mostly on smell vs. sight, and 3)
having litters vs. single young. This study will use natural observations, and
controlled feeding experiments on three groups of coatis to determine the impact
these differences have on individual feeding rates, coalition formation, food
discovery and use, and the social system of these two species. These data will
then be compared to previously recorded data on capuchin monkeys in the same
forest. The results of this study will shed light on how ecological, sensory,
and reproductive traits shape the evolution of mammalian social behavior.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: By testing primate-derived models of
the evolution of social behavior in a non-primate, this study will test the
robustness of these models. The comparison of these two species of distinct
origins, combined with carefully chosen field experiments, may uphold the
generality of the standard models. However, any differences found may suggest
cautions in applying these models both to non-primates as well as to primates
that do not possess the particular suite of traits that characterize most
primates today. It may be important to realize that the social systems of fossil
primates (including human ancestors) may not be simple intermediates between
those of living species, but present novel traits or novel combinations of
existing social traits. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This study will
be the first intensive study of ecology and behavior of &lt;br/&gt;the South
American coati. It will provide not only comparative data for understanding the
evolution of mammals, but important data for the conservation and management of
this species. The project will provide training opportunities in tropical
biology for several U.S. and Argentine students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;