* 0314063
* Dissertation Research: Researching Present Futures: Neoliberalism, Laboratory Science, and Citizenship in Bolivia
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Jean Comaroff, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 09/30/2005
* USD 7,200.00

This NSF Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant, will
support ethnographic field work at a specific laboratory located in La Paz,
Bolivia, in order to examine how a research laboratory conducting investigations
into the health and genetics of Bolivian populations is related to broader
trends of neo-liberalism, citizenship, identity, and nationalism. This research
laboratory is one of the laboratories in Bolivia that has been involved in the
recent push over the past several years to increase scientific research
conducted in Bolivia with Bolivian materials and personnel. This study thus asks
why science has become important to influential Bolivians, why this is happening
now, and what role the particular research projects being conducted -- which are
rooted in the "cultural patrimony" of the country, a category that includes the
genetic materials of Bolivian human populations and their specific attributes,
such as adaptation to long-term residence at extremely high altitude -- have in
the development of a Bolivian scientific research infrastructure and research
agenda. These investigations draw upon specifically Bolivian materials for their
objects of study, and the personnel involved in laboratory research conduct
experiments utilizing, for instance, laboratory protocols tailored to the
specific conditions of Bolivian laboratories. Furthermore, there is a relative
lack of ethnographic studies on the growth of scientific research in developing
countries, as well as a need for further investigation into how neo-liberal
economic policies influence ideas of national identity that in turn shape
specific political agendas. Therefore, this project will address issues and
processes that have not been extensively studied, while drawing upon and making
a contribution to both the science studies and anthropological literature due to
the subject matter and methods of investigation. &lt;br/&gt;This research will
illuminate how a national science infrastructure is developed, and how the
research agendas guiding this development reflect and respond to global trends;
in this case, the privatization of national resources. It will also show how
biology, particularly human biology, is being used to justify certain claims
about citizenship, nationhood, and identity by various interest groups. This
project is thus more than an ethnography of Bolivia or a focused study of
laboratory practices and their epistemologies, for it will speak to issues that
are being confronted in increasingly strident, sometimes violent, ways
throughout the developing world. In addition, this project will address how
scientific research can figure into the framework of a nation and begin
elucidating the increasingly privileged role that human biology has in national
research agendas throughout the world. Furthermore, as discussed above, it will
contribute to several bodies of literature simultaneously, while addressing a
previously under-studied area of social life. &lt;br/&gt;