* 0314709
* New Approaches to Electronic Materials Based on Conjugated Oligomers and Polymers.
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* T. Don Tilley, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2006
* USD 456,800.00

This proposal describes research on the synthesis of conjugated organic
materials, making use of newly discovered carbon-carbon bond-forming processes,
which are based on (1) the couplings of alkynes with zirconium, and (2)
nucleophilic aromatic substitutions involving fluorinated arenes. Using these
synthetic methods, several new types of conjugated materials will be generated,
including materials designed to have high electron affinities and operate as
efficient electron-transporting (n-type) materials. The n-type materials
developed in this program will be incorporated into field effect transistors and
light-emitting devices, and the performances of these devices will be evaluated.
Other structures to be targeted are expected to be highly emissive and therefore
of use in light-emitting devices. Finally, synthetic routes to macromolecular
and oligomeric species that combine p- and n-type segments will be explored. The
solid-state structures and mesophases of such materials will be studied in
detail, and specific examples will be investigated as components in new solar
cell devices. With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program, Professor T. Don Tilley, of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of California - Berkeley, is studying new approaches to electronic
materials based on conjugated oligomers and polymers. In recent years, the
electronics industry has made significant contributions to the economy and our
standard of living. These developments have been fueled by the design and
discovery of new materials that allow breakthroughs in the fabrication of
electronic devices. Conjugated oligomers and polymers have attracted
considerable interest for their potential to replace inorganic components in
electronic devices such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs), field-effect
transistors (FETs) and photovoltaic cells. Much of this interest stems from the
wide range of properties that are potentially accessible and the available
opportunities for tuning these properties via synthetic manipulation of the
organic material's structure. Recently, this field gained considerable momentum
with the realization of practical devices based on such "plastic" materials.
Commercial applications have now emerged, and conducting organic materials are
expected to play an expanding role in future technologies. The pace of this
progress will be heavily influenced by the development of new organic materials
with useful electronic properties. The proposed research is well suited for the
training of young scientists, providing them with a good overview of important
issues in science and technology and helping them to develop a broad set of
technical skills and promote innovation and creativity.