* 0314618
* Surface Chemistry for Molecular and Biomolecular Interfaces to Group IV Semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Robert Hamers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 07/31/2006
* USD 440,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CHE-
0314618&lt;br/&gt;Hamers/Wisconsin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, Professor Hamers and his coworkers at
the University of Wisconsin-Madison are examining routes to the surface
modification of diamond and silicon surfaces. Photochemical and electrochemical
modification routes are developed that will allow the attachment of chemically
and biochemically interesting species to the surface of active semiconductor
materials. Robust chemical and biological sensor platforms result from the
attachment process. Readout of these sensor structures is accomplished through
the application of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to selectively modify and control the
attachment of proteins and other biologically important molecules to
semiconductor surfaces is important for the development of sensor systems. With
the support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, Professor Hamers
and his coworkers are exploring novel photochemical and electrochemical methods
for the modification of diamond and silicon surfaces. These robust sensor
structures are then characterized using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy.
This work promises new routes to important chemical and biochemical sensor
arrays. &lt;br/&gt;