* 0314349
* Development of a Proton Transfer Reaction Linear Ion Trap for Fast Atmospheric Pollutant Detection
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Paul Shepson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2008
* USD 535,000.00

Professors Paul Shepson and Scott McLuckey of Purdue University and Professor
Armin Hansel of the University of Innsbruck are supported by the Analytical and
Surface Chemistry and Atmospheric Chemistry Programs to develop and evaluate a
novel instrument for fast and sensitive detection of atmospheric pollutants. The
research is motivated by the fact that volatile organic compounds from
vegetation participate in significant ways in the production of tropospheric
ozone, which is an important greenhouse gas. There is thus a great need for
quantitative information about exchange of gases with forest ecosystems. The
instrument, called a Proton Transfer Reaction Linear Ion Trap, is a combination
flow tube reactor and linear quadrupole mass spectrometer, with a unique new
design that uses end plates with appropriate applied potentials that enable
trapping of ions within the axis of the quadrupole rods. Analyte ions are
produced in a flow tube that allows for reaction with protons, followed by
sampling to the mass spectrometer; the known reaction kinetics can allow for
quantitative detection without calibration standards. Selected ions can then be
excited with an applied AC potential, resulting in collision induced
dissociation, and acquisition of MS/MS spectra. Flux measurements will be
possible using the eddy covariance flux technique. This project involves a
collaborative effort between groups expert in mass spectrometry, instrument
development and atmospheric chemistry. The developed instrumentation will be
tested at Purdue and then field tested at a forest site in northern Michigan as
part of a large-scale study (PROPHET) of forest-atmosphere interactions. The
first generation instrument will be used to conduct measurements of the
oxidation products (methyl vinyl ketone and methacrolein) of biogenic isoprene,
and to conduct measurements of the fluxes of isoprene from the forest canopy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the potential to impact several fields
including trace detection and atmospheric chemistry. The role of volatile
organic compounds (VOCs) in mediating the impacts of rising carbon dioxide
levels is not well understood. This research is thus an important element in
understanding and predicting global surface temperature changes. &lt;br/&gt;