* 0314510
* Estrogen: A post-hatch modulator of reproductive fitness in birds
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* James Millam, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2008
* USD 336,624.00

Estrogen: A post-hatch modulator of reproductive fitness in birds James R.
Millam University of California, Davis

Treatment of zebra finch chicks (Taeniopygia guttata) with the female hormone
estrogen masculinizes female brains. As adults, such females are capable of
song, whereas normally female finch cannot sing. Oral exposure of chicks to
estrogen also impairs later reproductive performance by increasing the incidence
of eggshell breakage and, in males, by decreasing fertility. Vulnerability to
early exposure to estrogen may be related to their relatively immature state of
development at hatch/birth (altriciality). Manmade substances in the environment
(xenoestrogens) that chemically resemble animal estrogens and substances
produced naturally by plants (phytoestrogens), collectively termed
"environmental estrogens," may similarly alter normal development of songbirds.
The objective of this project is to characterize the consequences of early
environmental estrogen exposure on adult reproductive performance. The specific
aims are: a) to determine how drought increases the estrogenic potency of seeds
consumed by granivorous songbirds; b) to determine the potency of xeno- and
phytoestrogens to induce oviduct growth in female chicks and to induce
biosynthesis of an estrogen-sensitive protein, vitellogenin, in male and female
chicks (both are estrogen bioassays); and c) to determine dose-response
relationships between phytoestrogen and xenoestrogen exposure and an array of
reproductive performance measures known or postulated to be altered by early
estrogen exposure (e.g., number and fertility of eggs, eggshell structure,
alteration of male copulatory behavior). The results of this research may reveal
novel mechanisms of plant-animal interactions, wherein drought-stressed plants
may increase phytoestrogen production to combat predation by avian predators.
The results may also have regulatory relevance, with respect to the development
of endocrine disruptor screening programs to evaluate the estrogenicity of
thousands of drugs and chemicals. This research could dramatize the need to
include an ecologically- and phylogenetically-justified altricial avian species
in endocrine disruptor screening programs.

