* 0314395
* Dissertation Research: The Effects of Water Scarcity on Reciprocity and Sociability in Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2003,03/31/2006
* H. Russell Bernard, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2006
* USD 11,020.00

Reports on the state of freshwater reserves warn that severe local shortages are
imminent, and predict that violent conflicts will emerge in water-scarce regions
around the world. Water scarcity has been shown to cause civil conflict,
particularly when accompanied by high population density, poverty, and income
inequality. Urban migrant communities, where ethnic, religious, and class
differences can exacerbate tensions, and community-wide patterns of adaptation
to environmental scarcities are not well-formed, may be particularly vulnerable
to water conflicts. To better understand how conflicts develop in water-scarce
regions, a PhD student of cultural anthropology will sample 60 households in
Villa Israel, a barrio of Cochabamba, Bolivia, where conflict over water is an
established part of life. Every winter, seasonal water shortages threaten the
lives of the people of Villa Israel, forcing them to make choices in how they
use their economic and social resources. Using a combination of formal and
informal interviews, participant observation, and archival research, the student
will determine if and how cooperative economic and social ties break down during
the dry season, facilitating the emergence of conflicts.

Broader implications: In addition to contributing to the education of a doctoral
student and a Bolivian undergraduate, the study has practical applications for
those seeking to anticipate and manage coming conflicts over scarce freshwater.
By determining when and how social ties become vulnerable during periods of
severe water scarcity, the research will point policymakers and development
planners to possible avenues for conflict prevention in marginal urban
communities.