* 0314133
* Geoscience Education at Grand Canyon: Integrating Research and Education through the Trail of Time Exhibit (planning grant)
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Laura Crossey, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 12/31/2005
* USD 49,997.00

The Grand Canyon offers one of the best exposed and most complete records of
geologic history on Earth. In cooperation with the National Park Service, we
propose to design a world-class geologic exhibit entitled: "The Trail of Time."
The core project involves a 4.6 km-long trail at the edge of the Canyon on the
south rim. The trail itself is the primary "exhibit"; it will be scaled and
marked so that one meter represents one million years of Earth history. Its goal
is to teach visitors about deep time and how geologic history is recorded in the
rock record. Large rocks, interactive displays, maps, and photos will be placed
along the Trail to illustrate geologic history and Earth processes, all in the
context of the spectacular vistas which provide inspiration for learning about
geology, as well as the best "visual aid" imaginable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award provides funds for a second planning year for the Trail of Time. The first
planning year (nearly over) has been very successful. 1) The PIs formed an
Advisory Board, 2) had a first workshop, 3) began exhibit design and front-end
assessment, and , most importantly, 4) forged a formal agreement between the
National Park Service and the University of New Mexico to develop the Trail of
Time. During the workshop and in discussion with the National Park, it became
clear that a second planning year was necessary in order to better define the
goals and design for the project. Thus, the overall goal for this award is to
develop the scientific content for the Trail of Time, start the Trail of Time
website, and develop the broader geoscience education vision for the Trail of
Time that includes K-12, teacher training, and college curriculum development.
In particular, this second planning year will be used to 1) develop a multi-
level science content plan that attempts to convey concepts of geoscience and of
the scientific method to all ages and levels of ability; this will require
further surveys to evaluate the different target levels, 2) begin to design the
Trail of Time website and Park brochures that will announce and track the formal
development of the Trail of Time concept and the time table for implementation
of the physical Trail of Time, and 3) Develop a formal plan for the broader
Trail of Time geoscience program.