* 0314677
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Planetary Boundary Layer Formulation for Improving Monsoon Forecasts
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* T. Krishnamurti, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2006
* USD 14,600.00

Description: This award supports the US-India cooperative research project
entitled Planetary Boundary Layer Formulation for Improving Monsoon Forecasts.
US PI T.N. Krishnamurti, Florida State University (FSU) and Indian meteorologist
S.V. Singh, National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting, New Delhi will
construct a unified planetary boundary layer model for numerical weather
prediction that exploits the strengths and weaknesses of several existing
schemes used by operational weather centers and research groups in different
parts of the globe. They will synthesize the most current schemes and retain the
best aspects of each formulation in order to devise a multimodel superensemble
scheme that will provide future algorithm formulations for short range
forecasting. &lt;br/&gt;Scope: Improved predictions of monsoon precipitation for
the Asian-Australian region are critical for issues of water resources,
agriculture, health, and economic well being for the billions living there. This
research extends work completed by the PI for one region of India to the entire
area affected by the Asian Monsoon. The award supports exchange visits to the
collaborating institutions by graduate students from each institution. Cofunding
for this research is provided by the Indian Department of Science &amp;
Technology under the NSF/DST joint program.