* 0314110
* Tailored and Functionalized Polyolefin Structures via Metathesis Polycondensation Chemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2007
* K. Wagener, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

Acyclic diene metathesis polymerization will be employed in the pursuit of 4
research objectives: to define structure property relationships in branched
polyethylene and related (functionalized) materials, to create a set of "Bio-
Olefins" for tissue engineering and other bioapplications, to explore solid
state metathesis chemistry, and to continue to expand the catalyst base for this
metathesis oriented polycondensation chemistry. Precision synthesis techniques
based on ADMET chemistry will be used to create branched polyethylene, where the
branch identity and frequency can be controlled in an exact manner. Completely
new functionalized versions of polyethylene will be made, and the
structure/property relationships of these model ADMET polymers will be examined.
Doing so will set clear goals for the generation of useful functionalized
polyethylene structures. Collaborations on this aspect of the research are
established with two industrial research laboratories in the USA in addition to
the University of Pennsylvania and the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research
in Germany. Polyolefins containing amino acid and dipeptide branches have been
made via this condensation chemistry, polymers which readily crystallize thus
rendering them as durable materials for biomedical applications. Attaching known
biologically active peptide sequences to the polyolefin backbone will advance
this research. The biological activity of these materials will be examined in
collaboration with two separate research groups, one at the University of
Florida and the other at MIT; higher order structures within these polymers will
be accessed via collaboration with Kyoto University in Japan. Solid-state
metathesis polymerization thus far has produced the first known metathesis
polycondensation chemistry occurring at room temperature. This facile method of
polymer synthesis may prove useful in generating otherwise intractable polymer
structures, some of which are conjugated in nature. Collaborations regarding
this aspect of the work are in place with the research group at the University
of Florida that investigates conjugated polymer systems. The catalyst base for
ADMET chemistry will continue at a low level. Metathesis catalyst research,
which is being done in several organometallic laboratories around the world,
benefits ADMET chemistry; the metathesis catalyst work done within this project
is being tailored especially for metathesis polycondensation.

Polyethylene is the largest volume plastic made in the world, with a demand for
more than 110 billion pounds produced in the year 2000 alone. Its impact on
society is obvious and important, and so conducting research on polyethylene and
related materials can influence a large number of people. This research is
designed to strengthen the utility of polyethylene further by understanding
fundamental issues associated with crystallization of this material, by
synthesizing functionalized versions, and by expanding into tissue engineering,
drug delivery, and other biomedical applications. Amino acids and peptides are
being attached to the backbone of the plastic to create this new class of
biomaterials. The research provides an intensive educational and training basis
for undergraduate, Masters, and PhD students in chemistry and materials science.
Included in the plan are several collaborations with other research groups in
the USA, Germany, and Japan. These interactions will broaden the student's
exposure beyond the University of Florida and our nation.