* 0314740
* Probing the Role of Primary Sequence Asymmetry in a Symmetric Superfold
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Michael Blaber, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2007
* USD 397,180.00

Proteins, one of the basic categories of biological molecules, are able to
perform a wide variety of functions. Their functionality is due to their unique
three-dimensional structures. There are tens of thousands of different proteins
in living cells, yet in almost every case their individual structure can be
described as belonging to just a handful of basic categories of shapes or
"superfolds". Furthermore, the majority of the basic protein superfolds are
symmetric in their general design. While this symmetric organization provides
clues as to how these superfolds may have evolved (and also provides clues as to
how novel proteins could be designed) the symmetry is "imperfect". The nature of
this imperfection may reflect essential features associated with the ability of
a protein to fold, and remain folded, into the unique structures required for
their function. The project will study how protein structure, stability and
folding are affected by the amino acid sequence symmetry within
characteristically important central core region and turn regions of a
representative member of the beta-trefoil symmetric superfold. The research will
provide a major advance in our understanding of the relationship between the
evolutionary mechanism of gene duplication and fusion and the requirements for a
foldable polypeptide. Furthermore, the research will help further our
understanding of how proteins can be effectively designed, and have a major
impact upon the application of proteins in novel
uses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The research will provide
comprehensive training for graduate and undergraduate students in contemporary
biophysical and biochemical methodologies, and foster one-on-one mentoring
between graduate and undergraduate students that is essential for effective
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;