* 0314215
* LTREB:  Interaction of Below- and Above- Ground Herbivory in Forest Gap Formation:Long-Term Analysis of Underlying Mechanisms and Spatio-temporal Patterns
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2009
* John Reeve, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 03/31/2009
* USD 348,233.00

The overall purpose of this research is to explore the effects of, and the
interactions between, herbivory on stems and herbivory on roots of red pine
trees. Interactions between below-ground and above-ground processes such as
herbivory are widely recognized as important but are poorly understood
components of terrestrial ecosystems. In red pine, the group of herbivores that
feeds on stems includes bark beetles and other boring insects; a different group
of organisms feeds on tree roots. Previous results suggest that root-colonizing
beetles also bring fungi into a few trees in new stands. These organisms do not
kill mature trees, but they interfere with transport of materials (water,
nutrients, carbon) between stems and roots. This interference reduces trees'
ability to resist infection by bark beetles. At the same time that bark beetle
infestation is increasing, fungi spread through roots and contribute to tree
mortality. As infected trees die, different types of plants colonize the
resulting empty space, leading to major vegetational changes in the forest. The
specific objectives of the current study are to 1) study the effects that
herbivory on roots has on susceptibility to stem herbivores, 2) measure
movements of root beetles, bark beetles and their predators among trees and
among forests, and 3) conduct experiments to determine the relative importance
of stem-colonizing organisms, root-colonizing organisms, and their predators in
tree mortality and gap (open forest space) formation. Because bark and root
insects cause significant losses in commercial and natural forests, results from
this study will aid forest management and public land management. The study will
provide a better understanding of the scale at which crop diversity can reduce
losses. The research will also contribute to science training by emphasizing
interdisciplinary education at the undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate
levels.