* 0314217
* Dissertation Research: The Institutionalization of South African Street Youth in Urban Shelters
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Eric Worby, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/2004
* USD 4,259.00

This dissertation project will examine the institutional experiences of street
children in urban shelters in Durban, South Africa,. The project distinguishes
state-sponsored shelters from a newly emerging type of institution, known as
"informal" street shelters. Established by youth for youth, informal shelters
are places where street youth congregate to create adaptable living conditions
for their everyday survival. Instead of focusing on deviance, this project will
investigate informal shelters as alternative sites of youth participation where
children mitigate the daily realities of urban poverty and create a meaningful
sense of social order. Through anthropological methods of participant-
observation, semi-structured interviews, surveys, and archival research, this
project will investigate cultural formations of youth identity that occur in
these highly marginal settings. This project will examine how street youth both
draw upon and depart from the norms of state institutionalization to structure
alternative notions of personhood and community. By examining the emergence of
informal shelters, this research project will analyze how young people act
positively to create meaning in their difficult lives. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Aside from contributing to the education of a young social scientist,
the research findings of this project will assist in policy initiatives that
focus on the presence of street youth in urbanized, African
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;