* 0314211
* Dissertation research: Ecological knowledge and success in a Puerto Rican small-scale fishery
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Ervan Garrison, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 05/31/2005
* USD 11,985.00

This dissertation research by a doctoral student at the University of Georgia
will investigate the relationships between local Traditional Ecological
Knowledge (TEK) held by small-scale fishers and their success in a tropical
estuarine-reef fishery in Jobos Bay, southeastern Puerto Rico. The central
hypothesis to be tested is that the more ecological knowledge fishers have, the
more successful they will be. Highly knowledgeable fishers in the area will be
interviewed on their knowledge of local resource species and ecosystems and what
constitutes success in fishing according to local standards. After analyzing the
interview data, a random sample of fishers from the local population will be
interviewed to assess their ecological knowledge. Their responses will be
compared with the responses of the expert fishermen to measure variation in
ecological knowledge, which will then be correlated with their success in
fishing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will provide
valuable information for government agencies addressing tropical fisheries
issues by adding to the understanding of the determinants of success in small-
scale tropical fisheries, and documenting resource users' empirical knowledge of
the marine ecosystem that could prove useful for future management. If TEK is an
important predictor of social and economic success in this modern small-scale
fishery, then this research can serve to underscore the need to integrate TEK
into management schemes and activities. This study also engages Puerto Rican
undergraduate students in the research, providing: opportunities for the
training and involvement of a traditionally underrepresented group in the
sciences, and a vehicle for Puerto Rican students to become familiar with
social/environmental issues of local and ecological importance. &lt;br/&gt;