* 0314150
* WorkShop: Summer Workshop for Synchrotron Radiation in Biological Research to be held on June 2-6, 2003 in Baton Rouge, Louisiana
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2004
* Marcia Newcomer, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 04/30/2004
* USD 12,000.00

This project supports attendance of young participants in the Summer Workshop
for Synchrotron Radiation in Biological Research, which will be held at Baton
Rouge, Louisiana from June 2-6, 2003. The purpose of this workshop is to
introduce biophysical techniques, which utilize powerful X-ray sources to
biologists, molecular biologists, geneticists and biochemists. X-rays provide an
important tool to study biological molecules, and synchrotrons provide
scientists with an exceptionally powerful x-ray source. The workshop will
introduce the participants to the theory and practice of techniques that utilize
synchrotron radiation in biological research. Speakers at the workshop will
describe the different techniques that utilize X-rays to image biological
molecules and structures. In addition, participants will have the opportunity to
gain first hand experience in the use of these techniques so that they may in
the future apply the methods to their specific areas of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is open to any scientist wishing to
apply the various x-ray imaging techniques to his/her area of research. Special
efforts will be made to invite scientists from minority-serving institutions.
Because a synchrotron source is a specialized facility, students, post-doctoral
associates and principal investigators at many research institutions have little
opportunity to survey these techniques. A workshop in the synchotron use will
provide the participants with a research exposure they are unable to obtain at
their home institutions. Furthermore, once they obtain this expertise they will
be able to travel to the various synchrotron facilities to pursue further
studies.&lt;br/&gt;