* 0314273
* Post-Collapse Transformations in Late Prehispanic Nasca
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Christina Conlee, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2009
* USD 131,332.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Christina Conlee will conduct three
field seasons of archaeological research in Nasca, Peru at the late prehispanic
site of La Tiza. The Nasca Valley is located in the southern desert coastal
region of Peru at the foothills of the Andes. The period following state
collapse is a dynamic time in which societies are restructured and new types of
social, political, and economic organization emerge. Despite the important
transformations that occur during these periods there is a lack of
archaeological study on how societies reform after a time of disruption. This
project is focused on testing the hypothesis that the collapse of the Wari
empire facilitated changes in elite activities and transformed the foundations
and relations of power in the Nasca region. The result was the development of a
fundamentally new type of society in the following Late Intermediate Period (AD
1000-1476). This model will be tested through investigations at the site of La
Tiza, the largest settlement in Nasca during the Late Intermediate Period and
probably the political capital of the drainage. Three seasons of excavations and
analyses are designed to: 1) identify elite versus non-elite domestic areas; 2)
investigate the various levels of the social/political hierarchy; and 3)
establish what activities elites were associated with and wielded power through.
Excavations will recover information from four different types of domestic
architecture that have been identified at the site and from specialized activity
areas that include cemeteries, ritual lookout areas, and workshops. Various
types of analyses will be undertaken from the data collected at the site. These
include an analysis of architecture, ceramic manufacturing and distribution
(including chemical compositional studies), food remains, prestige items, and
exchange patterns.

The project team will include a variety of personnel including a Peruvian co-
director, Peruvian archaeologists, students from the United States and Peru, and
specialists from both countries. This project will contribute to general studies
of social transformations and the development of complex societies. In
particular, it will address the types of changes that take place after a period
of state collapse and local disruption. The approach used to study these
transformations includes a consideration of collapse, elite agency, and power
and will build on other studies conducted in different regions and time periods
that have addressed these issues. The broader impacts of this project are that
it emphasizes collaboration between Peruvian and American archaeologists and
students, and will provide important training for professionals and students
from both countries. The results of this project will be disseminated widely to
both scholars and the general public through presentations and written articles
in both Spanish and English.

