* 0314808
* Institute for Advanced Study/Park City Mathematics Institute
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2013
* Phillip Griffiths, Institute For Advanced Study
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 08/31/2013
* USD 7,403,164.00

The IAS/Park City Mathematics Institute (PCMI), with a 12-year history of
preparing high-school teacher leaders to improve their own practice and
implement professional development for their peers pilots a transfer mechanism
of its own professional development to three diverse school districts across the
nation Cincinnati, OH; McAllen, TX; and Seattle, WA. &lt;br/&gt;PCMI
traditionally deals with high school teachers. This proposal broadens
participation by including middle school teachers. Three school districts
representing diverse student populations form partnerships with local institutes
of higher education. Districts identify 4-6 secondary and middle schools for
initial participation and all teachers of mathematics in the designated schools
become involved over the course of three years. The three-year plan includes
building a cadre of teacher leaders by their participation in at least two PCMI
summer sessions. PCMI partners with a university mathematics department in each
district to provide local resources to the mathematics teachers supporting
implementation of the professional development model. District mathematics
supervisors coordinate with teacher leaders to design and implement local
professional development programs that meet the needs of peer mathematics
teachers in selected schools. &lt;br/&gt;Districts design a professional
development model that directly addresses the needs of its own teachers and
students based upon state standards and local education environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation determines the effectiveness of partnerships,
teacher-leader formation, transfer model, and district leadership teams.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;