* 0314380
* The Role of Xanthophylls in the Mechanism of Nonradiative Energy Dissipation in Photosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Harry Frank, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2007
* USD 419,872.00

Photosynthetic organisms contain protective mechanisms by which excess light
energy is dissipated before it leads to the photodestruction of the
photosynthetic apparatus. Also, energy flow from light-harvesting pigment-
protein complexes to the photosynthetic reaction center is highly regulated. The
controlling features of these processes are not well understood. Xanthophyll
pigments have been implicated in the mechanisms, but the precise nature of their
involvement is unclear. In order to address this issue steady state absorption,
fluorescence, two-photon excitation, and time-resolved absorption and
fluorescence spectroscopic experiments will be performed. These experiments will
probe the energies and electronic configurations of the excited states of the
xanthophylls and measure the efficiencies and dynamics of energy transfer
between the xanthophylls and chlorophylls. Also, electrochemical analyses will
be done to examine the oxidation potentials of the molecules. The xanthophylls
to be studied differ in their structures, extents of pi-electron conjugation,
excited state energies and oxidation potentials. This research will investigate
precisely how energy dissipation and energy flow regulation are accomplished
through a systematic study of these molecules in native, recombinant, and
reconstituted pigment-protein complexes isolated from higher plants and algae.
The major objective of this study is to examine each of the molecular factors
thought to be important in these processes in order to reveal the detailed
mechanisms by which they take place in vivo. This work is expected to lead to a
better understanding of how plants convert solar energy into chemical energy and
withstand stress under excess solar energy conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this study include having the participating students obtain
experience in the techniques for the isolation, purification and
characterization of biological materials and in sophisticated optical
spectroscopic methodologies. Part of their training will include writing papers
and making presentations at scientific meetings at which the results of the
studies will be openly disseminated. This project also involves the
participation of a faculty member from an undergraduate institution. His direct
involvement in the project would expand his research horizons and will have an
impact on the science education at a liberal arts undergraduate institution.