* 0314705
* Development of Specific Regression Models Involving Latent Classes in Social Research
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Kazuo Yamaguchi, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2007
* USD 144,996.00

This project aims at developing three new groups of specific regression models
for the analysis of social and individual processes. All the three regression
models involve latent classes for the purpose of both the measurement of
quantities that are not directly observed and the reflection of specific aspects
of unobserved population heterogeneity. One group consists of multinomial logit
latent-class regression models with special contrasts among the dependent
latent-class categories, and it will be developed for the analysis of
intrasocietal group comparisons of social mobility. The second group consists of
regression extensions of the mover-stayer model, which is a special case of the
two-class model, for the panel data analysis of stability and change in public
opinions. The third group of models, latent-choice models, assume a pair of
dichotomous latent-class variables that represent husband's and wife's latent
choices as covariates of an observed dichotomous dependent variable for the
discrete-time hazard-rate analysis of a family event using pairs of event-
history data of married couples. Although the three groups of models differ in
form and substantive application, they are all intended for the analysis of
social and individual processes using latent classes. For each model, the study
addresses issues related to (1) specific parameterizations of models, especially
about latent classes, regarding possible new insights that such
parameterizations may provide in the analysis of particular social and
individual processes, (2) the stability of parameter estimates, and (3)
comparisons of results from models to be developed in the project with those
from related existing alternative models.

The three groups of specific latent-class models are expected to yield
substantive findings that cannot be made, or cannot be obtained definitively,
without using them in the areas of social research for which the models are
intended. The substantive area of applications of the first group of models is
intrasocietal group comparisons of social mobility, such as differences in
social mobility patterns, for which an analysis based on existing mobility
models has serous limitations. The models to be developed in the project will
shed new light on racial/ethnic inequality of social opportunity. The
substantive area of applications of the second group of models is the panel-data
analysis of change in public opinion. The models separate the prediction of
positive versus negative response from the prediction of the stability of these
responses by assuming that responses of a population are based on unobserved
heterogeneous confidence levels. An application, such as an analysis of the rise
and the fall of support for the first Bush administration through the years
1990-92, may yield such a finding that an apparently high rate of support for
the government administration stands on a weak basis because supporters'
confidence levels are much lower than nonsupporters' confidence levels. The
substantive area of applications of the third group of models is the analysis of
a family process having as its outcome a family event, such as divorce,
childbirth, a residential move, or the purchase of a house -- regarding which
the husband and the wife may or may not agree with each other. The models will
try not only to identify the predictors of latent individual choices but also
the predictors of unobserved family heterogeneity regarding (1) the relative
"power" between husband and wife in causing event occurrence or nonoccurrence,
and (2) the extent to which a consensus between wife and husband is required to
yield the occurrence of the family event.