* 0314704
* Collaborative Research:      Effect of Chemistry and Molecular Transport on Tubular Premixed Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Robert Pitz, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 08/31/2008
* USD 294,003.00

This study analyzes the structure of highly curved, lean, premixed flames in the
tubular geometry using both advanced laser diagnostics and detailed computer
simulations. Fuels studied are hydrogen, methane, and propane. A tubular,
premixed flame, where premixed reactants flow radially inward to form a
stretched cylindrical flame, is an ideal fundamental configuration for the
numerical study of curvature and stretch. The tubular configuration can be
mathematically simplified to a two-point boundary-value problem where solutions
incorporating complex chemistry and detailed molecular transport can be
determined in a short time on a personal computer. The study uses a unique
optically accessible tubular burner that incorporates optical ports for
application of advanced laser diagnostics (e.g., Raman scattering and
fluorescence). Recent Raman measurements of gas composition and temperature in
lean hydrogen-air tubular flames show excellent agreement with calculations at
low stretch values. However at high stretch, large theory-data discrepancies
point to the need for improvement in chemical and/or molecular-transport
modeling in lean tubular flames near extinction. This work studies lean premixed
tubular flames with advanced laser diagnostics and numerical models
incorporating detailed transport and complex chemistry. Near-extinction tubular
flames are studied to determine the effects of molecular transport and chemical
mechanism on the model-data comparisons. The studies focus on high-curvature
flames where the flame radius to flame thickness is near unity. To vary Lewis
number effects, various fuels are studied. The arc-length continuation method is
used to properly predict the extinction condition. A full two-dimensional model
of the tubular flame is developed to check the self-similarity assumption near
extinction. Finally, the premixed tubular flame interaction with surfaces is
studied with implications for design of micro-combustors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study unites the capabilities of an advanced laser
diagnostics laboratory at Vanderbilt University and a state-of-the-art
combustion simulation group at Yale University. Graduate and undergraduate
students including underrepresented minorities are involved in the research.
Lean fuel/air premixing produces clean and efficient combustion in gasoline-
fueled automobiles and methane-fueled gas turbines for electric power
generation. Lean premixed flames in practical devices are stretched and curved
by turbulence but there are few comprehensive experimental-numerical studies of
the effects of both curvature and stretch. Most previous studies have focused on
stretched planar premixed flames. Curvature in premixed flames is important as
the combination of differential diffusion and curvature can greatly affect the
flame temperature, gas composition, and pollutant formation. Flame extinction
can be retarded or promoted by curvature and curved flames can exist below the
standard lean flammability limit; sublimit. flames have the promise of producing
very low pollutant emission at high levels of efficiency. Students will present
their results at research conferences. Students will be exposed to the latest
computer simulation and laser diagnostic facilities. Faculty will mentor junior
and senior high-school students in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;