* 0314279
* Dynamics of Disordered Non-Equilibrium Systems: Hysteresis, Noise, and Domain Wall Dynamics in Systems Ranging from Magnets to Earthquakes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Karin Dahmen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2006
* USD 156,000.00

Many systems "crackle"; when pushed slowly they respond with discrete events in
a broad distribution of sizes and durations. The earth responds to slow tectonic
motion with quakes ranging in size from tiny tremors to devastating multitude-
nine quakes. Similarly, a magnetic tape in a slowly changing external magnetic
field magnetizes in a series of jumps (Barkhausen noise) - avalanches of
reorienting magnetic domains that range from microscopic to macroscopic in size.

In the past few years there has been rapid progress in developing models and
theories of scale-invariant, often-universal behavior in driven, disordered,
nonlinear, dynamical systems. This theoretical project will carefully test some
of these models against experimental results, extract universal predictions for
future experiments, extend the models if necessary to adequately describe
experiments, and explore the size of the corresponding universality classes. The
methods employed range from numerical simulations to scaling theories, and draw
on ideas ranging from hydrodynamics to dynamical and disordered systems theory.

Intellectual merit: Barkhausen noise serves as an ideal experimental example
system for studying collective "crackling" noise in hysteretic systems. It is
relatively accessible to experiments and is also of commercial interest, as for
non-destructive testing. The non-equilibrium zero temperature random field Ising
model (RFIM) and recent variants (with applications far beyond magnetic systems)
have been extraordinarily successful in modeling universal scaling exponents
obtained from Barkhausen noise measurements in a large class of different
materials. Adding temperature fluctuations to the model at finite field sweep
rate, the entire experimentally relevant crossover regime from far-from
equilibrium to close-to equilibrium will be explored and compared to recent
experiments in magnetic and ferroelectric systems. The corresponding equilibrium
and non-equilibrium universality classes will be compared in detail, to answer
long-standing questions relevant to both experiments and applications.

Broader impact is two-fold. Students involved with the project will gain a broad
range of skills and learn to work with groups of theorists, experimentalists and
possibly industrial representatives. Besides being of great fundamental
importance, the results of this research hold promise of technological
applications. %%% Many systems "crackle"; when pushed slowly they respond with
discrete events in a broad distribution of sizes and durations. The earth
responds to slow tectonic motion with quakes ranging in size from tiny tremors
to devastating multitude-nine quakes. Similarly, a magnetic tape in a slowly
changing external magnetic field magnetizes in a series of jumps (Barkhausen
noise) - avalanches of reorienting magnetic domains that range from microscopic
to macroscopic in size.

In the past few years there has been rapid progress in developing models and
theories of scale-invariant, often-universal behavior in driven, disordered,
nonlinear, dynamical systems. This theoretical project will carefully test some
of these models against experimental results, extract universal predictions for
future experiments, extend the models if necessary to adequately describe
experiments, and explore the size of the corresponding universality classes. The
methods employed range from numerical simulations to scaling theories, and draw
on ideas ranging from hydrodynamics to dynamical and disordered systems theory.
***