* 0314353
* Establishing an Internship Program for Underrepresented Minority Students at Science and Technology Centers
* O/D,OIA
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 03/31/2008
* USD 653,451.00

OIA-0314353&lt;br/&gt;McBay&lt;br/&gt;Quality Education for Minorities
Network&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the late 1980's, the Quality Education for
Minorities (QEM) Network, a non-profit organization, has been instrumental in
improving the education of under-represented groups in science, mathematics,
engineering and technology that have been historically underserved by the
nation's educational system. A successor to the Quality Education for Minorities
Project based at MIT, QEM continues to develop effective strategies of STEM
education for minorities, and focuses on issues and barriers that prevent
minorities from receiving a high quality education. Through technical assistance
workshops, conferences and internships, QEM has been successful in providing
students and faculty with the necessary tools required to be competitive in
securing federal program support for research, research-training and science
education projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon the success of its
internship programs for undergraduate students, QEM will develop and implement
an internship for STEM doctoral students and faculty at minority-serving
institutions to participate in research and educational activities at NSF-
sponsored Science and Technology Centers (STCs). Besides providing a rich
atmosphere for encouraging future scientists and engineers, STCs conduct
innovative, world-class research of national importance, that promise to
contribute to the Nation's competitive potential through discovery and
education. The QEM-STC internship will offer a significant number of under-
represented students and faculty the opportunity to participate in STC-based
research. Consequently broadening the participation of all citizens, and
enhancing diversity within NSF's programs in regards to the Foundation's
strategic goal of People, Tools, and Ideas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;