* 0314255
* SGER:  High Throughput Screening of Arabidopsis Root Volatiles Induced By Biotic Stress
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Jorge Vivanco, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 07/31/2004
* USD 72,500.00

The roots of plants release about 5-20% percent of all photosynthetically-fixed
carbon, and as a result create a carbon-rich environment for numerous
rhizosphere organisms, including several plant pathogens and symbiotic microbes.
An important result of the Arabidopsis genome project is that it is now feasible
to begin identifying the genes that are expressed in roots and that mediate
root-rhizosphere interactions. Although some chemical characterization of root
exudates has been achieved specially for secondary metabolites, much less is
known about volatile organic compounds (VOCs) released by roots. In this
project, a novel approach to explore these rhizosphere interactions will be
investigated. A new technology, proton-transfer-reaction mass spectrometry (PTR-
MS), that allows rapid and real time analysis of virtually all biogenic VOCs
without preconcentration or chromatography will be applied to the analysis of
root VOCs. Specific objectives are: (1) application of PTR-MS to analyze total
VOC emission from Arabidopsis roots in response to normal conditions versus
abiotic and biotic stresses; (2) screening a subset of Arabidopsis T-DNA mutants
for key biotic-induced root VOCs. This research will provide the broader benefit
of the training of a postdoctoral scholar in a multidisciplinary research
atmosphere. If successful, this work will demonstrate to the science community
that PTR-MS is a valuable analytical tool which offers great potential for
discovery when combined with a genomics approach.