* 0315493
* Acquisition of Particle Tracking Instrumentation for Soft Matter and Biomaterials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* James Harden, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 89,000.00

This grant provides support for the acquisition of particle tracking
instrumentation for soft matter and biomaterials research and education at Johns
Hopkins University. In particle tracking, colloids are suspended in a complex
fluid, and their motion is measured and analyzed. The study of this motion,
which can result from thermal fluctuations, interactions with other particles or
the host fluid, or the application of external fields, provides a unique probe
of fundamental properties of complex fluids as well as an important avenue for
applications. This new instrument will make possible a new research program
focused on studies of orientational ordering, pair interactions, and controlled
self-assembly of magnetic nanowires in nematic liquid crystals. They will enable
existing programs on soft glassy materials and protein hydrogels to branch into
new directions, and will provide needed new capabilities to advance studies of
the microrheology of the cytoskeleton in living cells.

These unique instrumental capabilities will be available to experimenters across
the Johns Hopkins materials research community through a convenient user access
arrangement. The particle-tracking instrument will also be an important resource
for student training, educational efforts, and outreach programs in soft matter
and biomaterials at Johns Hopkins. The strongly visual nature of particle
tracking techniques makes them highly well suited for introducing young
scientists and potential scientists to materials research. Among the specific
educational plans for the instrument is its integration into the curriculum of a
new interdisciplinary laboratory course on complex fluids targeted at upper-
level undergraduates and beginning graduate students.

