* 0315468
* Functional Analysis of Codon Bias in the Adh Gene of Drosophila melanogaster
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* David Carlini, American University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2008
* USD 170,190.00

There are two types of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in protein-coding
genes: "replacement" or non-synonymous polymorphisms, which result in amino acid
substitutions in the encoded polypeptide, and "silent" or synonymous
polymorphisms, which do not result in amino acid substitutions. Due to their
effects on the primary structures of encoded polypeptides, the functional
effects of non-synonymous SNPs have been studied extensively. The functional
effects of synonymous SNPs, on the other hand, have received comparatively
little attention from researchers. Synonymous SNPs can potentially affect the
level of protein synthesis; consequently, silent variation can also affect
fitness. This is evidenced by the fact that synonymous codons are not used with
equal frequency, a phenomenon known as codon bias. Several lines of evidence
suggest that codon bias is due to natural selection for translational accuracy
and/or efficiency at synonymous sites, but few experimental studies have been
conducted to confirm the importance of codon bias in multicellular eukaryotes as
a means of regulating protein expression. The goal of this project is to
determine the functional effects of synonymous substitutions by experimentally
altering codon bias in the Drosophila alcohol dehydrogenase (Adh) gene. In
particular, this research will accomplish the following three objectives: (1)
The translational selection hypothesis will be vigorously tested through the in
vivo introduction of a number of optimal and sub-optimal codons into the
Drosophila Adh gene. Transgenic flies will be constructed using P-element
mediated germline transformation, and the translational effects of synonymous
mutations will be assessed through measurements of protein expression. (2) The
position dependence of synonymous mutations will be investigated by comparing
the expression and fitness of constructs containing ten unpreferred mutations at
the 5' end of the Adh gene with constructs containing 10 unpreferred mutations
at the 3' end of the gene. (3) The fitness effects of preferred and unpreferred
synonymous substitutions will be investigated directly by performing ethanol
tolerance and population cage experiments. Regression analysis of the fitness
and protein expression data will determine if the effects of synonymous
mutations are additive or epistatic.

Synonymous codons, those that encode the same amino acid, are not used with
equal frequency in most organisms. This pattern of variation is known as codon
bias. The functional significance of synonymous variation will be investigated
by experimentally altering levels of codon bias in the fruit fly Drosophila
melanogaster. The effects of changes in codon bias will be examined by measuring
protein expression and fitness in transgenic flies. This research will
contribute to our understanding of the significance and evolutionary dynamics of
synonymous variation in natural populations.