* 0315480
* Gas-Phase Studies of Organic Biradicals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Hilkka Kenttamaa, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2006
* USD 435,000.00

With this Renewal award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the
Chemistry Division supports the work of Dr. Hilkka I. Kenttamaa of the
Department of Chemistry at Purdue University. This research provides long-
sought-after reactivity information for elusive aromatic biradicals. Reactivity
studies on organic biradicals are hindered by their high reactivity and short
lifetime in solution. Very little is currently known, for example, about
reaction kinetics and selectivity of many aromatic biradicals, and even less
about the factors that control this reactivity. However, it is highly desirable
to obtain such information since aromatic biradicals play a key role in many
reactions, ranging from organic synthesis to the biological effects of antitumor
antibiotics. In the past, the PI and her research group have developed gas-
phase methodology for the characterization of organic radicals. This methodology
is now adapted for the examination of biradicals. Kinetic reactivity studies are
carried out on isolated biradicals in the gas phase by using FT-ICR mass
spectrometry. The radicals are manipulated in the mass spectrometer via a
chemically inert charged group attached to the radical (distonic ion approach).
Identification of reaction products and determination of reaction rate constants
for many different reaction systems yields new information on the fundamental
factors that control organic biradicals reactivity. The specific effects of the
charged group are independently explored. Thermochemical information is obtained
using a flowing-afterglow quadrupole-octopole-quadrupole apparatus. This
instrument is also used to study in detail some of the novel triply- charged
addition products formed in the biradical reactions. Molecular orbital
calculations are carried out to theoretically examine the systems in
collaboration with two experts, Dr. John Nash (Purdue) and Professor Chris
Cramer (U.Minnesota).

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division
supports Dr. Hilkka I. Kenttamaa of the Department of Chemistry at Purdue
University who will develop new experimental methodologies for characterization
of elusive reaction intermediates that will have an impact on experimental
physical organic chemistry. Fundamental knowledge obtained on the properties of
poorly understood organic biradicals will facilitate the rational design of
biradicals with properties tailored for use, for example, in organic synthesis
and in new cancer treatments. Professor Kenttamaa will continue her excellent
track record in promoting the integration of research and education. Previous
accomplishments have seen more than 20 graduate and undergraduate students carry
out all the aspects of the research and disseminate the results under Professor
Kenttamaa's supervision. Ten PhD's graduated and each secured an excellent job
in industry, national laboratories or academia during the last grant period.
About half of the participating students are female or belong to
underrepresented groups (mostly African-American). Geographic diversity
includes, students from South Africa, Ghana, Nigeria, India, China, Belize,
Canada and the US. Professor Kenttamaa's results will continue to be published
in peer reviewed chemistry journals and disseminated via seminars given by
Professor Kenttamaa and her students at national and international conferences
on organic, biological and analytical chemistry, mass spectrometry and gas-phase
ion chemistry, and in undergraduate and graduate colleges. Industrial
collaborations and visits currently with Lilly, Lubrizol, Exxon, will continue.