* 0315634
* Acquisition of Electron and X-Ray Diffraction Equipment for Oxide Superlattice Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* I-Wei Chen, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 210,000.00

This action provides funds for the acquisition of a high pressure Reflection
High-Energy Electron Diffraction (RHEED) system and a four-circle X-ray
diffraction system for oxide superlattice research and education. The electron
diffraction instrument will be retrofit to an existing pulse laser deposition
(PLD) system to allow real-time, in-situ determination of film growth at the
single layer, unit cell level. Switching between multiple targets allows oxide
superlattice thin films to form with atomically sharp interfaces between layers
of different compositions. The X-ray diffraction instrument will be used for ex-
situ determination of the crystal structures and distortions of the
superlattices, including lattice correspondence, strain misfit, and interlayer
atomic mixing. High quality oxide superlattices grown by this system will
provide new scientific and technological opportunities. The superlattices can be
designed to trigger competing interactions at the interface, induce ionic,
electronic and magnetic excitation modes not previously present in the oxide
constituents, and engineer stacking-related symmetry breaking to override the
symmetry constraint of the constituent crystals. In short, essentially new
materials with an artificial, nanoscopic design become possible. These materials
are expected to show enhanced field responses and exotic non-linear properties
that can be used for electrical, magnetic, and optical applications. A large
impact is expected on the materials physics, especially on the fundamental
understanding of transition-metal-oxide magnetism, conductivity and
ferroelectricity.

Our educational program has been successful in mentoring high quality PhDs and
postdoctoral researchers while offering training to undergraduates and high
school teachers. This effort will be integrated into the research to attract
students and to provide them with laboratory and research experience. The
acquisition will strengthen the capability to offer atomic-scale fabrication,
characterization, and visualization experience, which has proved most exciting,
inviting, and educating to young students. Further outreach to industry will be
made through ongoing collaborative, synergistic, and exploratory research with a
start-up computer memory company.