* 0315989
* Structure,  Reorganization Dynamics and Reactivity of Self Assembled Carbanionic Species
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Gideon Fraenkel, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone D. Mitchell
* 06/30/2007
* USD 392,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professors Gideon Fraenkel at Ohio State University proposes to focus on
carbanionic substances as revealed by the structure and behavior of selected
categories of organolithium compounds. The objective is to correlate structures
with the dynamics and mechanisms of their fast equilibrium reorganizations and
their chemical behaviors. Structure will be investigated with X-ray
crystallography and new NMR experiments while dynamic information will be
obtained using proton, 13C, 6Li, 7Li and 15N NMR line shape analyses. DFT
calculations will be used to analyze the results and help predict new
interesting systems for possible future study. Model compounds have been
designed to reveal specific aspects of structure and dynamics.

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division
supports Professor Gideon Fraenkel at Ohio State University who will utilize
many areas of chemistry including organic and organometallic synthesis, dynamic
NMR, DFT calculations and X-ray crystallography to examine critical problems.
Professor Fraenkel's have provided enhanced opportunities in the job market for
women and members of other unrepresented groups who have participated in the
research. Former students have entered both traditional and non-traditional
fields. Dr. Fraenkel was PI of the REU site here 1997-2000 and he administered
the department's undergraduate research program for six years. The REU program
was particularly successful in recruiting talented students from traditionally
black colleges. Professor Fraenkel's research is leading to a fundamental
understanding of organolithium compounds and their use in reactions. Many groups
from all over the country have consulted with the group on their synthetic
problems involving organolithium compounds. For example, research results and
consultations have benefited institutions such as Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co,
researchers at Cornell University, and Merck Co.