* 0315606
* Development of a Small Angle X-ray Scattering Station for Dynamical Materials Studies and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Hector Abruna, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 300,000.00

This grant provides support for the development of a small angle X-ray
scattering station (SAXS) for dynamical materials studies and education at the
Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS). This X-ray station will be a
user facility to study the structure and dynamics of materials with feature
sizes ranging from 0.1 to 200 nanometers and time scales ranging from sub-
millisecond to indefinite. The types of materials that will be explored include
polymers, nano-scale composites, macro-surfactants, dendrimers and organic-
inorganic hybrid thin films. This facility will take advantage of the extremely
high-flux X-ray beams produced by the "G" wiggler beamline at CHESS. Designed
from the start to deliver stable, focussed, high intensity X-ray beams, the
G-line facility will routinely deliver a high flux of more than 1015 photons per
second onto a specimen. With such high fluxes it is becoming practical to
perform, on times as short as milliseconds to microseconds, routine in-situ
measurements of particle size, shape, lattice distortions, strain and
relaxation, molecular reorientations, and complete phase transformations. With
the extremely powerful X-ray beams from the wiggler source at CHESS, this new
facility will significantly increase national capabilities to collect high
quality X-ray data from weak scattering and rapidly varying materials. The
classes of materials to be studied - surfactants, dendrimers, polymers, proteins
and thin-films - fall into the broad class of "soft matter" that has
traditionally been difficult to study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new SAXS
facility is being built on the central campus of Cornell University, providing a
rare opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students to have long-term
participation and projects at a national synchrotron center. Graduate students
are expected to help design and build the facility as well as carry out their
own dissertation projects. This overall 'hands-on' approach will give a broad
group of students a deep understanding of X-ray techniques and provide a
thorough training of scientists for future materials research careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;