* 0315780
* Mechanism of EF-G-Dependent Translocation In The Ribosome
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Simpson Joseph, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2007
* USD 375,000.00

Ribosomes carry out the complex task of protein synthesis in all organisms. A
fundamental step during protein biosynthesis is the precise and coordinated
movement of the tRNA-mRNA complex within the ribosome, called translocation. The
long-term objective of this research is to understand the mechanism of
translocation of tRNAs from one site to the next within the E.coli ribosome. The
specific goal of this project is to determine the role of two well-characterized
base pairs between 23S rRNA and P and A site tRNAs in translocation. The first
base pair is between the universally conserved bases C74 of P site tRNA and
G2252 of 23S rRNA. The second base pair interaction is between universally
conserved bases C75 of A site tRNA and G2553 of 23S rRNA. The effect of
disrupting these base pairs on the kinetics of translocation will be examined
using a rapid kinetic method recently developed in the PI's laboratory. In
addition,methods such as site-directed mutagenesis, toeprinting, and chemical
probing will be used to characterize the role of these universally conserved
base pairs in translocation. Bacterial ribosomes are the target for inactivation
by several classes of antibiotics. Antibiotics such as erythromycin, viomycin,
thiostrepton, and spectinomycin specifically inhibit translocation.
Understanding the functional role of specific interactions within the ribosome
is critical for elucidating the molecular mechanism of translation and will
provide insights for developing novel antibiotics. This research also serves an
important educational need by integrating research and education. Several
undergraduate minority students will obtain invaluable research experience in
the laboratory.