* 0315513
* Acquisition of Scanning Probe Microscopy and Nanoindentation Instrumentation for Nanomaterials and Biomaterials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Dinesh Katti, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 150,000.00

This grant is for acquisition of a scanning probe microscope (SPM) and nano-
indentation equipment. The principal investigators have several research
projects in the areas of nanomaterials, biomaterials, nanocomposites and
multiscale modeling that will benefit from the equipment. For example, the five
PIs have formed a collaborative team for biomaterials research in collaboration
with Mayo Clinic researchers to pursue tissue engineering applications using
patented rapid prototyping technology and the acquisition of the SPM and
nanoindentation system will be useful in this research effort.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of SPM capabilities will also enhance the
educational experience of undergraduate and graduate students. The instrument
will be used for demonstrative purposes in several courses taught by the PIs and
as a hands-on learning tool in the "Fundamentals of Nanotechnology and
Nanomaterials" course and in the "Biomaterials: Materials for Biomedical
Applications" course. It will be extremely beneficial for students in
introducing novel and cutting edge research into the educational experience.
This instrument will also be used in several graduate courses including
"Composites, Biomechanics and Tissue Engineering" taught by the co-PIs. In
addition the team is actively working to establish a program in biomedical
engineering at NDSU. Use of the instruments for materials characterization and
nanomechanical testing will be made available to industry in the region. The PIs
institution has provided a dedicated laboratory space where the instrumentation
will be housed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;