* 0315533
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Water Storage, Atmospheric Pressure, and the GRACE Gravity Satellite Mission
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Isabella Velicogna, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 30,000.00

0315533&lt;br/&gt;Wahr&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. John Wahr, Department of Physics,
University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado and Dr. Mosalam Shaltout, Desert
Environment Research Institute, Menoufia University, El-Sadat City, Egypt. The
primary objectives are related to the 5-year GRACE gravity
satellite&lt;br/&gt;mission, launched in March 2002 by NASA and DLR (the German
Space Agency). Both&lt;br/&gt;objectives involve the ability of GRACE to monitor
changes in large-scale averages of ground-and surface-water in Egypt. These
objectives are:(1) to validate the GRACE data to make sure they are continually
meeting accuracy specifications; and (2) to use the GRACE measurements of large-
scale water variability in Egypt to monitor such things as long-term aquifer
depletion, and changes in the amount of water in the soil and sub-soil layers
available for agricultural purposes. As part of the effort to achieve these
goals, the PIs will continue the acquisition of pressure and temperature data as
recorded at barometers throughout the country, including in the region
surrounding the southeastern desert. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This project
is the continuation of a project initiated under a grant from NSF, Office of
International Science and Engineering, and is part of an overall effort towards
integrating time-variable satellite gravity observations into the hydrological
sciences. These observations constitute a new and innovative data type for
hydrology, with considerable promise for improved understanding of the global
water cycle. This project will allow scientists from Egypt, a country where
water resource issues are of considerable importance, to familiarize them with
the analysis of this new data type. This project is being supported under the
US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers
in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;