* 0315474
* RUI: Asymmetric Risks and Rewards:  Optimization of Group Positions to Balance Ecological and Physiological Constraints
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* William Romey, SUNY College at Potsdam
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 07/31/2007
* USD 185,658.00

Title: RUI: Asymmetric Risks and Rewards: Optimization of Group Positions to
&lt;br/&gt;Balance Ecological and Physiological Constraints.&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Dr.
W.L. Romey, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The beauty of a shifting school of
fish or flock of birds moving in unison belies the underlying tension within it:
differences of opportunities for food, differences of risks of being attacked,
and differences in physiology among its members. Fish, birds, and other
gregarious species are not as randomly distributed within their groups as
previously assumed. Dr. Romey and students will develop and test a general
conceptual model to predict where individuals should be in a group based on an
individual's physiology and their environment. For example, if there is more
food available at the front edge of a group, but also greater risk of predation,
then well fed individuals "should" position themselves in the back, weighing the
chance of predation higher than food acquisition. A series of laboratory
experiments will be carried out in which the following factors will be
systematically varied: satiation, chemical defenses, food distribution, predator
distribution, and water velocity. They will use whirligig beetles (Dineutes) as
a model organism for this type of loosely grouping species (congregation)
because they can be easily brought into the laboratory, marked, and group in
two-dimensions. Position of marked individuals under these different conditions
will be analyzed by computer-video analysis. This study will help to develop a
general conceptual model, and eventually a simulation model, which can help to
make predictions about group dynamics of swarms, flocks, and schools. Broader
implications of the proposed research include understanding: 1) how animals make
decisions, 2) optimization theory, 3) game theory and stochastic dynamic
modeling, and 4) understanding how individual behaviors lead to emergent group
properties and distributions.&lt;br/&gt;