* 0315954
* Exploring Precursor Chemistry and Materials Synthesis Using Combinatorial CVD
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Wayne Gladfelter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 08/31/2006
* USD 404,000.00

Wayne Gladfelter of the University of Minnesota is supported by the Division of
Chemistry for his research exploring precursor chemistry and materials synthesis
by a combinatorial-type CVD approach. Prof. Gladfelter will investigate new
thin-film oxide materials prepared by chemical vapor deposition that are of
potential interest as higher dielectric constant materials for microelectronics
applications. He will also prepare and study new precursor compounds. This
research will develop CVD methods to produce compositional spreads of metal
oxide films by balancing the fluid dynamic behavior of the precursor gases with
the deposition kinetics. Combinatorial CVD will be used to produce films of
amorphous materials such as HfO2(SiO2)n using several different precursors,
allowing direct comparisons of the impact of deposition chemistry on metal-
oxygen stoichiometry, crystallographic phase and film
microstructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New higher dielectric constant materials
are of significant interest for microelectronics applications. Field effect
transistors are critical components in logic and memory circuits. Successful
replacement of SiO2 as the gate dielectric in field effect transistors will
allow the trend in shrinking device size to continue for several years into the
future. Graduate students, undergraduate students and postdocs will receive
excellent training and research experiences in a forefront inorganic materials
chemistry program.