* 0315862
* Functional Roles for Short-term Synaptic Plasticity in Neuronal Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Victoria Booth, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2007
* USD 355,340.00

Bose, Booth The primary goal of this project is to derive general principles
that underlie how short-term synaptic plasticity (STSP) is utilized by neuronal
networks in three different computational and architectural settings. These
settings are motivated by concrete biological examples arising in crustacean
stomatogastric ganglion (STG), rat hippocampus, and cortex. Specific aims
include determining the effect on phase maintenance of multiple depressing
synapses and intrinsic cell properties in pacemaker-driven networks, determining
how multiple depressing synapses can introduce multiple, co-existent stable
firing patterns in reciprocally-connected networks, and determining how
depressing excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs in an afferent-driven
network can generate frequency-selective, steady state, and transient network
responses. The investigators develop and use techniques of geometric singular
perturbation theory to project and analyze the dynamics of these complicated,
high-dimensional neuronal networks onto lower-dimensional slow manifolds. These
techniques allow them to understand how different synaptic and intrinsic
parameters contribute to and modulate network behavior. They work closely with
experimentalists who, in a parallel research program, are investigating the
effects of synaptic depression in the crustacean STG. Synaptic plasticity refers
to the ability of a synapse to change its strength as a function of its usage.
It is widely found in neuronal circuits across the brain. While experimental
studies of short=term synaptic plasticity (STSP) are necessarily focused on the
particulars of the neural system under investigation, modeling of the type
proposed here can provide insights into the more general properties of STSP. The
investigators study the possibility that seemingly independent roles for STSP
can be grouped together based on how the network architecture constrains STSP to
operate. Elucidating the general principles behind these operations provides a
framework for understanding how STSP participates in very diverse neuronal
computations across brain regions. Due to its interdisciplinary nature, this
project is expected to be of interest to members of the experimental,
computational and analytic neuroscience communities. Additionally, the
investigators continue to teach computational neuroscience and mathematical
biology courses that they recently developed. Graduate and undergraduate
students have the opportunity to work directly with their experimental
collaborators. Thus students become well positioned to continue pursuits in
either experimental or theoretical fields, or in an area that combines the two.
This enhances the development of a trained workforce at the critical
intersection of mathematics and biology.

