* 0315527
* RUI: Drosophila Bang-Sensitive Mutants as a Model for Mitochondrial Function in the Nervous System
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Elaine Reynolds, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 168,779.00

Abstract

Mitochondria are organelles, specialized compartments within cells.
Mitochondria produce most of a cell's energy and their optimum function is
essential in high-energy tissues like the nervous system. When energy production
is compromised by a mitochondrial defect, a cell cannot carry out its proper
role in the organism and may even die via a process know as apoptosis. This
project utilizes Drosophila melanogaster, the fruit fly, as a model system to
study mitochondrial function in the nervous system. Drosophila is a well-
characterized model system with an extensive literature on cellular and neural
processes. In flies, the effects of gene mutations, changes in DNA, can be
examined at the level of the cell and the whole organism using a variety of
previously established genetic and molecular techniques. Studies using mutants
allow the researcher to infer something about the normal role of that product in
mitochondria. Since cellular processes are similar in all organisms, the
knowledge acquired through this research will increase our understanding of the
role of this important organelle in the nervous system. Two nuclear genes in
Drosophila, technical knockout (tko) and stress-sensitive B (ses B) have been
identified as encoding mitochondrial products. Flies mutant for tko and ses B
live to the adult stage, but seize and paralyze in response to stressful stimuli
such as a sharp rap on the table or large changes in temperature. Because of the
response to mechanical stimulation, this behavior is known as bang-sensitivity.
The first group of experiments outlined in this proposal address the question of
why only the nervous system appears to be seriously affected in these mutant
flies. One possibility is that these genes are only required in specific places
in the nervous system, and play specific roles in nervous system function. To
test this idea, Dr. Reynold's group will determine the location of RNA from
these genes and then define the regions of the brain that require these genes
for normal function. In a second group of experiments, the PI will use
techniques that label apoptotic cells to identify those areas in the nervous
system that cannot survive without these mitochondrial gene products. A third
group of experiments will determine if other bang-sensitive mutants also have
defective mitochondria using a battery of mitochondrial enzyme assays and
mitochondrial specific stains. The proposed research has broader impacts in
several areas. A major objective of this proposal is the training of
undergraduate neuroscientists. The PI has a proven track record in mentoring and
publishing with a diverse group of undergraduate students. This project will
provide undergraduate students with hands-on training in the methodologies of
experimental science. They will also communicate their results through
publications and presentations at meetings. This training will provide students
with knowledge about basic science that will help them become better scientists,
teachers, and citizens. The research activities and meeting attendance supported
through funding of this proposal will also enhance the undergraduate teaching
and community outreach activities of the PI.

