* 0315147
* CAREER:  Explicit Combinatorial Constructions, Indexed Data Scheduling, and Their Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Shiyu Zhou, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 08/31/2004
* USD 107,193.00

PI: Shiyu Zhou&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 9985310&lt;br/&gt;Institution: U of
Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Randomized
computation has become one of the major research fields&lt;br/&gt;in Computer
Science since its emergence in the late 1970's.&lt;br/&gt;In spite of its
seemingly enhanced power, as far as we know,&lt;br/&gt;randomness may not
provide any computational advantage &lt;br/&gt;(by more than a polynomial
factor) over determinism.&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of this project is to
investigate the issue of&lt;br/&gt;reducing randomness in computation via
explicit combinatorial constructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Derandomization in
space-bounded computation is the major subject to&lt;br/&gt;study here, with the
focus on pseudorandom generator constructions.&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the
constructions of pseudorandom generators for constant-width&lt;br/&gt;read-once
branching programs, and of discrepancy sets for
combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;rectangles are to be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Derandomizing the well-known randomized log-space
algorithm for &lt;br/&gt;undirected graph connectivity problem will be
investigated further.&lt;br/&gt;In the meantime, a variant of the connectivity
problem&lt;br/&gt;in the model of directed graphs with tree structures will also
be examined,&lt;br/&gt;hoping this can provide a better understanding of the
relationship between &lt;br/&gt;non-deterministic and deterministic
computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An advanced topic course (graduate or
undergraduate) on explicit&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial constructions and their
applications will be designed.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the course is to enable the
students to attain a solid&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the mathematical
foundation of explicit&lt;br/&gt;constructions as well as their applications to
algorithm design&lt;br/&gt;and computational
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mobile computing over wireless channels has
emerged as a rapidly growing&lt;br/&gt;technology and gained a large amount of
attention in recent years.&lt;br/&gt;The highly asymmetric nature of the
communication environment&lt;br/&gt;in this context gives rise to many new
challenges concerning the&lt;br/&gt;issues of information dissemination and
retrieval. Indexed data&lt;br/&gt;scheduling is to design data broadcast schemes
that&lt;br/&gt;minimize both the average waiting time and energy
consumption&lt;br/&gt;of the clients in retrieving information on
air.&lt;br/&gt;Another objective of this project is to investigate
&lt;br/&gt;the possibility of applying the ideas from indexed data
scheduling&lt;br/&gt;to the design of communication protocols for multimedia
applications&lt;br/&gt;in wireless mobile communication networks.