* 0315875
* Role of Outer Membrane Cytochromes in Respiration-Linked Metal Reduction
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Charles Myers, Medical College of Wisconsin
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2008
* USD 630,001.00

Anaerobic respiration provides a mechanism to generate energy under oxygen-
limited conditions. The Gram-negative bacterium Shewanella oneidensis MR-1
exhibits remarkable anaerobic respiratory versatility, using several soluble
compounds and highly insoluble manganese(IV) and iron(III) oxides as electron
acceptors. Therefore, the cells must establish a link between electron transport
components and these extracellular insoluble electron acceptors. When grown
under anaerobic conditions, MR-1 has a high specific cytochrome content in its
outer membrane (OM). Two of its OM cytochromes, OmcA and OmcB (both c-type and
having lipoprotein consensus sequences), have significant roles in Mn(IV)
reduction and their surface exposure has important implications for the use of
insoluble electron acceptors. The project will determine if OmcA and OmcB are
lipoproteins, and if the lipid modification is essential for their localization
to the OM and their ability to support electron transfer to extracellular
electron acceptors. Mn(IV) reduction requires only 2 electrons, but the decaheme
nature of the OM cytochromes may facilitate optimal heme arrangement for
electron transfer across the OM to insoluble Mn(IV). This "electric wire" scheme
implies that particular hemes are critical for electron transport. The project
will determine if particular hemes of a decaheme OM cytochrome are required to
support the reduction of insoluble Mn(IV). This research will significantly
enhance the understanding of multiheme cytochromes and bacterial metal
reduction, and will broaden the conceptual framework of anaerobic respiration to
include electron transport links to the extracellular environment through OM
components.