* 0315788
* Essential (and Dispensable) Genes in Escherichia Coli
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* William Reznikoff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 447,708.00

This project utilizes Tn5 derived DNA transposition systems to address several
fundamental questions in bacterial genomics. The experiments will define the
compliment of essential, dispensable and conditionally essential genes in the
Escherichia coli K12 genome. This effort will provide a powerful tool for
studying the function of genes of unknown function. In addition the E. coli K12
gene content will be reduced to the minimal necessary for survival for aerobic
growth in rich medium. This will result in the generation of an organism that is
more amenable to metabolic modeling. Finally, the techniques will be used as a
tool for studying in vivo chromosome condensation. The project has broad impacts
beyond basic science discoveries. The methodologies to be employed can be used
to study any bacterial species amenable to DNA electroporation technology and
thus can be used, for instance to identify functions necessary for pathogen
survival in host organisms. In addition, previous work on this technology has
resulted in the generation of a number of patents that have been licensed to a
biotechnology supply company. These types of practical discoveries will
continue. Finally, the research program has always been used as a vehicle for
undergraduate education especially in regards to underrepresented minorities.
This has been accomplished by having undergraduates as active participants in
the research projects.