* 0315367
* Acquisition of Small-Angle X-Ray Scattering under Shear for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Paul Sokol, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 250,000.00

This grant provides support for the acquisition of small-angle X-Ray scattering
equipment to be used for materials research and education at Pennsylvania State
University. Small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) is one of the most powerful
analytical tools for probing the structure of materials on 2-100 nm length
scales. This size regime encompasses a diverse spectrum of research at
Pennsylvania State University. The new instrument will enable exciting new
studies of fundamental structure-property relationships of complex fluids such
as liquid crystals, where the application of shear perturbs the morphology of
the defect texture, which in turn dictates the rheology. This class of materials
is important for displays, optical data storage and imaging. Shear flow is also
known to induce phase changes near phase boundaries and result in markedly
different final morphologies. Examples include flow-induced phase separation in
polymer blends and flow-induced crystallization. SAXS is the ideal means to
study these effects. SAXS will also be used in ongoing research on nano-scale
phase separation in biomaterials, solidification of fluids in nanoporous solids
and molecular self-assembly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This acquisition will fill a
critical analytical void in materials research at Pennsylvania State University.
We expect that the availability of on-campus SAXS will educate students and
faculty in the techniques of X-ray scattering. The instrument will strengthen
existing research programs of all users and enable new research and
collaborations, in part by the incorporation of an in situ fluid shear cell
important to faculty research. This new SAXS instrument will create learning
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. A SAXS laboratory course
will be developed in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering. The
instrument will become part of Penn State's campus-wide Materials Research
Institute analytical lab, making it available to more than 200 research groups
and 700 graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;