* 0315126
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Presidential Bicameralism:  Legislative Politics in Brazil
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Barry Ames, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 02/29/2004
* USD 12,000.00

What consequences do bicameral legislatures have for legislative processes and
outcomes? Democratization of authoritarian regimes has brought about the rapid
expansion of presidential bicameral systems. With the numerical expansion,
different forms of presidential bicameralism emerged. Unlike the U.S. separation
of powers system, many of these new presidential democracies endow their
presidents with substantial legislative powers. This growth of presidential
bicameral systems has created an unprecedented opportunity to inquire into the
workings and consequences of such political systems, but both empirical and
theoretical research on such systems has lagged behind. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
date, virtually no theoretical or empirical research has been conducted on
presidential bicameralism in which the president plays a major legislative role.
Prior studies of legislative politics in new presidential democracies have
instead concentrated on presidential-lower chamber relations or modeled
bicameral&lt;br/&gt;legislatures as if there were only one chamber. Neglect of
bicameral relations in legislative research is problematic because if rules that
govern bicameral relations differ from country to country and/or from one type
of bill to another, then their consequences are likely to differ as well.
Moreover, modeling a bicameral legislature as a single chamber would lead one to
misleading conclusions and introduce a bias in the results of research. By
building on spatial theory and bargaining literatures, this project uncovers the
ways in which the inter-chamber interplay in bicameral legislatures and their
interaction with the executive influence the legislative capacity of government
and outcomes. By examining the presidential bicameral system in Brazil, this
dissertation argues that increases in the rigidity of rules and divergence of
the preferences of two chambers raise a political system's propensity for
legislative delays and immobilism. Yet, paradoxically bicameral divergence in
presidential regimes at times offers important venues to the president to break
such a standstill and promote policy change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
tests these arguments using both quantitative and case study methods with the
legislative data from Brazil, 1985-2003. First, an event history analysis tests
the effect of (1) bicameral incongruence, (2) different decision rules, and (3)
economic and political crises on the speed and the timing of legislation and
gridlocks (i.e., failed bills). Second, this project conducts detailed case
studies of significant legislation in Brazil to examine the strategic
interaction between and among the president and upper- and lower-
chambers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brazil is an ideal case to examine the arguments
of this project for four reasons. First, Brazil's legislative system is that of
presidential bicameralism with substantive executive legislative powers the type
that is particularly understudied. Second, much debate exists about the causes
of legislative gridlock in Brazil, but no work has examined the Brazilian
bicameral system as a potential cause. Third, due to variation in decision
rules, Brazil offers a natural experimental setting to explore, by holding
country-specific factors constant, how different decision rules affect
legislative outcomes. Finally, but not the least&lt;br/&gt;important, the
legislative data necessary to test the arguments of this project are available
in Brazil. Previous field research verified the availability of legislative data
through the Centro de Informatica e Processamento de Dados of the Federal Senate
(quantitative data on the timing and speed of legislation), and the Chamber of
Deputies Library and the Senate's Secretaria de Documentacao e Informacao
(legislative history of individual legislation). In addition, personal
interviews with legislators and presidential aides will be carried out to
collect information not available in aggregate form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this dissertation have broad implications in at least two areas.
First, they contribute to the development of theories of, and research on,
bicameralism and legislative gridlock. Second, they offer an important point of
reference for designing political institutions.&lt;br/&gt;