* 0315331
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Archaeology at Chanlacan: An Early Colonial Maya Community in Northern Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Cynthia Robin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Under the supervision of Dr. Cynthia Robin, Maxine Oland will
complete the collection of archaeological data for her dissertation research
from the 16th-17th century Maya community of Chanlacan. Residents of Chanlacan
experienced Spanish colonialism at the boundary between the conquered and
unconquered Maya world, on the shores of Progresso Lagoon, in northern Belize.
The site is known from Colonial Spanish documents for its role in the early Maya
resistance movement against Spanish authority. Through a household and community
study Oland will address Chanlacan's interactions with both Spanish and Maya
neighbors, and will seek to understand the effectiveness of both Spanish
authority and Maya resistance at the community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is the
goal of this project to examine the Maya perspective on the colonial experience
at Chanlacan. By excavating and mapping households, this project will address
the lived material realities of residents of Chanlacan, who faced pressures from
both Spanish and unconquered Maya groups. The everyday items and foods people
used in their houses, the types of goods they produced for trade or tribute, and
the way people placed and organized their households can help explain the nature
of interaction between Chanlacan and its neighbors, and the effectiveness of
colonial authority and local resistance. This project will first seek to map all
households within the Colonial period community, and will then divide the
households into three size groups. One household from each size group will be
fully excavated to expose the various economic and ritual activities that took
place within the households. Households will be compared with one another in
order to examine the different strategies that native individuals and groups at
Chanlacan used to negotiate the colonial experience. These household excavations
are significant cross-culturally because the Maya of Belize are one of many
native groups around the world that transitioned to life at the edge of European
colonialism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research will impact the
nation of Belize, specifically the modern residents around Progresso Lagoon, as
well as the larger academic community. The Belize government has encouraged
Colonial period archaeology, because this epoch is so poorly documented there
historically. Residents of Progresso also have interests in the archaeology in
hopes of encouraging tourism and local historical pride. As in past years,
excavators will present an exhibition of artifacts from the project research,
and give a series of lectures in Spanish for Progresso residents. In addition to
paid field laborers, the excavation team will offer to train local high school
volunteers in archaeological field methods and research. The project will also
present results in the form of an annually published archaeological report to
the government of Belize. These reports are kept in an archive at the Department
of Archaeology in Belmopan, Belize, and copies will be distributed to local
libraries and town officials near Progresso Lagoon. Academically, results will
be disseminated in Oland's dissertation and in subsequent book and journal
publications that result from it. Initial results will be presented to
colleagues at the national archaeology meetings in 2004. Furthermore, this
project will provide field experience and training to Oland and several graduate
and undergraduate student volunteers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;