* 0315326
* Acquisition of a SQUID Magnetometer for Research and Education in Magnetic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Christopher Palmstrom, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 184,592.00

This grant supports the purchase of a Superconducting Quantum Interference
Device (SQUID) magnetometer. The instrument satisfies the current need for a
versatile magnetometer that will be used by four groups within the Department of
Chemical Engineering and Materials Science (CEMS). The instrument will be
employed in an array of projects including magnetic characterization of novel
magnetic thin films and heterostructures, magnetic semiconductors, molecular
solids, and magnetic nanostructures. This research is on structures that
incorporate magnetic materials of many types, from organic magnets to
conventional semiconductor and ferromagnetic metals, in a variety of
configurations (magnetic semiconductor nanoparticles, single crystals and thin
film heterostructures). It is this kind of engineering, where magnetic materials
are incorporated into novel device structures, which has been so successful in
terms of yielding useful magnetic devices such as Giant MagnetoResistance (GMR)
multilayers, spin-valves, tunnel junction based Magnetic Random Access Memory
(MRAM) and integrated magnetic metal/semiconductor structures. The intention
here is to acquire a workhorse instrument that elevates magnetic
characterization capabilities to the level of the materials fabrication and
characterization expertise at CEMS, while simultaneously strengthening teaching
and education in this area. This is essential to the challenging work of
developing materials for spin-electronic devices of the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed work lies primarily in
the education and training of students in the interdisciplinary field of
magnetic materials, an area in which the basic experimental skills are highly
sought-after in many fields. These researchers will be from both Chemical
Engineering and Materials Science programs at the undergraduate, graduate and
post-graduate levels. In particular, undergraduate students will become actively
involved with the research by taking advantage of the UROP (Undergraduate
Research Opportunities Program) and REU (Research Experience for Undergraduates)
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;