* 0315460
* Acquisition of a Scanning Probe Microscope System for Research and Education in Nanomagnetism and Spinelectronics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Marjorie Olmstead, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 06/30/2006
* USD 160,000.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a scanning probe microscope (SPM) system
for research and education in nano-scale magnetism and spin electronics at the
University of Washington. This acquisition will qualitatively and creatively
enhance the education and research activities at UW. The new SPM system will
enable magnetic force microscopy, high-resolution nanomanipulation and
nanolithography and tunneling spectroscopy with high speed, high resolution
imaging and metrology features, and will provide the entire range of SPM
scanning techniques. In addition, it will include tunneling-AFM and conducting-
AFM modes to measure either electrical current (imaging) or current-voltage
characteristics (spectroscopy) spatially, as a function of position.
Specifically, it will provide significant impetus to recently funded projects on
self-assembled nanocrystals arrays, exchange bias in atomically engineered thin
film hetero-structures and magnetic oxide semiconductors for silicon-based
spintronics. It will also complement efforts in micromagnetic imaging/modeling
and support exploratory projects on spin-resolved quantum conductance,
controlled domain wall scattering in exchange-spring magnetic thin film
structures and soft-lithography nanostructures and hybrid materials. Magnetic
materials and devices are central to the technology of information storage and
retrieval. It is also believed that in the near future the technology of
magnetic data storage will be integrated with that of data processing using
silicon based semiconductor devices leading to faster access, lower power
consumption, longer life time and more portability. Such "spinelectronics"
devices may also lead to new and revolutionary quantum computing strategies. The
new SPM system will help to address these related scientific and technological
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument will be integrated into the
teaching, education and training of graduate and undergraduate students in the
areas of magnetism, mesoscale engineering and spinelectronics, and enrolled in
the departments of materials science, physics and chemistry as well as the
interdisciplinary Ph.D. program in nanotechnology at the University of
Washington. It will significantly enhance the infrastructure for research and
teaching in these areas at UW as well as the training of the next generation of
scientists and engineers with expertise in a rapidly developing but critical
area of technology. The UW has a wide range of programs to encourage diversity
in research and teaching. We will actively work with these organizations and
specifically the programs initiated to increase the participation of women and
people of diverse backgrounds in science, engineering and mathematics. The new
SPM system will be made available to the participants in these
programs.&lt;br/&gt;