* 0315548
* Genetic and Biochemical Studies of a Yeast CDK.inhibitor Interaction
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Michael Mendenhall, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John C. Rogers
* 08/31/2007
* USD 389,999.00

This research will examine two aspects of the interaction between a yeast cyclin
dependent kinase (CDK), an enzyme that controls passage through the cell
division cycle, and its natural inhibitor. The first half of the project will
use genetic approaches to investigate how the inhibitor physically interacts
with the kinase. It is expected that this work will identify important regions
on the surface of the kinase with which both inhibitors and natural substrates
of the kinase interact which, in turn, will be useful in the identification of
novel inhibitors specific for this enzyme and in the identification of new
classes of CDK targets. The second half of the project will explore the
hypothesis that a new and unsuspected level of control involving natural
chemical modifications is involved in the regulation of the interaction of the
CDK with its inhibitor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A revolution in the understanding
of how cells reproduce themselves has come in the last 15 years with the
discovery of the CDKs and the study of their regulation. The essential use of
yeast as a model organism for the development of this work was recognized in
2000 with the award of Nobel prizes to a trio of yeast researchers that made
fundamental contributions. This foundation has generated an explosion of studies
on related proteins in mammalian cells that has had a profound impact on how we
think of natural processes such as differentiation, development and the response
to environmental stresses and signals and on disease states such as cancer. This
project will extend these studies by providing guides to the identification of
new control routes for these important cellular proteins. Furthermore, this
project is expected to have a significant regional impact on science education
as it initiates a new collaborative program that will pair talented
undergraduates chosen by the Biology Department at Berea College with doctoral
level researchers at the University of Kentucky. Berea College is a unique
institution that has successfully targeted an Appalachian population that,
traditionally, has had limited access to higher education. Increasing the
exposure of talented members of this population to modern problems in biology is
expected to have long term, positive impacts on the educational and economic
opportunities available to the people of this region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;