* 0316251
* NifI Proteins of Methanococcus Maripaludis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* John Leigh, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 06/30/2006
* USD 434,566.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. John Leigh at the University of Washington to
study proteins involved in a novel mechanism of nitrogen regulation that occurs
in certain methanogenic Archaea. Methanogenic Archaea are a group of
microorganisms that produce methane as a metabolic product. In addition, some
species of methanogenic Archaea can fix nitrogen, that is, convert atmospheric
nitrogen to valuable ammonia nitrogen. The process of nitrogen fixation is
rigorously regulated by microorganisms, because only when an organism is
nitrogen-starved is it advantageous to obtain needed nitrogen via nitrogen
fixation. The control of the activity of the enzyme that catalyses nitrogen
fixation, nitrogenase, is one way in which the regulation occurs. Regulation of
nitrogenase activity will be studied in Methanococcus maripaludis, a species
that serves as a particularly good laboratory model. The focus will be on
proteins called NifI1 and NifI2, which are hypothesized to sense the degree of
nitrogen starvation and to interact with other proteins to effect regulation.
The project will investigate the role of metabolic intermediates as indicators
of nitrogen starvation, the interaction of those intermediates with NifI1 and
NifI2, the modifications of NifI1 and NifI2 that might occur, and the
interaction of NifI1 and NifI2 with other proteins that might be involved in the
regulation of nitrogen fixation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide
important training to graduate students, undergraduate students, and
postdoctoral trainees, who will participate in the research activities. The
research will also contribute to the resources available to the scientific
community through the continued development of Methanococcus maripaludis as a
model species for studies in the Archaea. The results will bear directly on
teaching students the principles of regulation and of nitrogen assimilation by
organisms. The regulation of nitrogen fixation has broad significance to human
agriculture. Biological nitrogen fixation has huge environmental and nutritional
importance because it is the primary means of cycling nitrogen from the
atmosphere to the biosphere. The work should lead to fundamental new insights
into the regulation of this process in a major group of organisms.&lt;br/&gt;