* 0316697
* Role of Olfactory and Acoustic Information in the Communication of Food Location by Stingless Bees (Genus Melipona)
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2008
* James Nieh, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 01/31/2008
* USD 296,611.00

LAY ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Role of olfactory and acoustic information in the
communication of food&lt;br/&gt;location by stingless bees (genus
Melipona)&lt;br/&gt;James C. Nieh&lt;br/&gt;NSF Award
0316697&lt;br/&gt;Successful foragers of highly social insects commonly
communicate the location&lt;br/&gt;of good food sources to other colony members.
In honeybees, such location&lt;br/&gt;communication can occur through the waggle
dance, famous because&lt;br/&gt;honeybees encode the distance and direction to a
resource in the waggle dance&lt;br/&gt;(referential communication). This degree
of directional information is only&lt;br/&gt;matched by human language. Aside
from honeybees, the tropical stingless bees&lt;br/&gt;are the only highly social
bees, and both groups are closely related. Several&lt;br/&gt;authors have
therefore made preliminary studies to see if stingless bees also&lt;br/&gt;have
a similar ability to encode and communicate food location. Previously,
the&lt;br/&gt;P.I. discovered that one species of stingless bee can communicate
3D food&lt;br/&gt;location and may encode distance and height in sound pulses.
Through this&lt;br/&gt;grant, the P.I. will determine, in detail, the role of
odor and sound in this&lt;br/&gt;communication system. He will also begin
playback experiments designed to test&lt;br/&gt;whether bees can use acoustic
information to find a food source at specific 3D&lt;br/&gt;location. This
research will increase our understanding of sophisticated
animal&lt;br/&gt;communication by exploring a new model of referential
communication, the&lt;br/&gt;stingless bees.