* 0316523
* Collaborative Research:  Orchid-Fungal Interactions-A System for Testing Hypotheses about the Ecological Role and Distribution of Mycorrhizal Fungi in Affecting Plant Distribution
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Melissa McCormick, Chesapeake Research Consortium Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

All terrestrial orchids require symbiotic fungi called mycorrhizae and can
persist only when these fungi are present. They interact with a wide range of
fungi - some orchids are extreme specialists, while others are generalists that
can host many different fungi. The proposed study uses orchid-mycorrhizal
associations as a model system to investigate the roles of symbiotic fungi and
of the chemical composition of the substrate in regulating the distribution and
growth of orchid host plants. To determine whether symbiotic fungi regulate the
distribution of orchids, a series of laboratory and field experiments is
proposed in which orchid seeds, fungal partners, litter substrates and abiotic
factors (light, water) are manipulated. To determine how substrate quality
affects orchid growth, carbon sources for seedling orchids will be determined
under varying substrate, water and light regimes. This study will contribute
fundamental knowledge about orchid-mycorrhizal interactions and about the nature
of nutrient (carbon) acquisition under different stress (substrate quality,
light, water) regimes. Results from this study research will substantially
benefit conservation efforts. All three of the institutions involved in the
project will include undergraduate students in research, and intern activities
at the Smithsonian Institution that focus on minority institutions will be used
to solicit student participation in the study.