* 0316135
* Dissecting the CBL-CIPK Network in Plant Signal Transduction
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Sheng Luan, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* John C. Rogers
* 09/30/2007
* USD 694,250.00

Plants cannot move and therefore they need to deal with environmental changes
on-site. All plants that survive to this day have learned many ways to adapt to
environmental changes, especially stressful conditions that affect their growth
and development. If one understands how plants adapt to environmental stress,
such knowledge can be used to engineer plants with strongest tolerance to the
stress conditions--supercrops--to benefit agriculture. This project aims to find
out the molecular mechanisms underlying plant responses to environmental stress
factors. Almost all extracellular signals, including plant hormones, light,
stress factors, and pathogenic or symbiotic elicitors, can elicit Calcium (Ca2+)
pulses or transients which serve as "second messengers" in further signaling
processes. Because different signals often induce distinct and specific cellular
responses, an interesting question is how cells distinguish the Ca2+ messengers
produced by different stimuli and respond accordingly. Studies suggest that
signaling components that "sense" and "interpret" the Ca2+ parameters hold the
key. Recent studies identified a new family of Ca2+ sensor proteins (CBLs) that
play a role in plant response to stress signals. This family of calcium sensors
works by interacting with a family of protein kinases (CIPKs). This project will
use a number of approaches including biochemical, cell biological, genetics, and
genomics tools, to understand how this CBL-CIPK network transduces the signals
from the outside to the inside of plant cells. This research will involve
undergraduate students who will learn first-hand biological research skills in
the lab. In addition, this project will be educating high school biology
teachers who will participate in lab experimental work during the summer. Such
outreach activity will provide a link between K-12 schools and university
research labs and will bring current research topics to the K-12 classrooms.