* 0316963
* Molecular Genetic and Functional Analysis of Chitin Synthase During Insect Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Karl Kramer, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 714,443.00

Insects protect themselves from mechanical injury and predators by enveloping
themselves in a chitinous cuticle and lining their guts with a peritrophic
matrix (PM) made up of chitin and protein. Several isoforms of the enzyme that
makes chitin, chitin synthase (CHS), are generated by multiple genes and
alternate exon splicing. This study will determine the role of these CHS
isoforms in the synthesis of the cuticle and the PM. The red flour beetle,
Tribolium castaneum, will be used to examine at the whole insect level how the
activities of CHS genes are coordinated and regulated to ensure proper insect
development. To understand the role of each CHS in embryonic, larval and adult
cuticle and PM, the investigators will inactivate each gene in whole insects
using interfering RNAs specific for each gene and determine the effects on
cuticle and PM integrity at each stage of insect development. At the molecular
level, the investigators will produce large amounts of each CHS or their
catalytic domains and determine their biochemical properties including
susceptibility to various chitin inhibitors. Knowledge generated in this
proposal with Tribolium will lead to greater general understanding of chitin
metabolism and its influence on insect development.&lt;br/&gt; CHS is the target
protein of some insecticides and the results of this study will provide useful
information for the design of additional strategies to control insect pests in
agriculture and disease vectors, while minimizing detrimental effects on the
environment. This award will also assist ongoing efforts by the investigators to
maintain the popular website, Tribolium Genetics Website; to respond to requests
for Tribolium stocks, information and advice; and to conduct outreach activities
involving K-12 students and biology teachers. &lt;br/&gt;