* 0316488
* Collaborative Research: REVSYS: Systematic Revision of the Etherioidea, the Freshwater Mussels (Mollusca: Unionoida) of the Gondwanan Continents
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Kevin Cummings, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt; A grant has been awarded to Kevin Cummings of the Illinois Natural
History Survey (University of Illinois) in collaboration with Dr. Daniel Graf of
the Academy of Natural Sciences to document the diversity and evolutionary
relationships of a group of southern hemisphere freshwater mussels known as
etherioideans. These animals are of interest to biologists because of their wide
distribution on South America, Africa, Madagascar, India and Australia and
because they have a life cycle that involves a fascinating larval stage which is
parasitic upon fish. Recent analyses indicate that etherioidean freshwater
mussels are closely related to each other, and this, combined with their
enormous geographic range on the southern continents suggests that these
patterns are the result of ancient continental drift. This research will test
these hypotheses of evolutionary relationship and biogeographical processes by
synthesizing the vast amounts of zoological information about freshwater mussels
that is housed in museums and recorded in over 250 years of biological
literature. The result will be a complete synthesis and reclassification of the
nearly 200 species of etherioidean freshwater mussels.&lt;br/&gt; The data and
conclusions generated by this research will not only be made available through
traditional media but will also take advantage of modern means of dissemination
such as CD-ROMs and the internet (&lt;http://clade.acnatsci.org/mussel). While
this information will be of interest to scientists and conservation officials,
it will also serve teachers, students and all members of the public interested
in better understanding this interesting group. Besides providing a novel
scientific perspective on an important and imperiled fauna, this study will also
serve to train up-and-coming biologists. The information provided by this
project will give conservationists and management personnel, who depend on
accurate taxonomies and biological data, an authoritative source to assist in
their efforts to save one of the most imperiled groups of mollusks in the world.
&lt;br/&gt;