* 0316493
* Continued Studies of Endogenous Mechanisms
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Matthew Jackson, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2007
* USD 166,649.00

This accomplishment based renewal proposal for continued research in the design
of mechanisms or institutions for collective decision-making, ranging from
voting systems to markets. The literature on this subject usually takes the
decision problem and set of possible decisions to be exogenous. The research
under this project focuses on situations where agents have discretion in what
the set of alternatives are, what the decision problem itself is, and even which
mechanism they will use to make a decision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part
of the research studies how societies might gain by linking decisions across
different collective decision problems. In studying collective decision-making,
the decision problem is taken as exogenous. However, by linking the decisions
over different, possibly completely unrelated problems, a society can achieve
Pareto improvements relative to making decisions over the same problems in
isolation. In particular, it is very helpful in terms of incentives to be able
to ask agent's questions like "Which problem do you care more about?" The second
part of the research will continue to study how societies choose the voting
rules. In particular, it will examine situations where a society makes decisions
over projects that may involve a sequence of investments. In such a dynamic
voting environment, several interesting cases, including "option-value"
considerations, and changes in voting rules that can have non-monotonic effects,
arise. This research will identify efficient mechanisms and their relation to
the structure of uncertainty, as well as understanding which mechanisms would be
selected by the voters themselves to deal with such issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last part of the research looks at a voting procedure
where citizens elect representatives who then participate in later votes on
their behalf. Here the research will analyze how the votes of the
representatives of different groups should be weighed in an efficient rule, as
well as how such weights might be selected by participants and how this might
affect the choice of who becomes part of a union when the union is first formed.
&lt;br/&gt;