* 0316108
* Minority Research Planning Grant - Spectroscopic Studies of the Interaction of the c-Src SH3 Domain With Proline-Rich Peptides
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Rosa Rivera-Hainaj, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 01/31/2005
* USD 18,000.00

The goal of this project is to identify structural changes induced by the
interaction between the SH3 domain of the c-Src protein and proline-rich
peptides. To achieve these goals, flourescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)
and fourier transformed infrared (FTIR) spectroscopies will be used. FRET
experiments will provide information about distances involved in ligand binding
to the SH3 domain hydrophobic groove. The SH3 domain-binding groove contains a
conserved tryptophan residue, which will be the focus of the experiments
proposed. FTIR experiments will allow us to study conformational changes in both
the protein and the peptide upon complex formation. The combination of these
studies will allow delineation of molecular interactions between SH3 domains and
proline-rich peptides. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed work
is particularly well suited for the environment at the James Madison University.
The P.I. has extensive experience working with proteins and protein
characterization. The Chemistry Department has a number of undergraduate majors
who are very interested in pursuing research during the academic year as well as
the summer months. Moreover, the SH3 domain-containing proteins are suitable for
use by undergraduate students. They are water-soluble proteins and their
purification from the expression plasmids yield large amounts of protein. The
undergraduate students will learn protein purification and protein engineering
techniques. Additionally, students will gain experience in spectroscopic
techniques, including fluorescence and FTIR. The exposure to different research
techniques as well as training in logical problem solving will give students
access to new science career paths. Additionally, some of the proposed
experiments will form part of the schedule of activities for a general
biochemistry laboratory course.&lt;br/&gt;