* 0316524
* How Competition and Parasitism Control Diversity in Ant Communities: Testing a Mechanistic Theory
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Donald Feener, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 02/28/2009
* USD 439,845.00

PROJECT ASTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to discover the general
rules that govern how natural ecological communities are put together. Discovery
of these rules will have immense practical value in predicting the causes and
consequences of biological invasions, evaluating the influence of biodiversity
in ecosystem functions, directing the restoration of degraded ecosystems, and
guiding the development of public environmental policy. We have selected ant
communities for study because they have long served as a model system for
studying ecological processes that control patterns of species richness, species
composition and relative abundance of species. The primary goal of this project
is to develop and test an integrative, mechanistic theory of species
interactions in local ant communities. This theory focuses on a set of
interspecific trade-offs as a general mechanism that controls species richness,
composition and abundance in ant communities. The project will be the first
attempt to develop a comprehensive theory of species interactions in ant
communities that integrates the effects of both competition for shared resources
and attack by natural enemies. The approach of identifying generalized trade-
offs associated with competitive ability and defense against natural enemies
should have broad applicability and lead to efficient and rapid progress toward
a general understanding of ecological communities. In addition to the proposed
research, the major educational goal of this project is to begin training a new
generation of community ecologists who are equally adept at theoretical modeling
and empirical analysis.&lt;br/&gt;