* 0316539
* Transcriptional Activation by Bas1 and Bas2 in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Ronda Rolfes, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 07/31/2004
* USD 75,000.00

Cells must adapt to the changing conditions in their environment by sensing
external conditions and signaling these conditions to alter expression of genes
whose products permit growth or survival under the new conditions. In general,
transcription factors are the recipients of the signals and their activity is
increased or decreased dependent upon conditions. Transcription factors, in
turn, bind to specific DNA sites and recruit components of the transcriptional
machinery including the general transcription factors, coactivators, chromatin
remodeling complexes and RNA polymerase II. Frequently, gene expression depends
upon multiple activators functioning in a combinatorial manner to specifically
stimulate transcription. The ADE genes of Saccharomyces are a system we have
been studying to determine how a purine limitation signal is detected and
transmitted to the activators Bas1 and Bas2. Expression of the ADE genes is
inherently combinatorial as both activators are required. However, the
individual roles that these factors play in activation function are unknown.
Furthermore, although Bas1 and Bas2 are required to stimulate expression of the
ADE genes, there is evidence that the binding and expression conditions vary in
the different promoter contexts, suggesting that recruitment of the components
of the transcriptional machinery is also different. This research will
investigate the roles that the activators Bas1 and Bas2 play during
transcription of the ADE genes. The goal is to understand the underlying
mechanisms that permit these activators to respond to a purine limitation signal
and to promote transcription. While the focus of this project is on ADE gene
regulation by Bas1 and Bas2, these studies will add to our understanding of
combinatorial mechanisms for transcription regulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;