* 0316870
* Non-Heme Iron Oxygen Atom Transfer Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* John Caradonna, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 07/31/2005
* USD 279,000.00

This award in Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports work by John P. Caradonna to explore the chemistry exhibited by a class
of binuclear non-heme ferrous complexes that are capable of catalyzing the
oxidation of alkanes to alcohols in the presence of either oxygen atom donor
molecules or alkyl hydroperoxides. Catalytic alkane oxidation and
functionalization is an area of intense scientific and commercial interest due
the potential for converting inexpensive aliphatic hydrocarbons to valuable
chemical and fuel products. The proposed approach uses a combination of
synthetic, mechanistic, and spectroscopic methods to investigate the catalytic
chemistry of complexes, which are designed based on principles obtained from
metalloenzyme studies and mimic two fundamental process exhibited by many non-
heme iron monooxygenases. These processes are the heterolytic cleavage of a
bound peroxide ligand and the efficient transfer of the oxygen atom to
substrate. The work focuses on two fundamentally different, although related
aspects of alkane oxidation: 1) Development of a molecular-level understanding
of the mechanism by which binuclear ferrous compounds catalyze the oxidation of
alkanes and arenes, and 2) Exploration of the chemical nature and electronic
characteristics of the iron-based reactive intermediate(s) responsible for the
formal transfer of an oxygen atom to an alkane substrate.

Although alkanes and biological materials are attractive feedstocks, their use
is currently restricted primarily to fuels because of the limited number of
available reactions for their modification. This work is directed toward a
deeper understanding of the fundamental reaction chemistry and the development
of useful reagents for the controlled oxidation of substrates such as alkanes
and arenes. This project also affords an opportunity for graduate and
undergraduate students to participate in a collaborative learning environment.
As a participant in the American Chemical Society's SEED program, Prof.
Caradonna has also opened his laboratory to minority high school students who
perform 10 weeks of research in which they are also exposed to college life in
general. The research activities associated with the proposed program and
Professor Caradonna's educational projects generate a wide range of experiences,
depth of knowledge, and communication skills necessary for the development of
accomplished young scientists.