* 0316453
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Nano-Sized Copper/Alumina Composites
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Reza Abbaschian, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/2006
* USD 30,000.00

0316453&lt;br/&gt;Abbaschian&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award
supports a joint research project between Dr. Reza Abbaschian, Department of
Materials Sciences and Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida
and Dr. Sayed F. Moustafa, Central Metallurgical Research and Development
Institute (CMRDI), Helwan, Egypt. They plan to investigate producing nano-sized
copper-alumina composites by using two novel methods of powders preparations,
namely, Cu-coated alumina powders, and Cu-alumina composites powders produced by
mechano-chemical method. The powders will be cold pressed and then sintered
using conventional powder metallurgy techniques. The copper-alumina composites
produced by the above mentioned methods will be compared to those produced by
conventional powder metallurgy techniques. It is expected that the novel coating
techniques will lead to better thermal and electrical conductivities, better
particle/matrix interface adhesion, higher stiffness, and high temperature
strength than the composites produced by the conventional technique. The
physical and mechanical properties of the composites will be correlated with the
processing parameters in order to provide a science base for their
manufacturing. The developed composites can be used for heat sink applications,
welding electrodes, bearing and high temperature electrically conducting
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Materials with high thermal conductivity
and high elevated-temperature strength have been required for certain
applications such as spot welding electrodes, seam welding wheels, conductors,
and electrical switches. Copper based-alloys that are currently used for such
applications, exhibit excessive creep and low high-temperature strength. Copper-
based ceramic composites in general, and copper - alumina composites in
particular, are potential alternatives. The composites, if properly processed,
can provide excellent high-temperature strength without sacrificing other
attractive properties of the alloys. This project involves multidisciplinary
fundamental and applied research efforts where the two teams collectively
contribute to developing a new technique for processing of nano-sized alumina
particulate reinforced copper matrix composites with desired properties. The
project will help introduce the science and technology of composites'
fabrication to US and Egyptian industries as well as educating students and
training scientists in both countries. The two organizations have had
collaboration in the past in areas of training and education of students and
scientists in microstructural characterization area, and this project will
extend that collaboration to areas of powder and composite processing.