* 0316710
* Species Recognition and Reproductive Isolation in Fungi: Neurospora, an Evolutionary Model
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* John Taylor, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2006
* USD 506,000.00

DEB-0316710 "Species recognition and reproductive isolation in fungi: Neurospora
an evolutionary model"

A grant has been awarded to Dr. John W Taylor of University of California at
Berkeley to recognize the limits of species in the fungus Neurospora. Taylor and
colleagues will recognize species that are genetically isolated using
evolutionary analysis of DNA variation and will recognize species that are
reproductively isolated using mating success. Use of the two approaches has
discovered three new species in the N. crassa branch of the outbreeding
Neurospora species and this grant will focus on these three new species, as well
as the application of the two methods of recognizing species to the N. discreta
branch of the genus. When concluded, this research should provide the
fundamental knowledge needed to make Neurospora as useful to evolutionary
biology as has been Drosophila or E. coli.

This research is important because it is providing the most comprehensive
comparison in any organism of the two biologically important methods of
recognizing species, genetic isolation and reproductive isolation. For fungi, it
is doubly important because reproductive success cannot be assessed in most
fungi, but genetic isolation can. Recognizing species is essential to all
comparative biology and, in fungi, is of fundamental practical importance to
fields as diverse as vaccine design, indoor air quality and the unwanted
introduction of exotic fungi - either by bioerror or bioterror. The comparative
biology made possible by the results of this grant will allow biologists to use
the newly discovered populations of N. discreta found throughout North America,
and the newly sequenced genomes of N. crassa and N. discreta, to learn how
changes in genes and their activity allow organisms to adapt to local
environment. The research supported by this grant will provide the roadmap of
the evolutionary history of Neurospora, and this map will allow biologists to
learn how the road was built.