* 0316262
* Molecular Mechanism of Protein Transport into Chloroplasts
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* John Froehlich, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2006
* USD 491,038.00

Many essential metabolic pathways in plant cells occur within the chloroplast.
Although some of the proteins and enzymes required for these processes are
synthesized within the chloroplast itself, the vast majority of these proteins
are synthesized as precursors in the cytoplasm of plant cells and are
subsequently transported into chloroplasts. Import of these proteins into
chloroplasts is mediated by an import apparatus located on the chloroplast
surface. The long-term goal of this project is to identify the proteins that
constitute the import apparatus of the model plant Arabadopsis and to clarify
the biochemical mechanisms by which individual proteins of the import apparatus
contribute to the transport of precursor proteins into chloroplasts. This
project uses a genetic approach to investigate the function of selected proteins
that operate as the molecular motor of the import machinery, by providing the
driving force for the transport process. Transgenic plants will be constructed
in which the normal Arabadopsis protein has been either inactivated or replaced
with an altered form of the protein. Cell biological and biochemical experiments
will then be used to evaluate the effect of the gene alterations on the
transport process. The transport process will be studied in plants expressing
either one altered protein or multiple altered proteins. This strategy will
elucidate the functions of individual proteins and also provide information
about interactions between the various proteins.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The new
understanding of protein import derived from this project will be useful for
efforts that involve the engineering of various chloroplast-specific metabolic
pathways. For instance, novel enzymes that synthesize unique fatty acids could
be targeted to chloroplasts to create plants with modified fatty acids that have
improved nutritional or industrial value. Hence, this research will both advance
our basic understanding of protein targeting to chloroplasts and have the
practical impact by improving our ability to engineer and modify plants for a
variety of uses. &lt;br/&gt;