* 0316283
* The Role of Developmental Genes in Controlling Butterfly Eyespot Patterns
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Antonia Monteiro, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2006
* USD 252,000.00

0316283 Monteiro

The emerging field of evo-devo seeks to understand the evolutionary processes
that have shaped how genotype translates into phenotype, in part by studying
variability in genes and the developmental pathways that they control. The
colorful and functional patterns on the wings of butterflies provide ideal
material for evo-devo research because 1) they are variable both within and
across the 12,000 described species, 2) because they represent visually
compelling products of selection, often with a known adaptive value, and 3)
because the two-dimensional epidermal wing surfaces, where pattern formation
takes place, are very amenable to developmental, molecular, and phenotypic
characterization. Among the most common pattern elements within the nymphalids
are the eyespots: distinct concentric rings of differently colored scales.
Eyespots are thought to mimic the appearance of vertebrate eyes, and can either
startle an attacking predator or deflect the attack towards the margin of the
wing. Recently it was shown that three transcription factors, Spalt, Sal;,
Engrailed, En; and Distal-less, Dll, are expressed in the eyespot field of
Bicyclus anynana during the pupal wing stage. Sal and Dll are expressed in a
central disc of the eyespot, where black scales differentiate, while En is
present in a ring of cells around the central disc, correlating to the pattern
of gold scales in the adult wing. Additionally, in a mutant line of B. anynana,
"Goldeneye," Sal is absent from the central disc of cells, while En is expressed
in the whole eyespot field, and the adult pattern consists of an entirely gold
eyespot. The experiments outlined in this proposal will test whether there is a
causal involvement of Sal and Dll, on the one hand, and En, on the other hand,
in differentiating the black and gold colored scales of an eyespot,
respectively. The technique of germ line transformation in B. anynana will be
developed in order to test whether these genes have been functionally co-opted
to specify novel patterns in evolution. Development of a heat-shock promoter
system that can activate these transgenes at specific times during development
will also be attempted. The function of the candidate genes will be determined
by ectopically expressing them in the eyespot field and testing their function
and sufficiency in specifying the fate of the colored scales. If, as expected, a
causal relationship is established between the transcription factors and
differentiation of the colored scales, the ultimate goal will be to dissect the
evolution of the regulatory regions of these genes across selected lines within
B. anynana, across closely related species with divergent eyespot morphologies,
and ultimately across species with and without eyespots in order to understand
the relationship between DNA sequence variation and morphological evolution.

Merit Criteria I: Much work in evo-devo has been dominated by the
characterization of the genetic pathways involved in the development of
different species, often times from different phyla. Although comparative
studies can, and have, generated fruitful results, studies of variation at the
intra-specific level and among closely related species should not be neglected.
Indeed, adaptive evolution primarily involves the sorting by natural selection
of phenotypic variants present in individuals of the same population, not in
individuals of different species. It is important to understand the generation
of such intra-specific variation, as well as the possibly more "saltational"
mechanisms of gene co-option by comparing the evolution of a set of
developmental genes across the Lepidoptera. These aims can be achieved by
dissecting the evolution of regulatory genes with a demonstrated key role in
differentiating adaptive traits. This project aims to test whether a few
candidate genes display that key role.

Merit Criteria II: Dr. Monteiro is a new faculty member currently training 2
undergraduate students and two female graduate students, one of which a member
of the Native American tribe Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma. This excellent and very
promising graduate student has already begun working on the project described
here. Dr. Monteiro will continue to train graduate and undergraduates students
alike in Population Genetics, Phylogenetics, and Developmental Biology,
irrespective of gender and ethnicity, in order to provide them with a broad
multifaceted approach to Evolution and Development. In addition, this project
has a cross-disciplinary component where graduate students will be working with
members of the Physics department and taking appropriate graduate courses in
that Department as well.