* 0316541
* Collaborative Research: Extra-Pair Mating in Birds -- Trading Up Genetically to Enhance Offspring Health
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Brian Masters, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 12/31/2008
* USD 253,777.00

Collaborative research: Extra-pair mating in birds---trading up genetically to
enhance offspring health&lt;br/&gt;Charles F. Thompson, Laura A. Vogel, &amp;
Scott K. Sakaluk&lt;br/&gt;Illinois State University&lt;br/&gt;L. Scott Johnson
&amp; Brian S. Masters&lt;br/&gt;Towson University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Many
animals, including the majority of bird species, form long-term pair bonds with
one member of the opposite sex. In socially monogamous species of birds, the
male and female of a pair typically cooperate in rearing the offspring. However,
use of DNA-based molecular techniques has revealed that the progeny of females
in socially monogamous species often are sired not only by their social mate
(within-pair mating) but also by other males (extra-pair mating), resulting in
broods of mixed paternity. Why females mate with more than one male remains
obscure, because females seldom derive direct material benefits by doing so. One
possible explanation for extra-pair mating is that females derive indirect
genetic benefits through enhancement of the genetic quality of their offspring.
This enhancement could be brought about by improvement of the function of the
offspring's immune system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project tests the
hypothesis that females in socially monogamous species engage in extra-pair
matings to secure paternal genes for their offspring that enhance offspring
health and survival. The project will compare the function of the immune system
of young in broods of mixed paternity. If the hypothesis is correct, immunity of
young resulting from extra-pair mating will be superior to that of young
resulting from within-pair mating. Furthermore, these differences should
translate into differences in the overall health and survival.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; The project will also provide excellent opportunities to enhance the
professional growth and development of a large number of undergraduate and
graduate students, and will help redress the current under-representation of
women and minorities in science. All members of the research team regularly
involve undergraduates in their projects and frequently coauthor publications
with them. Graduates students at both institutions also work closely with
undergraduates, and they regularly present talks at professional meetings and to
the lay public. The researchers have been active in programs designed to enhance
elementary school teachers' training in science and to mentor high school
students, activities that will continue and expand during the course of the
research project.&lt;br/&gt;