* 0316627
* Ecological and Evolutionary Physiology of the Stress Response and Stress Proteins
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Martin Feder, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 593,191.00

Broad goals: The proposed activity continues a research program whose goal is to
understand the origin and maintenance of complex physiological and biochemical
mechanisms that enable organisms to persist in challenging environments. This
program uses as a model system the heat-shock protein Hsp70, which minimizes
stress-induced damage of other proteins, and the genes that encode it in the
fruit fly, Drosophila. The principal remaining unanswered questions are: What is
the genetic basis for the variation in Hsp70 levels among natural populations,
and how does this variation arise? Prior work suggests that transposable
elements, DNA sequences that can move from gene to gene, are the answer to these
questions. The major goal of the research is to test this
hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific aims: First the research will
determine the frequency with which transposable elements actually insert in the
genes encoding heat-shock proteins, and compare this frequency with that for
other genes that either do or do not resemble heat-shock genes in their
structure, organization, and regulation. In so doing, the research will discover
numerous instances of transposable elements naturally inserting into heat-shock
genes. Next, the research will use these natural mutants to examine whether the
insertions actually have the expected effect on heat-shock genes: reduction in
messenger RNA, heat-shock protein, and ability to withstand stress. Finally, the
researchers will undertake "laboratory evolution", in which fruit fly strains
compete in environments that ought to favor retention or elimination of
individuals with and without transposable elements in their heat-shock genes.
This final experiment would test whether transposable elements in the heat-shock
genes actually have their expected effect on individual
fitness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approaches: (a) Bioinformatics, the analysis of
pre-existing information to predict genes' properties. (b) High-throughput
screening, the simultaneous and rapid analysis of many genes in many populations
to detect genetic events. This will use "universal fast walking", a new
technique for cloning genes. (c) Transcriptional profiling, the quantification
of messenger RNAs produced by specific genes when they are expressed. This
profiling would use two techniques, the fusion of the heat-shock genes'
regulatory region with a reporter protein that emits light when the gene is
expressed, and quantitative real-time PCR, which measures messenger RNA by
quantifying its accumulation in a chemical reaction. (d) Laboratory evolution,
as described above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance: The proposed research is
distinctive in that it will elucidate a mechanism that apparently has repeatedly
resulted in the decreased expression of a protein, with adaptive consequences.
Because of extensive background work on the genes/protein in question, it can
rigorously assign significance to both regulatory mutations and variation in the
level of the protein they regulate. The proposed research has the potential to
become a landmark study in which all of the often-missing links among
evolutionary generation of variation, gene sequence, cellular function,
organismal function, fitness, gene frequency in populations, and response to
natural selection are explained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;