* 0316312
* Role of an LRR Receptor-Like Kinase in Root Epidermal Patterning
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* John Schiefelbein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Zhongchi Liu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 390,000.00

0316312&lt;br/&gt;Schiefelbein &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During their development,
all multicellular organisms generate diverse cell types and organize these cell
types in appropriate patterns. The research in this project is designed to
uncover the genes and the molecular mechanisms used by living things to produce
and to pattern distinct cell types during development. This project uses a
simple model system to study cell-type specification: the formation of the root
epidermis in the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana. The Arabidopsis root
epidermis is exceptional because its two cell types are produced in a
predictable position-dependent pattern. Furthermore, the root epidermis is
formed continuously as the root grows, so all stages of development can be
examined at a single time. Finally, plants that lack either root epidermal cell
type are viable, which enables sophisticated molecular genetic manipulations to
be conducted. Recent studies suggest that cell type specification in the
Arabidopsis root epidermis relies on a complex transcriptional regulatory
network. Several transcription factors are produced during epidermis
development, and these are involved in positive and negative feedback loops that
maintain or inhibit their expression in particular cells, depending on their
position. The research in this project is intended to address an important
question in this system: What causes cells in one position to express these
genes in a different way than cells in another position? Recently, a receptor-
like protein, SCRAMBLED (SCM), has been identified that influences the position-
dependent pattern of cell types. This project is designed to examine the
specific role of this receptor-like SCM protein. The major aims are: (1) to
define the location of the SCM mRNA and protein in the developing root, (2) to
analyze the relationship between the SCM receptor function and the
transcriptional regulatory network, (3) to characterize other receptor-like
proteins that are similar to the SCM protein, and (4) to identify new genetic
components of the SCM signaling pathway. These lines of investigation are
expected to provide insights into the molecular basis for the action of
positional cues during development. More generally, this will lead to a better
understanding of the mechanisms employed to generate and regulate cellular
diversity in multicellular
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;