* 0316244
* Exploration of Polyelectrolyte Film Properties Relevant to Membrane-based Separations and Sample Introduction
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Merlin Bruening, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2006
* USD 345,000.00

Professor Merlin Bruening of Michigan State University is supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program to synthesize and evaluate the
performance of ultrathin polyelectrolyte films in order to develop high-flux,
selective membrane skins. The initial objective is to make polyimide films by
alternating adsorption of poly(amic acids) (PAA) and poly(allylamine
hydrochloride) and subsequent imidization. An aim is to determine the minimal
thickness at which the polyimide film can still exhibit selectivity and
permeability. The second goal is to develop methods of adsorption of these skins
onto practical supports that contain large or ill-defined pores. The work will
involve synthesis of highly branched polyelectrolyte gutter layers that have
very large permeabilities. AFM images, transport measurements and infrared
spectra will be used in their characterization. A second section of the work
aims at creating high-flux membranes that quickly and selectively remove
organics from water. Such membranes will be tested in membrane induction mass
spectrometry (MIMS). A third area deals with using derivitized PAA films to
preconcentrate and filter proteins and DNA prior to analysis by matrix-assisted
laser-desorption/ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-
MS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical analysis of mixtures often requires a pre-
treatment step in order to simplify the sample, lowering concentrations of
interferents. Membranes offer potential in this regard, and could be used for
rapid and sensitive analysis of aqueous pollutants or chemical warfare agents.
This research on new growth methods of membranes and new membrane materials will
advance our understanding of this potentially inexpensive and environmentally
clean way to expedite chemical analysis. Another application of the project is
in mass spectrometry of the proteome.&lt;br/&gt;