* 0316608
* MCAA:     New Models of Hydrogen Bonding in Iron-Sulfur Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Marc Walters, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 05/31/2005
* USD 60,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Professor Marc Walters of New York University to address
hydrogen bonding effects in the Fe-S proteins rubredoxin (Rd) and ferredoxin
(Fd) through the use of model compounds. The modulation of hydrogen bonding to
the iron sulfur electron-transfer sites in these proteins is thought to have a
major influence on the redox potential of the clusters. The influence of N-H...S
hydrogen bonds to iron-sulfur clusters will be examined with models of high
electronic and structural fidelity and through the use of surface modified
electrodes.

Three sets of iron sulfide cluster complexes will be synthesized as models of Fd
for X-ray crystallographic and X-ray absorption edge (XAS) studies. The first
will consist of non-polar counterions. The second will be paired with polar non-
hydrogen bonding counterions. A third set will have hydrogen bonds that link the
complex (acceptor) to a counterion (donor). The hydrogen bond donors will
include secondary or tertiary ammonium groups or amides bearing a pendant
quaternary ammonium group. These should allow the formation of N-H...S hydrogen
bonds to the bridging sulfide ligands.

Chemically modified surfaces of gold electrodes will be employed as a new
approach to study the redox effect of N-H.S hydrogen bonding in anionic
electroactive metal thiolate model compounds. The electrode surface will be
modified by a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) of long chain alkyl thiolate
molecules anchored to the surface through sulfur and with amide groups at the
terminal positions of the attached molecule. In this arrangement, redox cycling
will occur for complexes that make contact with the amide-rich SAM, which is
designed for hydrogen bond formation with the analyte. The use of amide terminal
SAMs will obviate the need to synthesize unique hydrogen bonding donor ligands
for each electrochemical study. Success in these experiments would greatly
expand our ability to determine hydrogen bond induced redox potential shifts in
a variety of Fe-S model compounds and possibly lead to tools for the selective
detection of redox active species in solution.

This work probes the effect of the surrounding protein on metal clusters
involved in critical biological electron transport steps. The educational
component includes participation by undergraduate students, a high school
teacher and a high school student.