* 0316907
* Virus and Host Interactions of the Nucleocapsid Proteins Encoded by a Plant Nucleorhabdovirus
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Andrew Jackson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/2006
* USD 314,789.00

One of the major questions in disease development is how viruses interact with
host components to invade cells and circumvent host defenses. This project will
investigate the processes whereby members of the plant nucleorhabdovirus family
use proteins of their hosts to enter the nucleus of cells and establish a
complex that supports the multiplication of the virus. The orchestrated
transport of viral proteins between the host cell nucleus and cytoplasm is an
essential element of the viral life cycle. Biochemical and cell biology
experiments will be carried out to determine the mechanisms by which three
proteins required for virus multiplication hijack host proteins that are
involved in the normal transport of proteins into and out of the nucleus.
Genetic and biochemical approaches will be used to analyze interactions between
the three viral proteins, as well interactions between the viral proteins and
host proteins. These experiments will provide a step-by-step understanding of
the formation of the nuclear replication complex. The experiments will also
identify host proteins that participate in the cellular transport of the viral
proteins. Rhabdoviruses are responsible for many diseases affecting livestock
and wildlife, including rabies and vesicular stomatitis of horses and cattle.
Serious diseases of vegetable and field crops are also caused by members of the
rhabdovirus family, resulting in enormous losses to agricultural productivity
and ecological damage. Viruses closely related to rhabdoviruses cause serious
human diseases such as measles, mumps and influenza. These viruses have many
common parallels in disease development that may be exploited for disease
control. A better understanding of the common processes whereby viruses infect
their hosts will be useful in designing drugs to interfere with the infection
process and disease development. This project will provide training in virology
and molecular biology to students at many levels of their academic careers,
including underrepresented minorities.