* 0316818
* Testing the Relative Importance of Habitat Saturation and Benefis of Philopatry on Delayed Dispersal
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Nancy Solomon, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2007
* USD 253,487.00

Cooperative breeding, in which multiple adults share a nest and care for young
born at that nest, is unusual among vertebrates. Delayed dispersal, a hallmark
of cooperative breeding, can result from lack of vacant territories or benefits
to offspring that remain at the nest where they were born. The investigators
propose to test these alternatives in a cooperatively breeding mammal, the
prairie vole. They will establish prairie vole populations at high and low
densities in field enclosures. The prediction is that the proportion of
juveniles that remain at home and the size of extended family groups will be
greater at high density. In these same populations the investigators also will
test predictions regarding potential benefits to offspring that remain at home.
Throughout the field experiment, they will use genetic techniques to determine
kinship of group members. This study will be the first to combine a field
experiment manipulating population density with genetic data on kinship and
should allow the investigators to examine previously mentioned ideas about
delayed dispersal. The results of this study will contribute to our
understanding of the ways in which demographic and social factors shape
mammalian behavior. This study will provide opportunities for students to gain
first-hand experience in the application of the scientific method. The
investigators also plan to introduce grade school and high school teachers to
this research as part of a summer workshop.