* 0316124
* Kinetic and Mechanistic Studies of Highly Reactive Species Containing Electron-Deficient Main Group Atoms, and the Synthesis of Novel Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2009
* Peter Gaspar, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2009
* USD 560,000.00

The goal of this project is to understand the factors that control the reactions
of electron-deficient and multiply bonded species containing second-, third- and
fourth-row elements of groups 13, 14, and 15. The generation of dimethyldisilyne
(MeSiSiMe) will be explored in order to address the structure and reactivity of
molecules containing the silicon-silicon triple bond, as yet unknown. A novel
class of electron-deficient species containing four valence electrons at the
reactive atom, both charged (e.g. Br-C:+ and Ph-Si:+) and neutral (Ph-B: and Ph-
Al:), offer the capability of forming three new bonds in either a concerted or
stepwise manner. New precursors for reactive stannylenes (R2Sn:) will allow the
exploration of the full range of reactions available to neutral molecules
containing divalent tin atoms, without the presence of sterically shielding
substituents. Sterically unencumbered lithiosilylenes R(Li)Si: will be used for
the exploration of the chemistry of triplet silylenes, and a new program will be
initiated for the design and construction of "molecular vices" that are rigid
scaffolds capable of imposing preselected large bond angles on divalent species
mounted between the jaws. This will allow the study of the spectroscopy and
chemistry of molecules in unusual electronic states like triplet silylenes.

The study of reactive carbon-based intermediates has shed light on the
fundamental mechanisms by which organic reactions occur, providing both basic
understanding and predictive tools for the control of organic reactivity. With
the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Peter
P. Gaspar, of the Department of Chemistry at Washington University, is studying
the preparation and reactivity of analogous species based on the heavier
elements in the carbon group - silicon, germanium, and tin. These studies will
lead to the extension of the powerful mechanistic ideas of organic chemistry to
the prediction and rationalization of bond-making and bond-breaking processes
throughout the periodic table, and in addition will provide predictive insights
into the factors controlling the reactions involved in the chemical vapor
deposition of silicon films that form the basis of much of the modern
semiconductor industry.