* 0316357
* Role of the Obg proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Janine Maddock, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ming Lei
* 08/31/2005
* USD 183,893.00

All proteins in the cell are synthesized by the activity of ribosomes. Ribosomes
are composed of large and small ribosomal subunits (60S and 40S, respectively).
In the yeast, the mature 60S ribosomal subunit contains 46 proteins and three
rRNAs while the mature 40S ribosomal subunit contains 32 proteins and the one
rRNA. The assembly of these ribosomal particles occurs via an ordered series of
complexes as additional ribosomal proteins are added, and rRNA is cleaved and
modified. Throughout this process, non-ribosomal proteins aid in requisite
modifications and conformational changes. The processing and modification events
leading to the mature rRNAs are relatively well understood. In contrast,
however, the events that lead to the assembly of the rRNAs with the ribosomal
proteins are poorly understood. Critical to ribosome assembly is the function of
a GTP-binding protein, Nog1p. Nog1p is essential for 60S subunit assembly and it
is likely that GTP hydrolysis by Nog1p is required for a critical remodeling
step of the pre-60S ribosomal subunit. This research focuses on characterizing
Nog1p and its role in 60S assembly. In particular, the GTP binding and
hydrolysis characteristics of Nog1p will be determined in order to predict how
it may function in the cell. Further, the relationship between Nog1p and the
pre-60S ribosomal subunits will be investigated using a variety of genetic and
biochemical approaches. Finally, the proteins and/or rRNA that interact with
Nog1p will be identified and characterized such that their relationships will be
elucidated. These studies will result in a greater understanding of how the cell
orchestrates the temporal assembly of a large and complicated protein-RNA
complex.