* 0317323
* Polyhedral and Non-polyhedral Cutting Plane Methods:  Theory, Algorithims and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* John Mitchell, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2007
* USD 224,945.00

Cutting plane methods can be used to solve many classes of optimization
problems, including integer programming problems. These methods form a sequence
of relaxations of the problem and gradually tighten the relaxations in order to
find a solution to the original problem. Polyhedral cutting plane methods work
with linear programming relaxations of the problem of interest. Interior point
cutting plane methods have the potential to solve problems that are not amenable
to simplex methods, because of the size of the problem or because superior
cutting planes may be generated at an interior point. Computational experience
suggests that these methods can outperform simplex cutting plane methods, and
that combining interior point and simplex methods can be especially useful.
Nonpolyhedral cutting plane methods look at relaxations such as semidefinite
programming problems. Methods of interest in this proposal include solving
semidefinite programming problems by solving a sequence of smaller semidefinite
programs, and solving integer programs through the addition of nonpolyhedral
cutting planes. The non-polyhedral approaches offer the possibility of tackling
problems that were previously unsolved, and of using a new, possibly better,
approach to problems previously solved.

The development of the methods discussed in this proposal will make it possible
to solve problems that were previously considered intractable. The proposed
research will result in efficient, practical algorithms for solving large
instances of many classes of integer programming problems, as well as other
optimization problems. These problems will be drawn from diverse fields,
including engineering, economics, finance, and physics. A doctoral student will
be supported by this proposal. Research developed as a result of the proposal
will be incorporated into graduate courses in integer programming and linear
programming at RPI. Test sets for various problems will be collected and
generated, and these problems will be made available on the web. Computer code
arising from this project will be made available electronically where possible.