* 0317217
* Patterns and Consequences of Fragrance Variation in Oenothera caespitosa
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Robert Raguso, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 07/31/2008
* USD 546,086.00

Floral scent is a complex sexual signal used by plants to attract pollinators.
Like cricket songs or peacock tails, fragrance enhances reproductive success
(through pollination) but also attracts predators. Unlike these animal signals,
fragrance is poorly understood and difficult to measure. This project will
explore several potential causes of fragrance variation among night blooming
plants whose fragrance is essential for pollination. Floral scent variation
within and among several populations of evening primrose (Oenothera caespitosa)
plants will be surveyed using electronic nose technology, chemical analysis and
multivariate statistics. Then, behavioral observations of pollinators and path
analyses will be used to assess whether fragrance variation reflects (1) local
pollinator adaptation (2) responses to herbivory, or (3) neutral genetic
variation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates the concepts and
techniques of pollination biology with the emerging field of chemical
communication, with clear applications to other ecological model systems and
agricultural crops. The interdisciplinary laboratory and field studies described
above will provide excellent opportunities for undergraduate research experience
and educational outreach. Each summer, two students from the South Carolina
Alliance for Minority Participation (SCAMP) will participate in chemical
analysis and field research, with the option of presenting research findings at
an international conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;