* 0317766
* Collaborative Research:  Quantitative Estimates of Holocene Warmth and Climate Variability Derived from Icelandic Lake Sediments
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Matthew Wooller, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 148,120.00

This award will evaluate the role of polar amplification, and derive
quantitative estimates of warmth through the Holocene of Iceland. Iceland
occupies a strategic position to monitor North Atlantic climate, as it is
situated at the boundary between major oceanic and atmospheric circulation
systems. Consequently, Iceland records the status of much of the northern North
Atlantic region. This award will address Arctic warmth by reconstructing the
status of Iceland's ice caps from changes in the physical properties of sediment
accumulating in glacier-dominated lakes. Ice-cap modeling will provide
quantitative estimates of past summer warmth consistent with reconstructions of
the ice cap derived from the lake sediment study. The oxygen isotopic ratio
(delta18O) of precipitation will be determined from the delta18O of chironomid
(midge) head capsules, a common constituent of arctic lake sediment. The
delta18O of Arctic precipitation is highly correlated with mean annual air
temperature, providing quantitative temperature reconstructions. Chironomid
delta18O provides quantitative estimates of past air temperatures from Arctic
lakes, and circumvents persistent problems with low pollen productivity at high
latitudes and with plant immigration delays. Changes in chironomid assemblages
in the same sediment cores, tied to an Icelandic training set, will provide an
independent estimate of summer temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three U.S. PhD
students will be involved in this project. In addition, two Icelandic graduate
students and one postdoc will be involved in a companion study with Icelandic
collaborators. Film footage of the Hvitarvatn coring may be used in a proposed
public television program on climate change. Thermohaline circulation is the
greatest non-linearity in the climate system. By providing quantitative data on
Holocene warmth and status of ice caps, this work will provide a key benchmark
for General Circulation Models, especially those attempting to simulate
thermohaline circulation. Results will be of great interest to Icelanders, who
depend on their ice caps for hydroelectric power and as major tourist
attractions. If Iceland's ice caps are at risk from projected global warming,
this will have substantial economic impacts. This research will help constrain
those risks.