* 0317429
*    Fluid Dynamic Characterization and Control of Turbulent Plasma Jets
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Paul Strykowski, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 07/31/2007
* USD 449,956.00

The objective of this research is to derive a detailed physical description of
the crucial parameters in turbulent plasma jets and to devise means for
controlling the turbulence. Modern measurement techniques developed for the
relatively benign environment of combustion are exploited to unravel the
complicated flowfield of the plasma jet. The strategy is to use laser scattering
techniques to perform detailed measurements of three-dimensional velocity
distributions with high time resolution in jets that simulate the plasma jet
situation with respect to density ratios between jet fluid and environment and
with respect to flow forcing due to arc attachment dynamics. The appropriate
density field in the simulated jet is achieved using a novel facility that
supplies helium as the core jet gas and argon as a boundary layer gas. This
variable-density jet exhausts into an ambient environment of sulfur
hexafluoride. The plasma instabilities are simulated by forcing upstream
pressure and velocity fluctuations to produce conditions ranging from chaotic to
periodic. These studies are supplemented by measurements on plasma spray
torches, first to derive appropriate forcing functions, then to verify the
velocity distributions measured under cold-flow conditions by performing similar
measurements in the plasma jet fringes where the temperatures are lower. The jet
characterization leads to an improved understanding of the causes of the jet
instabilities, which in turn allows the design of fluid-dynamic means to control
the large-scale turbulence of the plasma jet, such as arrays of surrounding
microjets, passive nozzle shrouds, or shear-layer control using
coflow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale
turbulence in atmospheric pressure plasma jets remains a cause of irreproducible
behavior in a number of plasma processes, such as plasma spraying and cutting,
powder synthesis including plasma synthesis of nanoscale structures, and
metallurgical processing. It is qualitatively understood that these turbulent
fluctuations are caused by (a) the extreme density differences between the hot
plasma and the surrounding gas, and (b) the upstream fluctuations of the flow
due to varying arc-anode attachments. However, a detailed characterization has
not been achieved so far because of the difficulty of obtaining data such as
local velocities with high time resolution and sufficient signal-to-noise ratio
under plasma conditions. Improved understanding of turbulence in atmospheric-
pressure plasmas will result from the synergistic combination of expertise in
combustion fluid dynamics and plasma science and technology. It is expected that
the results impact not only a number of thermal-plasma processes through
improved plasma-torch designs, but also that the knowledge is applicable to
other jets with similar density gradients such as in aerospace propulsion
systems. Furthermore, the expected improved turbulence control can lead to
significant reductions in noise levels both for plasma-processing equipment as
well as for propulsion systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;