* 0317846
* Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry for Multidimensional Gas Chromatography and Related Fast-GC Techniques
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Philip Taylor, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 97,870.00

PROJECT SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award provides funds to acquire a
time-of-fight mass spectrometer (TOF-MS) to augment existing research systems
for the analysis of complex organic mixtures. Such a mass spectrometer permits
continuation of research involving development of multidimensional gas
chromatography (MDGC) and thermal-gradient programmed gas chromatography
(TGPGC). This equipment enhances the ability to develop faster GC-MS
investigations of combustion residues and effluents, as well as other types of
environmental samples. Because TOF-MS is inherently faster than conventional
quadrupole or ion-trap MS systems, it is possible to exploit fast GC
technologies (such as TGPGC) and integrate them into developing MDGC work. This
greatly increases the information that can be gathered for ongoing efforts
relating to combustion effluents, organic residues, and endocrine-disrupting
chemicals (EDCs).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;High-speed gas chromatography is itself
a growing and popular research area. Conventional open tubular columns (OTCs)
that have small internal column diameters are available for high-speed GC
separations. Since many microbore OTC techniques have significant shortcomings
in sample solute capacity and detection limits, we continue to develop
alternative techniques (such as TGPGC) to conduct high-speed GC that do not
require microcolumns and ultra-sensitive detectors. Fast GC systems that possess
high-solute capacity have the potential to perform analytical and process
control in combustion systems, monitor emissions, and perform routine or
established tests more quickly and efficiently. The most difficult aspect of
faster GC analyses, however, is that faster-response detectors are absolutely
required. Arguably, the most useful and powerful detector for gas chromatography
is the mass spectrometer, due to its sensitivity, specificity, and
identification ability. However, because it is a scanning instrument, the time
required to collect mass spectral tracings is significant in relation to the
speed at which a solute zone will elute from the chromatographic column.
Therefore, what is needed in order to pursue the development of these analytical
instruments is a mass spectrometer that is several orders of magnitude faster in
scanning speed, and yet similar in sensitivity to much slower quadrupole and
ion-trap MS instruments. Time-of-flight mass spectrometry (TOF-MS) can provide
this type of analytical speed without sacrificing sensitivity or qualitative
capability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies
are underway to develop and use multidimensional gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry (MDGC-MS) to investigate combustion emissions and residues. By
identifying as many components as possible from emissions and residues, risk
assessments can be more accurately performed and interpreted. Typically, a two-
column &lt;br/&gt;GC system is used in which a primary column is operated to
maximize the resolution of coeluting components, while a secondary sequential
column is operated such that remaining analytes are separated very quickly using
a stationary phase dissimilar to the primary column. Fast GC within the
secondary channel is the critical aspect of this analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;