* 0317460
* Search for Origin of Vertebrate Adaptive Immunity in The Sea Lamprey
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Zeev Pancer, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 10/31/2005
* USD 200,000.00

While all living beings use innate immune mechanisms to defend themselves
against foreign invaders, only jawed vertebrates possess specific adaptive
immunity, the cardinal elements of which include T cell receptors for antigens,
antibodies, and major histocompatability (MHC) genes. The adaptive immune system
evolved around 500 million years ago to provide immunological memory and
protection against recurrent infection with the same agent. To understand better
how innate and adaptive immunity work together, the project seeks to identify
the building blocks for adaptive immunity in sea lamprey, one of two living
representatives of jawless vertebrates. These experiments will identify genes
that are selectively expressed by lamprey lymphocytes, the cell type responsible
for adaptive immune responses in higher vertebrates, and genes expressed by
phagocytic cells, key types of cells for innate immune responses. Genes
selectively expressed in these lamprey cell types will be compared with genes in
higher vertebrates that are known to participate in innate and/or adaptive
immunity. The goal is to elaborate features of innate and, possibly, the
adaptive immune systems that have allowed lampreys to survive for the last 500
million years. These studies will provide insight into how the adaptive immune
system evolved in concert with innate immunity to allow higher vertebrates,
including humans, to survive constant invasion by a variety of infectious
microorganisms and toxins. The information could also be helpful in devising
means for biological control of predator sea lamprey that have devastated fish
populations in the Great Lakes of North America. This research effort will be
conducted in the intellectual environment of the University of Alabama at
Birmingham and will offer lectures, seminars, and research training to
undergraduate and graduate students and others in the community who are
interested in the important field of comparative immunology.