* 0317372
* Mathematical Modeling and Computational Analysis of Cell and Tissue Movement
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Hans Othmer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2006
* USD 180,000.00

Othmer and Stolarska&lt;br/&gt; The investigators formulate and analyze
mathematical models&lt;br/&gt;for signal transduction, direction sensing, and
movement in&lt;br/&gt;individual, non-interacting amoeboid cells and incorporate
the&lt;br/&gt;individual-based model in models for the collective motion
of&lt;br/&gt;tissue-like cellular aggregates in which the cells
interact&lt;br/&gt;strongly. The cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum
is&lt;br/&gt;used as the model system because it exemplifies both
the&lt;br/&gt;free-ranging movement of individual cells and the
collective&lt;br/&gt;motion of aggregates, and because it is widely used as a
model&lt;br/&gt;experimental system for the study of cell movement.
Current&lt;br/&gt;information on movement of Dictyostelium is used in
the&lt;br/&gt;formulation of the mathematical models, and interaction
with&lt;br/&gt;different experimental groups provides feedback on the
validity&lt;br/&gt;of the models. Suitable computational techniques to simulate
the&lt;br/&gt;resulting partial differential equations are developed. What
is&lt;br/&gt;learned about cell and tissue movement is applicable
to&lt;br/&gt;Dictyostelium; it can be used in several other
contexts,&lt;br/&gt;including embryonic development, wound healing,
angiogenesis, and&lt;br/&gt;the immune system. Macroscopic descriptions based on
microscopic&lt;br/&gt;models of cell behavior will significantly improve large-
scale&lt;br/&gt;tissue simulations and expand the scope of
feasible,&lt;br/&gt;microscopically-accurate simulations.&lt;br/&gt; In this
project the investigators develop mathematical&lt;br/&gt;models to help
understand how signal transduction, direction&lt;br/&gt;sensing, and movement in
individual, non-interacting cells of&lt;br/&gt;Dictyostelium discoideum, a
cellular slime mold, contribute to&lt;br/&gt;the collective behavior of large
aggregates of cells. Directed&lt;br/&gt;cell migration plays an essential role
in the early development&lt;br/&gt;and ongoing maintenance of most organisms.
Single-cell organisms&lt;br/&gt;such as bacteria find food and avoid repellents
by chemotaxis,&lt;br/&gt;leukocytes must detect sites of infection and move
toward them in&lt;br/&gt;order to ingest bacteria and cellular debris, and
directed cell&lt;br/&gt;migration is essential for embryonic development and
wound&lt;br/&gt;healing. Cell migration also occurs in many diseases; in
cancer,&lt;br/&gt;for instance, it leads to invasion and metastasis, and
cell&lt;br/&gt;adhesion and motility also have important roles there.
Metastasis&lt;br/&gt;is probably the major cause of death in cancer patients.
The&lt;br/&gt;potential impact of a better understanding of cell motion
is&lt;br/&gt;enormous. Not only is control of motility an
important&lt;br/&gt;therapeutic target for cancer treatment, but cell and
tissue&lt;br/&gt;engineering holds the promise to provide new tissues and
organs&lt;br/&gt;by in vivo tissue regeneration. The success of this hinges
on&lt;br/&gt;understanding the ways that cells attach to natural
and&lt;br/&gt;artificial extracellular matrix, as well as the
characteristics&lt;br/&gt;of the cell-cell interactions that eventually dictate
how cells&lt;br/&gt;move, proliferate and remodel into new capillaries or other
types&lt;br/&gt;of functional tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;