* 0317886
* Biotransformations Near and Above 100 C: Mining Genomes of Hyperthermophiles for New Biocatalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Robert Kelly, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 08/31/2007
* USD 400,004.00

Biocatalyst discovery and characterization remains a key biotechnological
objective. High throughput screening and directed evolution approaches have been
developed over the last few years that enable such biocatalysts to be identified
and then optimized with respect to their biochemical, biophysical and
bioprocessing properties. However, current methods for discovery and
optimization rely heavily on enzyme-based assays, which may be difficult or even
infeasible to implement because of chemical limitations or gene expression
issues. Moreover, multienzyme transformations are not easily identified by this
approach since current methods focus on the products of individual genes. As a
means of circumventing the limitations with current approaches, the objective of
this research is to develop functional genomics-based discovery methods to
identify novel biocatalysts. With the advent of high-throughput technologies to
measure gene expression, cellular responses at the genetic level can be
correlated to environmental conditions. This alternative approach to enzyme
discovery takes advantage of highly sensitive, transcriptional.based cellular
responses to biotechnologically-related environmental challenges and growth
conditions. In this project period, extensive use will be made of DNA
microarrays to identify the genes that encode new enzymes for a range of
important biotransformations.