* 0317165
* Isolation and Characterization of Pseudomonas Type III Effectors That Suppress Programmed Cell Death in Eukaryotes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Martin Dickman, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2006
* USD 375,000.00

Pseudomonas syringae is a pathogen whose interactions with plants can take two
strikingly different courses. In virulent interactions with susceptible plants,
bacteria cause disease, whereas in avirulent interactions with resistant plants,
bacteria trigger a rapid, defense-associated programmed cell death (PCD) known
as the hypersensitive response (HR). Both outcomes are controlled by bacterial
proteins injected into plant cells by a protein delivery system called the type
III secretion system (TTSS). Preliminary data on this project show that several
bacterial proteins act as suppressors of the HR. Remarkably, these PCD
suppressors also function to inhibit yeast apoptosis (a type of PCD found in
animals) and inhibit the ability of the mouse pro-apoptotic protein, Bax, to
induce apoptosis in plants and yeast. This indicates that these proteins
function as anti-apoptotic factors in a trans-kingdom manner. This project will
use screens in yeast and plant systems to isolate additional bacterial proteins
that act as PCD suppressors. Moreover, the project will characterize each
suppressor to determine their general effect on other hallmarks of plant
defense. &lt;br/&gt;The experiments described in this project offer broad
training for students. Besides current approaches in microbiology, plant
biology, and functional genomics, the topics pursued have important
ramifications for mammalian systems, greatly adding to the breadth of this
research program. The researchers have participated with the establishment of
the UNL Young Nebraska Scientist (YNS) program, designed to enhance the
recruitment of minority high school students who have demonstrated interest in
the life sciences. The program is unusual in that it provides mentorship to the
student from high school through their undergraduate career. Also, the
researchers have initiated collaboration with Nebraska Wesleyan University, an
excellent liberal arts college. Thus, the research group will enhance its pool
of undergraduates, many of which are from under-represented ethnic
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;