* 0317122
* SGER: Judicial Pioneers: Litigants in the Moscow Theater Hostage Case
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Vanessa Baird, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christopher J. Zorn
* 08/31/2004
* USD 40,824.00

This project, submitted under the Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER)
program, examines the willingness of citizens to sue. How does the idea to
redress grievances in courts first occur in developing democracies where people
previously did not view the courts as the final arbiter of disputes nor imagine
the possibility of taking their governments to court? Who are the pioneers in
taking legal action against governments? The researchers hypothesize that
wealthy or otherwise privileged individuals are the "judicial pioneers" in
developing democracies, a finding that contrasts with expectations generated by
those who study litigation patterns in established democracies. In developing
democracies, it is suspected that the barriers to entry are too high for the
disadvantaged and that only the relatively advantaged can break down these
barriers and attempt to hold governments accountable. The hypothesized
mechanisms connecting advantage to judicial pioneering include greater
expectations of satisfactory outcomes, greater perceptions of judicial
procedural fairness, greater experience with other democratic institutions or
specifically with the judicial process, great support for democracy, and greater
internal efficacy. By determining the importance for judicial pioneers of
expectations of satisfactory outcomes relative to these other variables, major
questions in the judicial politics and democratization literatures will be
answered. This research study litigants in Russia's first major class action
lawsuit - a case where 38 of the 600-800 victims in the Moscow theatre hostage
crisis recently initiated claims against the city of Moscow for an unprecedented
$40 million. They have been granted a hearing scheduled for January 16, 2003.
Social scientists rarely if ever have the opportunity to study judicial pioneers
who decide to take the risk of litigation in a vacuum of information and
experience. It is essential therefore to document this first case as the
building block for the literatures on litigation, judicial legitimacy, the
"judicialization of politics," and democratic consolidation. This project
advances knowledge about how underrepresented groups in new democracies access
judiciaries by litigating and thus how their rights come to be protected by the
legal system. In addition, this project sheds light on public attitudes toward
new government institutions in emerging democracies.