* 0317562
* Modelling Climate, Solar and Geomagnetic Related Variations in the Deposition of Ice Core Beryllium-10 Isotopes
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Dorothy Koch, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 09/30/2006
* USD 302,681.00

This award will allow the use a state-of-the-art atmospheric general circulation
model to examine the impacts of climate and production rate changes on the
deposition of Beryllium-10 isotopes (10Be) in ice cores. These results will in
turn be used to constrain the different causes of variability in 10Be fluxes and
thus improve estimates of possible solar magnetic field related production
changes. Over decadal to centennial timescales, hypothesized variations in
production rate, due to solar variability, are small, and the potential for
climate impacts large. Therefore, before 10Be records can be unambiguously used
to constrain solar variation, these impacts must be quantitatively addressed.
This study will incorporate a stratosphere with a full aerosol tracer module and
will focus on three separate questions: What is the impact of climate change on
10Be concentrations and flux? How are changes in 10Be production (solar and
geomagnetic) recorded? How do solar changes in irradiance and production impact
10Be deposition? The model will be subjected to a large number of relevant
climate forcings (both radiative and sea surface forcing). The proposed work
should provide a deeper understanding of the information contained within the
10Be ice core records, and thus an improved estimate of solar variations through
time. Better understanding of such forcings of past climate will help estimate
the degree of variability in the Earth System and ultimately be an aid to
environmental and economic policy makers.