* 0317103
* A Phylogeny of Pinus [Pinaceae] Based on Six Low-Copy Nuclear Genes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Aaron Liston, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 07/31/2008
* USD 278,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Aaron Liston at Oregon State University and Dr.
Richard Cronn at the USDA Forest Service to investigate evolutionary and genetic
relationships among the approximately 100 species of pine trees (the genus
Pinus). Pines are the most widespread genus of woody plants native to the
Northern Hemisphere, and are widely planted in the Southern Hemisphere. Thus
pines are of vast economic and ecological importance worldwide. Past studies of
pine evolutionary relationships have produced conflicting results, and no more
than half of all species have been included in any single analysis. To address
these problems, Liston and Cronn will use genomic data emerging from research on
loblolly pine to identify twenty-five nuclear genetic markers for screening DNA-
level variation across the genus. The six most promising markers will be used to
construct a multi-gene estimate of evolutionary relationships for all available
pine species, and to identify the source of conflict among existing studies. The
potential for transferring these markers to phylogenetic studies of other
gymnosperm genera will also be examined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resolution of
systematic relationships among pine species will result in an enhanced
understanding of their evolutionary history, and contribute to an improved
classification of the genus. Furthermore, these results will provide a robust
foundation for studies of pine ecology and evolutionary biology. By determining
which species are most closely related, the results should contribute to efforts
focused on the genetics and breeding of pine species. It is also anticipated
that the genetic markers developed here will be useful in similar studies of
other gymnosperm genera. Two graduate and two undergraduate students will be
supervised by Liston and Cronn, and receive training in the field of plant
molecular systematics.&lt;br/&gt;