* 0317617
* Collaborative Research:  Race and Rust Belt Revitalization--What Determines Who Lives Where?
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Mick Couper, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2005
* USD 69,005.00

Successful revitalization efforts are transforming urban America and have
special urgency in Rust Belt metropolises. Economic changes and immigration are
rearranging the housing and labor markets in locations such as Chicago and
Detroit. Older neighborhoods are redeveloped, new condos are built near downtown
while the suburban ring continues to grow. But like most metropolises, they
remain divided by race and by huge city-suburban differences in economic status.
Will revitalization exacerbate racial polarization or minimize it? This project
uses comprehensive and innovative face-to-face surveys in Chicago and Detroit to
address ongoing questions and debates about residential segregation. The data
gathered will test specific hypotheses about how race itself, racial attitudes,
and other factors influence neighborhood segregation on the three steps of
residential mobility: the decision to move, the search process, and the
selection of the most desirable alternative. In addition, because little is
known about the residential choices of recent immigrants and whether white and
African-American homeseekers are influenced by the presence of immigrants in a
prospective neighborhood, Hispanic neighborhoods will be oversampled in Chicago
and, if resources permit, in Detroit. Several methodological innovations will
improve the quality of data. For example, computer assisted interviewing will
allow a more precise measure of the net effects of neighborhood racial
composition independent of other characteristics on neighborhood evaluations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project itself will be an integral
part of graduate training at both universities through practicum courses in
survey methods that will involve students in all stages of the research process.
The research team itself is diverse, and, in the past, practica on this topic
have attracted numerous students and teaching assistants from underrepresented
groups. The topic of the study has broad implications for society more
generally, as undoubtedly urban policies and immigration will be toward the top
of the domestic agenda in coming decades. Survey respondents will receive a
report of the results; a highly accessible book describing the consequences of
revitalization for Rust Belt metropolises will be written; and a conference at
which the results will be presented will target community leaders, urban
planners, fair housing activists, and political officials. In addition, the
methodological innovations will appeal to those interested in using survey
methods to shed light on complex and socially sensitive issues across a wide
range of scientific disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;