* 0317254
* Collaborative Research: Black Migration to the West, 1930-2000
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Steven Ruggles, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2007
* USD 103,664.00

SES-0317247&lt;br/&gt;Stewart Tolnay&lt;br/&gt;University of
Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-0317254&lt;br/&gt;Joseph
Alexander&lt;br/&gt;University of Minnesota-Twin Cities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Internal migration reshaped the African American population throughout the
twentieth century. It produced a dramatic shift in the regional distribution of
the black population, ending its long-standing and overwhelming concentration in
the South. It turned a predominantly rural and agricultural population into
urbanites. And, as a result, it strongly influenced racial dynamics in the South
and non-South, alike. The project investigates a significant, but thus far
understudied, aspect of this broader demographic phenomenon - African American
migration to the West from 1930 through 2000. The general goals for the project
are to gain a better understanding of who the western migrants were and how they
fared after they arrived. The PIs will rely primarily on existing Public Use
Microdata Samples (PUMS) from the decennial censuses for 1930 through 2000 to
pursue five major substantive objectives. First, to construct profiles for
migrants to the West, including information about a variety of socio-demographic
characteristics (e.g., education/literacy, economic status, urban/rural origins,
residence, and family patterns). Second, to conduct comparative analyses that:
(1) determine the extent to which western migrants differed from migrants to
other regions, or from non-migrants, and (2) assess the amount of variation
among the western migrants, themselves. Third, to conduct temporal analyses that
examine how the migrant profiles, and group contrasts, varied over time. Fourth,
to complete contextual analyses that consider the extent to which the
characteristics of local areas affected the migrants and their situation
relative to other groups within the West. Fifth, to study patterns of return
migration from the West, and how they differed from return migration patterns
from the Northeast and Midwest. The new data sources and substantive findings
resulting from this project will advance, significantly, our understanding of an
important aspect of the Great Migration of African Americans during the
twentieth century, and the growth of the black population in the West. They will
also provide valuable evidence for the investigation of theoretically-important
issues related to: interregional migration; regional variation in the experience
of blacks and black migrants; relations among racial and ethnic groups in the
West; growth of the black ghetto in the West; racially- and ethnically-
determined occupational hierarchies in the West; and the effects of group size
on individual socioeconomic outcomes for minority group members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has broader impacts that transcend its
scientific contributions. Graduate students will be involved in the project
throughout its duration, offering an excellent opportunity for professional
development and human capital acquisition. Undergraduates will also be able to
gain first-hand research experience through independent study programs at both
institutions that allow them to earn credit while participating in actual
research projects. Findings will be disseminated to an interdisciplinary
audience through publishing in journals with an interdisciplinary focus and by
presenting papers at interdisciplinary conferences. The data preparation
activities that will create new data sources for public dissemination through
the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series website at the Minnesota Population
Center.&lt;br/&gt;