* 0317539
* Fine Resolution Transglacial Paleoclimate Record from Lake Titicaca, Peru and Bolivia
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Mark Bush, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2006
* USD 269,005.00

This award will generate a pollen and charcoal record from Lake Titicaca.
Selected portions of core LT01-2B (believed to be a continuous sedimentary
sequence spanning the last 140,000 years) will be sampled at 60-80 year
resolution. A study of modern analog pollen and charcoal deposition will be
conducted on lakes between 3000 and 5000 m elevation in Peru and Bolivia.
Samples will be collected from 80 lakes, notes will be taken on the surrounding
vegetation, evidence of fire, wetland plants, and basic limnological data. This
component of the research should strengthen other southern hemisphere
paleoclimate reconstructions. Titicaca is the largest lake in South America and
offers the first uninterrupted transglacial record that includes a full Holocene
sequence from the Neotropics. Core LT01-2B will be the center for multiproxy
collaborative research to establish paleoclimatic change in the Titicaca basin.
The fossil pollen and charcoal will be the principal non-paleolimnological
reconstruction and hence provide unique data on the vegetation, and fire history
of the surrounding watershed, the flanking marshes, and submerged aquatic
vegetation. These data will also provide an independent assessment of
paleoclimatic events deduced from isotopic or diatom data. This award will
provide important palynological data from a region of high biodiversity at
considerable risk from future global climate change. Understanding the
ecological preferences of modern pollen in the region and knowing what changes
took place in the past due to climate variability are fundamental to
understanding the biotic response to future southern hemisphere climate change.