* 0317586
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  New Coating Formulations Containing Natural Inhibitors for Steel Corrosion Control
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Adriane Ludwick, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 30,000.00

0317586&lt;br/&gt;Ludwick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research project between Dr. Adriane Ludwick, Chemistry
Department of Geology, Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama and Dr. Esam
Ibrahim Al-Hanash, Chemistry Department, Alexandria University, Alexandria,
Egypt. The investigators will study new anti-corrosion formulation of polymer
together with extracts from herbs indigenous to the Middle East area and/or
green algae available in seawater. Surface treatment of steel structures will be
examined. The performance evaluation of the polymer coatings containing the
natural extracts will be done by means of laboratory accelerated tests such as
ac impedance and salt spray fog test, as well as by means of field studies
through immersion of samples in the Alexandria Harbor of Egypt. This work is
based on a previous successful collaboration between Tuskegee University and
Alexandria University in which an anti-corrosion coating was developed using
compounds extracted from algae. The results of that collaboration are currently
being disseminated through workshops in Egypt attended by the end-users.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Organic polymers with anti-corrosion additives are
used as coating materials to enhance the corrosion protection of steel
structures such as civil engineering constructions, buried pipelines and marine
structures. These coatings can be used in complex shaped sections such as bends,
valves and tee sections. The project will benefit from the complementary skills
of the two PIs, and from the currently well-established links between their
universities. The U.S. PI has experience in the field having developed a varnish
containing algae that has proved effective in marine environments. The results
from this project will be disseminated by the two scientists to end-users. The
involvement of younger faculty in the proposed project will enhance the
potential for future international collaborations. The project will introduce
students to modern techniques of electrochemical evaluation of corrosion rates
and mechanisms, and to the types of naturally occurring organic means for
inhibiting corrosion of steel. This project is being supported under the US-
Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in
both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;