* 0317568
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Manufacturing of Asphaltic Superpavement Employing Polymer Modification Technology
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Louay Mohammad, Technology Resources Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 30,000.00

0317568 Aglan

Description: This award is to support a cooperative research project between
Mary Ann Aglan, President and Technical Director, Technology Resources Inc.,
Auburn, Alabama and Dr. Ayman Othman, Department of Civil Engineering, South
Valley University, Aswan, Egypt. Previous research has shown the potential
improvement in the hot temperature properties of asphalt concrete mixtures by
using polymer modifiers, when tested at moderate temperatures up to 85 degree F.
The PIs will focus on the performance of modified asphalt concrete mixtures
using the temperature gradient in hot areas such as Upper Egypt and the southern
United States, where temperatures exceed 120 degree F. Novel polymers with
different functionalized groups will be used as modifiers to produce asphaltic
pavements with superior high temperature properties. The performance of the
modified asphalt concrete mixtures will be evaluated. The effect of polymer type
and dosage on the pavement performance following high temperature aging will be
studied. Two different polymer modifiers will be used and compared with a
control mixture to study their effect on the high temperature properties of a
soft inexpensive asphalt binder. Mixtures containing Pliolite and Wingflex
modifiers will be compared. The polymer modifiers will be supplied by a U.S.
company, Goodyear Chemical. A lifetime cost analysis under local market
conditions will be performed in order to ascertain the economic advantage of the
use of polymer-modified asphalt.

Scope: The cost of highways represents a considerable portion of federal and
state budgets, due to the high initial cost of constructing asphaltic paved
roads and of maintaining them. High temperature exposure of asphaltic paved
roads in hot climates causes rutting and sever wear problems. A technical
challenge is in formulating paving mixtures that withstand this high temperature
exposure, in addition to the lack of constitutive relationships between the
durability of these paving mixtures and their compositions and the environmental
conditions. The research performed using local materials under local climatic
conditions will further the confidence of officials to use such advanced
materials in practice. The results of the laboratory tests, theoretical analysis
using constitutive equations, and cost analysis will be presented at a seminar
to be held in Aswan, Egypt for individuals from academia, government and private
industry involved in the construction and maintenance of the roadway system. The
technology developed will also be disseminated through publications in both
countries. One graduate student in Egypt and one in the United States will be
involved in this project and will benefit from training in this area. The
developed methodology can be applied not only to hot climates but also to other
climates such as cold regions using the proper polymer modifiers. This project
is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants
to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.