* 0317151
* Towards Understanding Mechanisms of mRNA Localization in Plants.
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Dina Mandoli, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 09/30/2007
* USD 390,277.00

The spatial organization of information is emerging as a critical factor in
understanding many aspects of cell and developmental biology. How do organisms
know how and where to make a top, bottom, left and right during development? The
green algal unicell, Acetabularia or The Mermaid's Wineglass, is a classical
developmental model that will be used in this project. Acetabularia grows to an
enormous adult length of 4 cm as a single cell, progressing through several
morphologically complex stages. This research will begin to describe how
protein-coding information, in the form of messenger RNAs, are moved to their
correct subcellular locations during development. The correct spatial placement
of these messenger RNAs underlies the protein gradients that ultimately dictate
morphological specializations. To define the spatial distribution of mRNAs,
~1000 gene tags or "ESTs" from juveniles or adults will be arrayed on a gene
chip and probed with mRNA isolated from different regions of this giant cell.
Next, a few genes that array analysis suggests may co-localize will be tagged
with a fluorescent marker and microinjected back into the unicell. Where, how
and how fast these genes and pieces of them move will be followed with video
microscopy. Movements of fluorescent-mRNAs in intact, wounded, enucleated or
amputated cells will be compared. Classic inhibitors will test if the "highway"
on which these mRNAs move is indeed the cellular cytoskeleton.&lt;br/&gt;This
research will impact understanding of the spatial organization of RNA in all
plant cells, and provide an interesting comparison to animal cells that have
solved the same problem in different ways. Human resources will be developed by
support of students. Public outreach will be enabled by a 4-color brochure about
RNA biology that will be created and distributed to teachers and K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;