* 0317334
* Energy Coupling in Cytochrome c Oxidase
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Randy Larsen, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2007
* USD 337,920.00

The ability of heme/copper terminal oxidases to transduce energy is the fulcrum
of cellular respiration in aerobic organisms. In fact, evolution of life on
earth relies on the ability of aerobic organisms to metabolize oxygen.
Heme/copper oxidases are found in nearly all aerobic organisms including some
archaeobacteria, some prokaryotes, and nearly all eukaryotes. Despite the
importance of these enzymes to our understanding of the evolution of aerobic
life on earth, a detailed understanding of enzymatic function has not yet been
achieved. The overall goal of this project is to identify the magnitudes and
time scales of molar volume and enthalpy changes associated with each electron
transfer reaction of the enzymes catalytic cycle using variable
temperature/pressure transient absorption spectroscopy and photothermal methods.
Specifically, electrons will be photo-injected into fully oxidized (no active
proton transport) cytochrome c oxidases (CcO) from both bovine heart tissue and
the bacteria Rb. sphaeroides using Ru(II)-based photoinitiators. Volume and
enthalpy profiles associated with the subsequent intramolecular ET will be
constructed using photothermal spectroscopy and variable temperature/pressure
transient optical spectroscopy. These experiments will be repeated using CcO
containing both P- and F-intermediates localized at the binuclear center (i.e.,
electron transfer believed to be coupled to active proton transport). Successful
completion of this project will provide the first look into the conformational
dynamics and free-energy coupling associated with active proton transport in
these complex enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The research plan
provides multi-disciplinary educational opportunities for students, who will
receive broad training in modern experimental physical chemistry including
photothermal techniques and fast optical spectroscopy as well as biochemical
methods including protein chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;