* 0317644
* Collaborative Research Predicting Trait Impressions of Faces and their Activation of Artificial Neural Networks from Human Brain Activation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Itzhak Aharon, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 06/30/2005
* USD 54,024.00

Face perception is perhaps the most developed visual perception skill, with
considerable neuroscience evidence for the involvement of a number of brain
areas. Theory and research in this discipline emphasizes a distinction between
processes involved in the recognition of identity and the recognition of
emotional expressions. Face perception also plays a critical role in social
interactions, and considerable research in social psychology has identified
consensual, evaluative trait judgments based on facial structure. The babyface
overgeneralization hypothesis has been proposed to account for certain
consensual trait impressions, and it has been supported using a variety of
methods. In particular, adults with facial structures that resemble those of
babies are judged to have the childlike traits of naivete, physical weakness,
warmth, and submissiveness, and the extent to which an artificial neural network
confuses adult faces with those of babies predicts impressions of these traits.
The proposed research will test this overgeneralization hypothesis by examining
human brain activation using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
Experiment 1 will identify regions and patterns of brain activation that
differentiate responses to faces of babies and adults, and Experiment 2 will
determine a) whether some adult faces elicit brain activation more similar to
that shown to babies' faces, and b) whether trait impressions of these adult
faces can be predicted from the similarity of the brain activation they produce
to that produced by babies' faces. The proposed research integrates theories and
research in the domains of social psychology and neuroscience to advance our
understanding of face perception and facial stereotypes.