* 0317224
* Effects of Family Environment on Health, Income, and Education:  A New Sample of Adoptees
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Bruce Sacerdote, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 382,267.00

The project collects and analyzes survey data from a set of 1,200 Korean
American adoptees and their adoptive parents. This will be the largest publicly
available set of data on adoptees and the outcomes will be measures of the
children's education, income, and health, including use of cigarettes and
alcohol. This data set is particularly useful because the adoptees are assigned
to families in a random manner. The adoptees in the study were Korean infants
placed with US families and the adoptees are now ages 21-30. These adoptees were
placed by Holt International which is widely recognized as one of the largest
and most professionally managed adoption agencies in the world. The objective of
the research is to understand the impact of shifts in family environment on
child outcomes within the areas of education, income and health. Because the
adoptive families have significant variation in family income and parental
education, this study provides a unique way to examine the direct impact of
differing socioeconomic conditions on child
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed
Activity&lt;br/&gt;The project has high intellectual merit for several reasons:
First, the proposed research helps answer a series of questions which are
fundamental to many areas of social science and policy making, namely "how much
do large shifts in a child's environment affect that child's long term
outcomes?" Second, the proposed research offers important innovations over
existing work on these questions because of the proposed work's large sample
sizes, the random assignment of children to families, and the focus on long term
behavioral outcomes (e.g. educational attainment and occupation). The random
assignment of children to adoptive families is critical to the study's ability
to measure the treatment effect of parent's income and education. Selection of
children by adoptive parents can confound attempts to measure such environmental
effects. The proposed data are one of the few adoption data sets in which
selection is known to be absent, making this study a unique opportunity. Much of
the existing research on adoptees focuses on IQ and personality tests rather
than behavioral outcomes such as years of education and labor market income.
Preliminary work suggests that the impact of changes in shared environment is
much greater for behavioral outcomes than for test scores. Furthermore many
adoption studies have sample sizes of only 200-400 children and this reduces the
range of hypotheses that can be tested. Specific questions to be investigated
include the following: How large is the treatment effect from&lt;br/&gt;family
environment (as measured by parental income and education) on children's
outcomes such as years of education, income and health? Do parents who smoke
tend to raise kids who smoke? If the adoptive parents have a high Body Mass
Index, is the adoptee also highly likely to have a high BMI? How do the measured
effects from the nurturing parents' inputs differ for adoptees and for children
raised by their biological parents? This analysis will use outcomes for the
biological children of the adoptive parents. Finally, do parental education and
income have a non-linear effect on child outcomes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Broader Impacts Resulting from the Proposed Study&lt;br/&gt;The study will have
a broad impact on the way social scientists view the effects from shifts in
family environment. The proposed work will measure convincingly the size of
these effects and the extent to which such effects are non-linear in parental
education and income. The study will produce a high quality public use data set
which other researchers can use to test a wide variety of hypotheses. The study
will also influence policy debate in several areas including the value of income
redistribution in the U.S. and the degree to which family background helps or
handicaps students in their efforts to attend college or
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;