* 0318665
* Theoretical Studies of Superconductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Daniel Agterberg, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2007
* USD 225,000.00

This award supports theoretical research and education on unconventional
superconductivity and exotic superconductors. This award has three related
research thrusts. The first seeks to elucidate the role of broken symmetries
that naturally appear in mesoscopic and nanoscale superconducting materials and
at Josephson junctions. The second aims to determine the properties of
superconductors near quantum critical points and to emphasize how these differ
from conventional weak-coupling theories. The third will explore the origins of
a sharp inconsistency between theory and experiment in the superconducting state
of Sr2RuO4. The research will involve a combination of microscopic and
phenomenological theories. &lt;br/&gt;This award also supports involving
graduate and undergraduate students in the research. The PI aims to broaden
participation of underrepresented groups through the inclusion of female
graduate students and through the participation of undergraduates in the
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Research Experiences for Undergraduates
program. This program emphasizes the participation of minority and female
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education on unconventional superconductivity and exotic
superconductors. Superconductivity has been discovered in single-wall carbon
nanotubes and other nanostructures; mescoscopic superconductors have revealed
new and intriguing behavior in magnetic fields. Superconductivity has been
discovered in close proximity to a variety of magnetic phases in strongly
correlated electron materials.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will follow thrusts in three
important areas to elucidate the nature of superconducting states in nanoscale
or nanostructured superconductors and exotic bulk superconductors. Exploring the
role of quantum phase transitions, phase transitions that occur at zero-
temperature, in determining the properties of the superconducting and normal
states is a particularly timely aspect of this work. Quantum phase transitions
appear to be important in understanding the exotic properties of superconducting
states in strongly correlated materials, including the high temperature
superconductors and some heavy fermion superconductors. The PI will also explore
the origins of a sharp inconsistency between theory and experiment in the
superconducting state of Sr2RuO4, likely an unconventional spin-triplet
superconductor. The research will involve a combination of microscopic and
phenomenological theories. &lt;br/&gt;This award also supports involving
graduate and undergraduate students in the research. The PI aims to broaden
participation of underrepresented groups through the inclusion of female
graduate students and through the participation of undergraduates in the
University of Wisconsin- Milwaukee Research Experiences for Undergraduates
program. This program emphasizes the participation of minority and female
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;