* 0318768
* Mechanisms of Embryonic Patterning and Lineage Specification
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Laurence Etkin, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2006
* USD 375,039.00

0318768&lt;br/&gt;Etkins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I. Intellectual merit of the
proposed study&lt;br/&gt;In the frog, Xenopus laevis, localized maternal RNAs
and proteins play important roles in early embryogenesis. In a large scale
screen for vegetally localized maternal RNAs the cDNA encoding fatvg was cloned.
Fatvg is localized through both the METRO (Early) and late pathways and is
associated with the germ plasm in cleavage stage embryos. It is related to a
group of mammalian proteins that include adipocyte differentiation related
protein (ADRP) and TIP47 that have diverse functions including transport of
lipid bodies, regulation of signaling pathways, and molecular trafficking within
a variety of cell types. A loss of function analysis of fatvg using antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides demonstrated that fatvg plays a dual role in
dorsal/ventral patterning and in the specification of the germ cell lineage. The
data also show that this dual effect is through the inability of maternal
dorsalizing and germ cell determinants to segregate properly in fatvg?depleted
embryos. This indicates that both the determinants specifying the germ cell
lineage and the dorsal/ventral axis may utilize a common mechanism in
segregating their products in the embryo or that their functions are regulated
through a common pathway. It is likely, that the mechanism involved in the
transport of dorsal and germ cell determinants relies on the movement of
vesicles that carry these factors. This is consistent with the observations that
fatvg protein is detected coating vesicle-like structures located at the vegetal
cortex. This represents a new and novel mechanism involved in regulating germ
cell specification and dorsal?ventral patterning. Based on the potential
function of fatvg related proteins in molecular trafficking in mammalian cells
it is hypothesized that fatvg is a key player in initiating the molecular
pathways responsible for germ line specification and dorsal ventral patterning
through its role regulating molecular trafficking. This hypothesis will be
tested by carrying out the following specific aims: A. To analyze the co
localization of fatvg protein with dorsalizing factors and germ cell
determinants on cellular structures and how this is altered in fatvg depleted
embryos; B. To determine the relationship between fatvg containing vesicles, the
cytoskeleton and molecular motors; C. To identify the interacting proteins
through which Fatvg functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;II. Broader Impact resulting
from the proposed study.&lt;br/&gt;The role of fatvg in both patterning and cell
lineage specification through its role in molecular trafficking is unique and
will illistrates a novel mechanism that integrates both processes. This would be
an important contribution to the understanding of early developmental mechanisms
and would have a broad impact on the fields of developmental biology, cell
biology, and embryology. In addition to the potential scientific advance, the
proposed project will involve the training of undergraduates (summer students in
the laboratory), graduate students, and postdoctoral scientists. This is an
important aspect of our work as scientists and how workers in this field relate
to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;