* 0318809
* SBIR Phase I:     All Optical Switch Based On The Photorefractive Nonlinear Rugate Effect
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Charles Chalfant, Space Photonics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2004
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to put
forth a highly innovative all-optical solid-state photonic switch based on an
optically controlled nonlinear photo-refractive rugate structure. This
innovation provides for a new and effective switching solution for advanced
optical network routing and wavelength division multiplexing systems where
switching time requirements are 10 to 15 msecs, i.e., circuit switching and
routing. A rugate structure is defined by its continuous, often periodic,
variation of the refractive index and can be used to produce diffracting optical
devices. These devices can be grown using thin film deposition techniques and
can provide efficient diffraction for use in wavelength dependent optical
systems. However, once grown, such a structure has a fixed performance,
diffracting at certain wavelengths for a certain incident angle, similar to
standard off-the-shelf optical gratings. The proposed optically controlled
rugate configuration provides a unique optical switch and simultaneous
wavelength select-ability, while also providing an enormous potential for
monolithic designs with no moving parts. The Phase I effort will include a
comprehensive investigation and analysis of all potentially usable nonlinear
materials, all potentially usable laser sources for optical control, optical and
mechanical designs, and an experimental demonstration of the proposed optically
controlled switching technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed all-optical
switch technology will develop and market a new type of optical switching
product for circuit switching and routing in metro-area networks (MANs). The
product also has the potential for wide applications in the long haul fiber
optic communications arena. Additionally, the all-optical wavelength tuning
capacity can be utilized for a host of widely used wavelength division
multiplexing (WDM) applications. The market for optical switching will remain
strong; the goal is to develop an optical switch that will directly compete
within a sector currently served by the telecom sector.&lt;br/&gt;