* 0318289
* Collaborative Research: The Substance of Representation: Studying Policy Content and Legislative Performance
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Ira Katznelson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2005
* USD 160,281.00

At the center of this proposal lies an ambitious empirical effort to better
understand the dynamics of legislative performance in Congress (at this stage of
the work, in the 125 years from the end of Reconstruction in 1877 to 2002) that
is grounded in a new theoretically-derived coding scheme to classify legislation
and roll call votes by policy area. The project's ambition is to code all public
statutes and roll calls from the first Congress to the present by utilizing this
substantive approach to policy classification.

Having developed, refined, and tested this method for data collection and
analysis, the project is deploying this tool to address and overcome limits
posed by some leading features of current congressional research: the focus on
short time series in the post-World War II period; the lack of content
specification in the major preference-based and institutional theories
addressing issues of legislative performance; and the measurement of
productivity by simple counts without making the substance of what is produced
an object of analysis. Thus at the heart of the proposal is an ambitious data
measurement and collection effort that can advance the research the project has
launched on the sources and character congressional outputs which are coded by
policy type, significance, and discretionary content. This work also is geared
to provide a public good for the profession in helping to place congressional
studies as they develop on a more secure substantive basis.

This proposal involves data collection and analysis efforts in two main areas.
The researchers seek support to finish collecting the project's public statutes
data. For the post-1946 period, it is possible to draw on NSF supported
research, particularly the monumental effort of Baumgartner and Jones. The
project also seeks support to help finish coding these public statutes and the
full set of roll call data by its policy classification scheme. The research
program's initial efforts have begun to lead to a widely useful dataset, and to
initial papers and publications elaborating its rationale and discussing initial
findings.

The broader impact of this proposal involves placing policy substance front and
center. This research program has begun to develop fresh data on the substance
of policy over a long period and to use this data to rigorously test and extend
existing and new theory about legislative behavior. In the quest to think about
legislative performance and related issues substantively, three traditions in
the discipline are being joined: an older, presently inactive tradition of
research on the difference made by variations in policy substance; currently
robust scholarship on preferences and institutions; and themes in the
historically-oriented subfield of American Political Development (APD) that has
been especially interested in apprehending how large-scale changes to
institutions, elections, the economy, and geopolitics map into policy outputs.