* 0318445
* High Resolution Reconstruction of Climate in the West Tropical Pacific Warm Pool from 26,000 Years Ago to Present: Stalagmites from Northern Borneo
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Jess Adkins, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2006
* USD 144,909.00

This award will develop high-resolution records of precipitation variability in
the West Pacific Warm Pool from 26,000 years ago to present using speleothem
data from the island of Borneo. The research plan is designed to investigate
decadal to centennial variability across select windows of the last 26,000 years
ago, and to determine the structure and timing of rapid climate changes that
occurred during the last deglaciation. The question of whether the tropical
Pacific drives, or passively responds to, extra tropical climate change can be
answered with these speleothem records. Speleothems collected from Borneo
provide an opportunity to reconstruct sub-decadal hydrological variability in
the West Pacific Warm Pool, an area where precipitation is heavily influenced by
El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) variability. Geochemical and optical
analysis of a speleothem already in hand will be carried out in parallel with
the collection and analysis of new speleothems. High-precision U/Th dates will
provide age control for the geochemical climate proxy records, which will
include oxygen isotopes, carbon isotopes, and Mg/Ca ratios. Micron-scale imaging
techniques will be applied to the speleothem in the hopes of resolving annual
variations in speleothem growth rate, which represents another potential
precipitation proxy. A field program will provide samples that will be used to
calibrate and test the reproducibility of the speloethem-based climate proxy
records. Calibration efforts will include comparing ultra-high-resolution proxy
reconstructions from the tops of actively growing speleothems to both
instrumental and proxy climate data for the last millennium. A high-resolution
record of climate through the Holocene back into the Pleistocene from the
equatorial Pacific region will be an important addition to the paleoclimate data
archive with multiple applications in the study of climate variability and
impact.