* 0318842
* SBIR Phase I:     Dendrimer-Immobilized Antibody Kits for the Detection of Bioterror Pathogens
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Charles Spangler, SENSOPATH TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,957.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop
rapid detection protocols for bioterror-related pathogens. At the current time,
there are no simple and inexpensive recognition systems that are well suited to
the simultaneous detection of multiple pathogenic agents. This is particularly
true for first responders at the point of attack, such as police, paramedics,
and firefighters. Since exposure to Class A bioterror pathogens causes flu-like
symptoms in their victims during the first few days after exposure, it is
critical that the pathogen be identified as quickly as possible (that is, in one
to four hours) in order to minimize fatalities. In this project, a unique
biorecognition system based on immobilized antibodies to a variety of protein
toxins will be developed. Fluorophores will be attached to multi-branched
dendrimers that are also derivatized for immobilization of antibodies against
bioterror pathogens. The detection ensemble will be in a kit form, with easy to
follow instructions for the identification of specific pathogens by antibody-
antigen binding, using chromatographic separation and fluorescence detection of
the complex. It is anticipated that a typical protocol starting from samples
obtained at the point of attack will be able to identify a wide variety of
bioterror agents in 1 to 4 hours.

The main commercial application of this project will be for first responders
involved in Homeland Defense. Additional applications are expected in the food
and beverage industry, biomedical research laboratories, water treatment
facilities and medical diagnostics companies.