* 0318876
* Dissertation Research: Comparing Eugenics in Cuba and the U.S., 1933-1959
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Joel Howell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 08/31/2004
* USD 10,575.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant is on the
Cuban eugenics movement from 1933 to 1959. It's main objective is to investigate
scientific and popular understandings of eugenics, as well as the impact of the
institutionalization of eugenics on gender roles and sexuality in Cuba at this
time. Funding will support extraordinary costs to conduct archival research on
Cuban eugenists, on public outreach efforts to educate Cubans about sexuality,
and on laypeople's responses to these eugenists' efforts in 1933-1959. Because
of the current State Department ban on federally funded travel to Cuba, the
student will access primary sources in the U.S. only. Primary sources located in
the Library of Congress and the National Library of Medicine in Washington DC,
and at the libraries at the University of Florida and Miami, as well as
University of California will provide primary sources. The doctoral student will
utilize existing studies on international eugenics and compare them to her
findings on Cuban eugenics. This project is comparative on two levels: first, it
will compare two distinct .waves. of Cuban eugenics, 1900-1933 and 1933-1959;
second, it will compare Cuban eugenics with U.S. eugenics in the period between
1933 and 1959. This project will contribute to theories concerning the appeal,
impact, and longevity of the eugenics movement. In addition, these comparisons
will further theoretical understandings of the relation between national history
and scientific social movements that are global in their provenance. The
proposed dissertation research on eugenics will advance knowledge and
understanding of the interactions between biomedical science, technology, and
society in both national and global realms. The proposed research advances
discovery and understanding of the complexity of the eugenics movement. The
study will use theories and methods advanced by Science and Technology Studies
scholars to investigate the ways in which the science of eugenics shaped Cuban
society and culture. Successful completion of the proposed dissertation research
will provide training and assistance toward the completion of the doctoral
student's Ph.D. in history and anthropology. The doctoral student plans to
conduct research and teach in upper-level scholarly institutions in the future,
thus benefiting future scholars and students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;