* 0318010
* Fechnerian scaling: Metric from discriminability
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Ehtibar Dzhafarov, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 01/31/2007
* USD 215,000.00

This project elaborates and expands the theory and applications of
Multidimensional Fechnerian Scaling (MDFS). Intuitively, MDFS is about how to
compute distances among objects "from the point of view" of a perceiver (human
observer, technical system, group of people, neurophysiological system), based
on the probabilities with which this perceiver discriminates (tells apart) very
similar objects. Discrimination probabilities impose on the set of perceived
objects a local geometric structure (generalized Finsler geometry), and this
local structure can be extracted and expanded into a global metric. Essentially,
this is an idea with which, albeit in a very limited context, G.T. Fechner
launched scientific psychology some 150 years ago. MDFS is motivated by the
expectation that, the discrimination among stimuli being arguably the most basic
ability of a perceiving system, and the probability of discrimination being a
universal measure of discriminability, distances computed from discrimination
probabilities may have a fundamental status among social and behavioral
measurements. Originally developed for sets of continuously parametrized stimuli
(such as colors, sounds, or mixtures of food ingredients) and critically based
on computation of derivatives, in the present project MDFS is expanded to
discrete sets of objects, such as alphabets, words, or consumer products. When a
discrete set of objects is subjected to the proposed modification of MDFS, it is
transformed into a network with inter-object distances. A subsequent immersion
of this network in a Euclidean space (by means of conventional metric
multidimensional scaling) allows one to identify the relevant features that
determine the dissimilarities among the objects. The theoretical work in this
part of the project will be complemented and guided by the collection of large
data sets on discrimination probabilities for such objects as letters of
familiar and unfamiliar alphabets and schematic faces. The adaptation of MDFS to
discrete object spaces is a non-trivial enterprise that is only enabled by the
recent discovery and documentation of two basic properties of discrimination
probabilities (regular minimality and nonconstant self-similarity). Their
further experimental analysis constitutes the second part of the project. These
two properties have far reaching consequences both within and without MDFS. Thus
it has been shown that no "random utility" type model in which random
representations depend on objects sufficiently smoothly can account for these
properties (the models referred to are those in which objects are mapped into
random entities in some unobservable "internal" space, and the decision as to
whether the objects are the same or different is determined by the realizations
of these random entities). The third part of the project is aimed at an in-depth
analysis of the relationship between MDFS, the "random utility" type models, and
the recently proposed alternative to such models in which random entities are
replaced by "uncertainty blobs" of perceived objects.

A successful completion of the project will improve our understanding of the
fundamental notions of discrimination and dissimilarity, and it will advance the
foundations of measurement in social and behavioral sciences. The project also
has a clear applied focus. Thus, the development of algorithms and software for
MDFS in discrete object spaces will provide a new useful tool for analyzing
large-scale polls of public opinion, for consumer surveys, and for educational
testing.