* 0318758
* US- Egypt Cooperative Research: Production and Application of Novel Insecticidal and Antimicrobal Textiles Using Atmospheric Plasmas and Irradiation Techniques
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Mohamed Bourham, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 33,213.00

0318758&lt;br/&gt;Bourham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research project between Dr. Mohamed Bourham, Department
of Nuclear Engineering, North Carolina State University and Dr. Samiha Gawish,
Textile Division, the National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. The Investigators
will study the production and applications of novel insecticidal and
antimicrobal textiles using atmospheric plasmas and irradiation techniques.
Irradiation, grafting, and plasma or chemical modification methods will be used
for the formation of bioactive quatemary ammonium salts sites or other groups
onto the textiles, without impairing the original mechanical properties. Three
series of novel biocidal textiles will be synthesized: permanent moth proofed
wool fabrics; insecticidal fabrics, which are resistant to blood-sucking
insects; and antimicrobial fabrics. Biocidal textiles will be prepared from the
available raw materials in the market, on a laboratory and pilot scales, and
then transferred to the industry. The effectiveness of the antimicrobial finish,
or wool resistance to insects and its durability to repeated washings or dry
cleaning will be determined. Improvement of other related fibers properties such
as the increase of moisture regain for synthetic fibers and increase of dye
uptake will be measured. Biocidal textile production cost will be evaluated.
Potential end-uses and fields of application will be identified. Elemental
microanalysis and other tests, for characterization of the produced biocidal
textiles, will be conducted, and the antimicrobial activity of the fabrics will
be measured.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Scope: Biocidal textiles are gaining in
importance for combating the spread of fatal diseases. Methods of production and
application of these textile materials need to be introduced to textile
industries, for the near future production of novel biocidal textiles from non-
woven or woven fabrics of natural, synthetic or blend of fibers. Research will
be conducted in collaboration with scientists from the NRC of Egypt, where the
textile industry is a leading industry in that country. The collaborators have
complementary skills and expertise in detection techniques and in textile
manufacturing. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund
Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;