* 0318478
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Language Change and Synchronic Typology: Morphosyntactic Variation in Indo Aryan
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Paul Kiparsky, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2006
* USD 11,975.00

Under the direction of Dr. Paul Kiparsky, Ms. Ashwini Deo will conduct fieldwork
for her doctoral dissertation. She will study three little-described Indo-Aryan
languages spoken by mostly tribal/indigenous communities in Western India: Pawri
and Dehawali from the Bhili group, and Ahirani from the Khandeshi group. Deo
will use interviews and questionnaires, and collect texts from the oral
tradition in two communities where these languages are spoken. On the basis of
this material, the languages' grammatical features will be analyzed and
described. They will then be compared to the standard languages, especially
their closest relatives Marathi, Hindi, and Gujarati, with a view to finding out
how they are related and how they have evolved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will contribute to linguistic theory by using the new data to test the
hypothesis that changes in inflections go hand in hand with changes in sentence
structure. The project will also contribute to the history of the Indo-Aryan
language family. The grammatical descriptions will be useful to other theorists
and to South Asian specialists, as well as to the language communities for their
efforts to promote literacy and language standardization. The data will go into
a public database of texts and sound files where others can access it for their
own research.&lt;br/&gt;