* 0318916
* SBIR Phase I:  Miniature NOx Sensor for Small Airborne Platforms
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* John Bognar, Anasphere, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,721.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is intended to
develop a new type of NOx sensor for use on Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and
other small aerial platforms. Many of these vehicles are quite small, and
therefore have very limited space and weight allowances for instrument payloads
- in fact, most traditional instruments used for real-time measurement of trace
gas species of interest are simply too large and consume too much power to be
used on UAVs. This project is to develop a new instrument for the measurement of
nitric oxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) based on a novel technique that
lends itself to miniaturization. The instrument will be very small and light to
allow it to be used in very small UAVs as well as on sounding balloons. Phase I
research will demonstrate operation of a proof-of-concept
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of medical applications are foreseen,
particularly in relation to asthma diagnosis and treatment. The instrument will
also find extensive use in satellite calibration and validation. Ultimately, the
NOx instrument will lead to two public benefits: improved air quality (and
resulting health benefits), and improved treatment methods and diagnostic
measures for asthma. An important direct medical application will be in the
diagnosis and treatment of people suffering from asthma.