* 0318480
* Holocene and Glacial Climate Change in the Desert Southwest, USA: New Isotopic Records from Speleothems
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Warren Beck, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2007
* USD 324,945.00

Climatic extremes in the desert southwest of North America control the
availability of water and the sustainability of many human and natural systems.
Instrumental records demonstrate significant variability of climate in the past
century, particularly related to the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) system.
Longer records from tree-ring reconstructions reveal the recurrence of
significant prolonged (decadal to multidecadal) droughts in recent centuries.
Continuous high-resolution records of desert southwest climate on Holocene and
glacial time scales are lacking. This award will fund a research program to
develop a promising archive of climate information in this region, the records
preserved in speleothems (cave deposits). This work will generate the first
highly resolved, well-dated, calibrated, replicated records of Holocene and
glacial climate in the desert southwest. This work will include expanded
speleothem sampling, modern cave monitoring for calibration, improvement of U/Th
dating methodologies, and the development and interpretation of new, replicated
high-resolution climate records for the Holocene. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work should make important contributions to the reconstructed climatic records
of the US desert southwest. Outreach components include the involvement of local
cavers, K-12 education, and US Forest Service collaboration.