* 0318058
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Motivation and the Context of Political Learning
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Michael MacKuen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/31/2004
* USD 4,640.00

&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research support investigation is about
how people acquire information from their environment, and how that context
matters for assessing political outcomes. The central question considered is how
and when people learn about politics. Specifically, the project integrates
theories of individual level motivation with explanations rooted in political
context, to explore how the information environment may either enhance or
circumvent the effects of political interest in the promotion of political
learning. &lt;br/&gt;To investigate the mechanisms of political learning, the
Ph.D. student begins with an environment that has been shown to improve levels
of political attention and information - a competitive campaign. Relying on a
set of experiments in conjunction with survey data, two central questions are
considered. First, can the political environment promote political learning,
even in the absence of a motivation to follow current events? And if context
does indeed promote the acquisition of political knowledge, then by what
&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms does this occur? Next, the consequences of passive versus
active learning are explored, considering whether people acquire different kinds
of information, and rely on different kinds of decision criteria, when passively
learning from the environment. &lt;br/&gt;To first more closely consider the
mechanisms by which context affects political learning, a set of experiments are
employed. The studies simulate a campaign context through a set of web-based
information environments, with variation in both the nature of the information
context as well as the incentives for political attention. In tracking patterns
of information search as well as posttest evaluations of interest and
information gains, the experiments offer a test of how context and motivation
interact to affect both the amounts and kinds of political learning.
&lt;br/&gt;Survey data offers a second test of these questions. Because
presidential candidates rely on electoral college strategies, the states vary in
the intensity of presidential campaigning. The consequences of these different
campaign contexts on patterns of campaign attention and learning across the
states are explored, considering explanations based on individual factors such
as education, as well as contextual factors such as the volume of campaign
advertising, the amount of presidential television coverage, and partisan
divisions within the states. Also considered are the consequences of these
contextual differences, and whether the context of a prominent presidential
campaign influences evaluations of other concurrent campaigns. This is
investigated by considering how the predictors of individual level congressional
vote &lt;br/&gt;choice vary according to context, to see whether evaluations of
the president and other national factors are more important evaluative criteria
when the presidential campaign is more prominent. &lt;br/&gt;The research has
broad social implications by developing some of the consequences of different
types of political learning, particularly in the kinds of information people
acquire either actively or passively, and how this matters for individuals and
for political observers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;