* 0318055
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Process Revealed: News Media, Legislators and Constituents Connections, Interactions and Communications
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Michael MacKuen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/31/2004
* USD 5,828.00

The American politics subfield of political science knows very little about the
intricacies involved in legislator, news media and constituency interactions and
communications in the political representation process. Political scientists
have many pieces to the puzzle but nothing approaching a unified model. Critical
in this doctoral dissertation research support's investigation is an
understanding of the political representation process is the role of the news
media as facilitator and provider of information between legislators and voters.
While this dissertation will not answer all of the questions about this process,
it begins to bridge the gaps between the relevant fields and literature of
Congress, political communication, voting and, to some extent, political
psychology. The fundamental question asked in this project is how does the
introduction of the news media as a strategic actor affect the political
representation process? The Ph.D. student argues that this is the single most
crucial element in how political representation manifests itself in the U.S.
political system, and yet the political science discipline has failed to
adequately model its effect. &lt;br/&gt;This project attempts to fill the
research gap for legislator, news media and constituency interactions in the
political representation process in three integrative ways. First, the student
develops formal models to investigate analytically how the introduction of the
news media as a strategic actor can influence legislators - homestyles and
campaigns. Second, he empirically tests the analytical results through content
analyses of newspapers' coverage of U.S. House members to see what coverage
actually looks like. Analyses are done on both local and national newspapers and
serve as a direct empirical test of the results generated out of the formal
models. Third, using the content analysis data, he empirically investigates
whether and to what extent citizens respond to various types of news coverage
about their House representatives. This investigation examines the news media's
impact on reelection probabilities. &lt;br/&gt;The project has the potential for
broader social impact by enhancing understanding of citizen-media relations and
for citizen-legislator interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;