* 0318102
* Protein-Protein Interactions in Photosystem II
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Terry Bricker, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2009
* USD 731,506.00

This project will elucidate the structural organization of proteins associated
with Photosystem II (PS II) in higher plants. Protein-protein interactions among
the structural components of the photosystem will be studied using biochemical
and molecular approaches. First, the interaction of the manganese-stabilizing
protein with the 24 kDa protein will be examined. Chemical modification of the
manganese-stabilizing protein when it is associated with PS II membranes
dramatically affects the ability of the 24 kDa protein to bind to PS II. It will
determined if the binding inhibition of the 24 kDa protein is due to charge
neutralization or steric interference. The location of the modified residues
will be mapped by mass spectrometry. Second, the effects of chemical
modification on the 24 and 17 kDa proteins with respect to protein binding and
function will be determined and the location of the modified residues will be
mapped. Third, the role of the observed heterogeneity in the extrinsic subunits
of PS II with respect to structure and function of the photosystem will be
examined. In Arabidopsis, each of the extrinsic proteins of PS II are encoded by
two genes. T-DNA insertion lines, which are available for a number of these
genes will be examined. For genes, which have no T-DNA insertional lines
available (psbO-2 and psbP-1), RNAi constructs will be introduced to suppress
the expression of these gene products. The phenotypes of these plants will be
examined with respect to PS II function, assembly and stability under control
and stress conditions. In addition to this genetic approach, biochemical
reconstitution studies examining the function of the two psbO proteins will be
performed. These studies will provide important new information concerning the
interactions of the extrinsic components of PS II with the intrinsic components
of the photosystem and with each other. Additionally, an understanding of the
role of extrinsic subunit heterogeneity may provide insights into regulatory
"fine tuning" of the photosynthesis. Finally, the Arabidopsis mutants, which we
will generate will provide a resource for examining the role of the extrinsic
subunits in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will
involve training at different levels. It is anticipated that several
undergraduate students will be involved in research related to this project.
These students will attend scientific meetings, presenting their research and
ultimately publish their results. The graduate students, postdoctoral
researchers and research associates are all intimately involved in the training
of these undergraduate researchers. Additionally, the project will continue a
long-standing association with Dr. Cindy Putnam-Evans at East Carolina
University, a female faculty member in a non-Ph.D.-granting
department.&lt;br/&gt;