* 0318500
* Paleoclimate, Landscape Evolution, and the Transformations of Prehistoric Agricultural Technology in the Western Lake Titicaca Basin, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Mark Aldenderfer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2007
* USD 195,728.00

Working at the intersection of three disciplines-paleoclimatology, which
attempts to understand the causal forces of climate change, fluvial
geomorphology, which seeks to understand how landscapes change and evolve under
different climatic conditions, and archaeology, which places humans into this
dynamic environment and searches for patterns of how humans respond to climatic
variability, Dr. Mark Aldenderfer and his colleagues will conduct two seasons of
archaeological research in the Rio Ramis drainage of the Lake Titicaca basin of
southwestern Peru investigating how agricultural systems in this harsh, high
elevation environment developed through time. The project will examine in detail
three specific research questions on this general theme: 1) the timing of the
origins of plant cultivation and its location; 2) the timing of the origins and
the initial scale of raised field/q'ocha agricultural systems; and 3) the
resilience of raised field systems to draught and increasingly arid conditions.
Within each of these questions, his research team has posed a set of competing
hypotheses that can be evaluated with archeological data generated by an
intensive program of full-coverage survey, surface collection, and an extensive
testing program of sites and landscape features directed by geophysical survey.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most important and exciting features of this
project is the close interaction of scholars from different scientific
disciplines who have crafted detailed research questions of broad importance and
who will work together closely in both the field and laboratory seeking answers
to them. The kinds of data to be created by this interaction include a high-
resolution, well-dated, record of paleoclimatic change in the western Lake
Titicaca basin for the past 12,000 years. The implications of these data go far
beyond the Titicaca basin, because they will necessarily involve consideration
of regional and global-scale forces that give rise to climatic change. It will
also generate new sedimentological and geomorphological data that can be used to
create a basin-wide model of fluvial evolution in the context of regional
climate change. This model will be valuable as a case study of landscape
evolution in a complex, arid, high elevation environment, one that may be
extended to similar environments in other regions of the world, such as the
Tibetan plateau. Finally, it will provide archaeologists with a fuller
understanding of the natural forces that shaped landscape evolution and with new
archaeological data that will begin to fill the very serious gaps in our
knowledge of the prehistory of the western Lake Titicaca basin on the origins
and transformations of agricultural technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among
its broader impacts are its promotion of teaching, training and learning by
building new partnerships among universities and disciplines. It will promote
the integration of research and education by involving both undergraduate and
graduate students in research. Each member of the research team will encourage
participating students to work directly with every aspect of the project,
enabling them to obtain a richer experience than would be possible by working
only within a single discipline. Finally, the problems this project addresses
and the data that will be produced are directly relevant to research initiatives
sponsored by the National Science Foundation and other granting agencies
worldwide that seek to understand both natural climate variability and the human
impact of global climatic change using the combined paleoclimatological and
archaeological record--goals with direct societal relevance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;