* 0318062
* Dissertation Research:  The Political Transformation of Corporate Rights:  Business Incorporation Law in American State and National Politics, 1885-1914
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Peter Trubowitz, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher J. Zorn
* 07/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

Recent corporate scandals have led to calls for reform with administrative
oversight. In order to assess possibilities for successful reform today, this
project seeks to explain variations in legislative strategy in granting or
restricting corporate charter rights in the past. Corporations in America rely
on state laws for their existence. Up to the late nineteenth century states
carefully restricted corporations from merging, forming holding companies, or
extending their range of business. Beginning in 1888 in New Jersey these laws
were relaxed, enabling the legal viability of the large corporation.
&lt;br/&gt;Some legislatures granted easy charter law in order to attract
capital, whereas others resisted this trend. The Federal Government attempted
regulation with the Sherman Act, but then largely left the field after narrow
construction of that act by the Supreme Court in the E.C. Knight case. The
authors ask how legislators, operating in an era of laissez faire, mediated the
tension between corporate pressures for easy charters and democratic impulses to
maintain popular control over the economy. Was the large corporation inevitable?
What are the possibilities for popular resistance to concentration of economic
power? &lt;br/&gt;This project to argues that federalism combined with property
representation can explain corporate development. Walter Dean Burnham (1965) has
noted that accumulation in initial stages of mass industrialization in any
political system requires some form of political insulation from mass pressures;
Richard Bensel (2000) argues that the Supreme Court served this role in regards
to the creation of a national market. Although state legislatures are considered
to be less insulated from democratic pressures, the corporate transformation
required positive action from this source. &lt;br/&gt;Contemporary explanations
of economic forms of development have centered on &lt;br/&gt;arguments of power
or of efficiency. Efficiency arguments, often based implicitly on Alfred D.
Chandler's (1977) "Visible Hand" of middle level management, are
underdetermining: they do not explain why some states were able to resist these
pressures. Arguments that power explains social construction of corporate
organization are overdetermining: they rely on a tautology that winners won
because they had power. &lt;br/&gt;This project advances our knowledge of the
rise of the corporation by an examination of political and economic variables
affecting the development of charter law in New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey
and at the national level from 1885-1914. A focus on the northeast emphasizes
competitive dynamics of American federalism. A focus on national politics
emphasizes the vertical aspect of nation and state relations. The researchers
gather documents from state archives in order to discover how actors justified
incorporation law. Did actors see the corporation as natural? Were their
arguments partisan, ideological, or related to economics? Did they seek to
compete with other states? Second, votes for charter liberalization in
legislatures will be tested for statistical relationships to a variety of census
and industrial data, including degree of economic development, partisanship, and
state sectionalism. Finally, there is an analysis of state partisan and
political structures. Federalism may be divided into issues of state
subordination and of state competition. Political studies of the Progressive Era
typically either ignore federalism, or only pay attention to the first of these.
A gap thus remains to be filled on the impact of state dynamics on economic
development. This examination of the origins of corporate charters promises to
shed light on sources of abuse of the corporation in America, and the range of
legitimate reform solutions. It thus has the broader social value of enhancing
knowledge on sources of corporate abuse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;