* 0318730
* Workshop on Remote Monitoring and Predictive Maintenance of Machine Tool Systems- Achieving Near-Zero Downtime Performance; Ann Arbor, Michigan; April 29, 2003
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Jun Ni, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2004
* USD 15,000.00

This grant provides funding for a workshop on remote monitoring and maintenance
of machine tool systems. Invitees will include machine tool builders, control
suppliers, users, academicians and representatives of several government
agencies. They will discuss the emerging needs and barriers to progress, and
make recommendations on needed capabilities of manufacturing equipment to
maintain processing consistency, improved techniques to monitor, diagnose and
self-adjustment, integration of compensation and diagnostic features into legacy
machine tools, health monitoring of the machine tool systems, and capabilities
for prediction of component failures. Major needs in metrology, standards,
control systems, monitoring systems and sensors will be outlined and reported as
a result of the workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of this workshop
will be a roadmap for the machine tool community on strategies to be taken
during following years, a launch platform for comprehensive research and
development programs oriented toward bringing solutions to measure performance,
and improve the accuracy and reliability of machine tools. United States machine
tool builders, users and customers in particular, and manufacturing industry at
large, will benefit from the results of this workshop by learning more about the
hidden and vital effects of unexpected downtime, countermeasures including
remote monitoring, predictive technologies and intelligent maintenance
practices. Young engineers as well as students will have an opportunity to face
the real challenges of the manufacturing industry at the early stages of their
career for their professional preparation.