* 0318497
* DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: LEGAL PLURALISM IN THE CONTEXT OF STATE-SOCIETY RELATIONS AND INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Michael McCann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 09/30/2005
* USD 10,870.00

The goal of this project is to provide a political analysis of the legal
pluralism in the context of state-society relations and human rights through the
lenses of religious personal status laws (i.e. marriage, divorce, inheritance,
succession etc.) in Israel, Egypt and India. The study explains why nation-
states recognize and incorporate non-state normative orders (customary and
religious personal laws) into their unified body of law. In addition, the
researchers assess the implications of this incorporation upon the capacities of
central state administrations and individual freedoms and rights of citizens in
post-colonial societies. As opposed to many, who assert that polycentric legal
orders in the field of personal status laws are due to the colonial legacies of
European empires, the researchers hypothesize that most post-colonial nation-
states make their decisions whether to recognize and incorporate non-state
normative orders based on rational cost-benefit calculations. The project has
far-reaching theoretical and practical implications on the field of law and
society. It primarily serves the aim of furthering our understanding of legal
pluralism and contributes to the literature by providing ontological and
epistemological innovations, such as introducing an alternative new
institutionalist approach to the existing colonial legacy theories and
suggesting a new terminology and nomenclature. Since it is a doctoral
dissertation, the project blends the scientific endeavor and higher goals of
education in its nature with a multidisciplinary approach derived from political
science, law, anthropology and sociology. The main contention of the work is
that legal pluralism in the field of religious personal status laws infringe
upon the rights of women, political dissidents and seculars. Hence, by the
dissemination of research findings, the study contributes to a better
understanding of freedom of conscience and religion, and emancipation of women,
and under-represented groups from patriarchal and religious oppression in
Israel, India and Egypt.