* 0318432
* Conference on Adaptive Methods for Partial Differential Equations and Large-Scale Computation; October 11-12, 2003; Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Peter Moore, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 5,000.00

Many physical phenomena in science and engineering are modeled by partial
differential equations with solutions that exhibit localized non-uniformities.
Such applications include boundary layers and shock waves in fluids and reaction
fronts in combustion. Applications such as thin film coating, composite media
and nano-scale materials require mathematical models capable of capturing
behavior at several different scales. The traditional approach with user-
designed meshes/methods is no longer acceptable in terms of cost and
understanding of process behavior. The problems are too complex and users can be
fooled. In some situations, the problems cannot be solved when using over-
designed meshes. Adaptive methods and the accompanying data structures have
become necessary for resolving different scales present in such applications.
Over the last 20 years adaptive methods have matured to a point where they are
used in many industrial applications. However, much is still to be done to
obtain higher resolutions and more efficient adaptive methods. The investigator
proposes to organize a conference with themes in (1) efficient adaptive
refinement strategies; (2) data structures for parallel and adaptive
computations; iii) a posteriori error estimation methods; (3) discontinuous
Galerkin (DG) methods; (4) grid and mesh generation; and (5) multiscale
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will bring together leading
researchers working in this critical area of scientific computing to discuss new
advances and challenges. It will also introduce young researchers to the area of
adaptive methods for solving partial differential equations. The conference
organizers have invited 14 plenary speakers to address those important issues in
scientific computing and applications. It is expected that there will be around
60 participants in the conference. The conference organizer plans to publish the
conference proceedings in the IMACS Journal on Applied Numerical Mathematics
published by Elsevier-North-Holland. This is one of the leading numerical
analysis journals that concentrates on the innovative solutions of partial
differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;