* 0318864
* SBIR Phase I:  Design and Development of a Unified Object Oriented Software Platform for Biomolecular Computations
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Jeyapandian Kottalam, Kuyilan BioSoft Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will perform the
research needed to design and construct an object-oriented software development
platform (SDP) in Java for sequence manipulations, storage in relational
databases, molecular mechanics computations, three dimensional structure
visualizations of proteins and DNAs. It will capture established methodologies
and techniques contained in legacy packages such as AMBER and Insight II into a
modern framework of object hierarchy and provide an Application Programming
Interface (API) that is easy to use by computational biologists for advancing
proteomics and bioinformatics research and development. Java is commonly used in
bioinformatics due to hardware independence and web availability. It is designed
for rapid software development. Although it suffers from poor performance for
computational applications, it also provides a means of rectifying this problem
through Java Native Interface (JNI). The computer-intensive portions of
biomolecular manipulations will be written as native Java methods in C to regain
the performance of legacy programs.

The commercial application of this project is in the area of bioinformatics and
computational biotechnology. Academic research groups and researchers in
pharmaceutical industry are the likely customers, who could use the proposed
software development platform to prototype new ideas rapidly and to explore new
computational algorithms and methodologies.