* 0318719
* Interacting Effects of Native Plant Diversity and Resource Availability on Plant Community Invasibility and Invader Impact
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2004,09/30/2010
* John Maron, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/2010
* USD 394,780.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Maron, John&lt;br/&gt;University of
Montana&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The invasion of native plant communities
by non-native plants is an increasing ecological and economic concern. Non-
native plants degrade native communities; removal of these damaging non-native
species from native communities conservatively costs this country over $8
billion annually. A major challenge for ecologists is to understand the factors
that promote invasion by non-native species into native communities so that
native systems can be managed to reduce the likelihood that exotic weeds can
establish and spread. Our research will explore whether species-rich native
grasslands are more difficult for non-native plants to invade than grasslands
that contain fewer native species. Furthermore, we will examine how water
availability interacts with native species diversity to influence community
susceptibility to invasion and the magnitude of impact that non-native species
have on native plants. &lt;br/&gt;We will create plant assemblages that vary in
the number of native species within them. We will then introduce seeds of St.
John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum), sulfur cinquefoil (Potentilla recta) and
spotted knapweed (Centaurea maculosa) into these assemblages. These widespread
weeds are economically and ecologically damaging throughout the western U.S.
Plots will receive ambient or supplemental water, a critically limiting resource
in dry grasslands of the intermountain west. By manipulating resource
availability in the context of a diversity-invasibility study, we will explore
how native plant diversity and resource availability jointly influence the ease
with which non-native species can enter native assemblages and the subsequent
effect that these non-native species have on native plants. &lt;br/&gt;