* 0319744
* SBIR Phase I: High-Sensitive, Multiplexed, Digital Readout for Transition-Edge Sensor Arrays
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Dmitri Kirichenko, HYPRES, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2004
* USD 99,798.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a sensitive digital read-out system with on-focal-plane digitization,
multiplexing and data transfer from large arrays of cryogenic transition-edge
calorimeters to room-temperature electronics employing rapid single flux quantum
digital technology. A set of over-sampling digitizers converts the output sensor
signals to digital data that are processed by control units, which multiplex
several digitized data streams into a single output line. Phase I will involve
the design and simulation of system components and a complete single pixel
readout circuit, and the lay out, fabrication and comparison of the experimental
results of an integrated prototype to simulations. In Phase II, a complete
digital readout system for 3232 transition-edge calorimeter arrays will be
fabricated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercial applications include magnetic
relaxation/remanence immunoassay systems for drug research or for read-out of
multiple SQUID-based qubits in a quantum computing system. This readout
architecture can be easily tailored to meet the application requirements for
speed and sensitivity for scientific (astronomy) and industrial (semiconductor
microanalysis) high- resolution x-ray
spectrometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;