* 0319769
* SBIR Phase I: Development of a Hybrid Optic for Proximity X-Ray Lithography
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Huapeng Huang, X-RAY OPTICAL SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,971.00

This SBIR Phase I project will determine the feasibility of a hybrid
reflector/polycapillary collimating optic to produce an intense and uniform
x-ray beam at least 50x50 mm2 in cross a sectional area from a high-intensity
laser plasma x-ray source. An all polycapillary collimator has been shown to be
able to produce an intense, uniform beam up to 30x30 mm2 field size but is
impractical for larger beams. Proximity x-ray lithography (PRXL) is a strong
candidate for the next generation lithography (NGL) systems needed for continued
progress on the semiconductor device roadmap for sub 100 nm feature sizes
necessary for ultra high-density, high-speed (&gt;100 GHz) applications. To
overcome the physical constraints of a polycapillary collimating optic for large
field sizes, a novel hybrid collimator is proposed in which a single bounce
reflective (SR) optic serves as a virtual source for a follow-on polycapillary
optic thereby increasing its effective capture angle while retaining its proven
high gain and beam quality. The critical physical and design parameters for such
a hybrid will be examined through measurements and modeling in Phase
I.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Development of a high-gain, high-field size hybrid
collimator optic to enable a compact PXRL collimated plasma lithography (CPL)
system capable of meeting the throughput and resolution requirements for next
generation (NG) 300 mm wafer Si-based microelectronics production could have
far-reaching and even nationally important consequences. It would provide an
attractive, lower cost alternative to advanced and as yet unproven extreme
ultra-violet (EUV) and electron projection lithography (EPL) systems. Such a
system would take advantage of more than ten years of experience and hundreds of
high-density, high-speed circuits that have been made using expensive
synchrotron research facilities and would give the US a possible counter to SR
based PXRL commercial developments in Japan. In the short term, such CPL systems
could seamlessly fit into existing fabrication lines and provide medium
throughput sub 100 nm production facilities for specialized ultra high-speed, or
high density applications which include a broad range of sophisticated, high-
performance commercial and military communications products and systems.
&lt;br/&gt;