* 0319871
* NR:  Next Generation MAC Protocol for Multimedia Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Aura Ganz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2007
* USD 330,000.00

The objective of this proposal will be to develop a new media access protocol
that work efficiently in the wireless multihop environment, i.e., preserve
battery power and bandwidth, provide QoS support and adhere to legacy standards,
i.e., IEEE 802.11. The research is on a new MAC protocol, denoted by CSMA/CA2.
The proposed scheme automatically adapts each node transmission rate to the
bandwidth usage and the number of active nodes in the network. The proposed
research includes a graceful rate adjustment algorithm that achieves fair
channel access and a low collision rate, control theoretical analysis of the
algorithm's parameters setting, and, provision of QoS support to diverse
multimedia traffic. In addition, the proposed protocol adheres to the IEEE
802.11 CSMA/CA standard. The adherence to open standards broadens the scope of
usage of the proposed algorithm, making it interoperable with other third party
network interface cards that adhere to these open standards. The analysis and
simulation studies demonstrate that the proposed CSMA/CA2 scheme has the
following advantages of achieving significant power and bandwidth savings with
reduced medium access delay compared to IEEE 802.11 CSMA/CA; it is easy to
implement, i.e., CSMA/CA2 has low computational complexity and does not require
additional control packets or buffers; it provides fair channel sharing with
fast convergence; it is compatible with the IEEE 802.11 standard, i.e., nodes
with both CSMA/CA and CSMA/CA2 can coexist in the same network; and, it can
provide quality of service (QoS) support to different traffic classes. The
project will extend the analysis to study the quantitative relationship between
system convergence speed and the CSMA/CA2 parameters. In addition, it will
define adjustments of the control parameters that allow the system to provide
different QoS support to different senders. Thorough analysis, both theoretical
and experimental, will be carried out to determine the trade-off between
CSMA/CA2 performance under various coexistence environments as well as system
convergence speed and stability. The project will also develop a wireless
testbed that will allow us to test the proposed algorithms in a real wireless
environment.