* 0319145
* Acquisition of AISA+ Hyperspectral Sensor
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Paul Mausel, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 133,250.00

With support from a National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation
Award, Dr. Ryan Jensen and his colleagues at Indiana State University and the
University of South Carolina will purchase a state of the art airborne
hyperspectral remote sensing system to use in a large variety of scientific
studies. Previous remote sensing research at the two institutions has relied
heavily on broadband multispectral sensors that are often not capable of
distinguishing very subtle changes in object reflectance. Hyperspectral sensors
are able to record reflectance from very small bands in the electromagnetic
spectrum and allow researchers to more accurately classify and model terrestrial
characteristics.

Working with a team of geographers, geologists, ecologists, and archaeologists,
Dr. Jensen and Co-PIs-S. Berta, J. Gatrell, J. Jensen, and P. Mausel-will
supervise and administer the system in many studies that will help us to examine
the physical and human environments and the interaction between them. This
system will provide a large group of researchers with the capability to explore
a variety of environmental and social issues. For example, it is anticipated
that the sensor will be used in missions that study forest dynamics in the
midwest, fire ecology in longleaf pine sandhills in the southeast, urban
forestry dynamics in many cities throughout the United States, water quality
dynamics and seagrass health in the Lower Rio Grande Valley, and in existing
NASA funded research in the Amazon Basin. A key feature of the instrument is its
ability to provide data at many different spatial scales - thus allowing the
instrument to be used for a wide range of scientific investigations.

Data obtained with the sensor will be made available via a web page
(wabashview.indstate.edu) in the spring of 2004. This page (similar to
OhioView.org) will provide both raw and processed data to researchers,
educators, and others who are interested in the data that we will acquire. The
raw data could be used for scientific studies. The processed data, in the form
of maps, classifications, etc, would enable educators to teach students the
basics of remote sensing and provide real world examples of remote sensing
products. WabashView will be maintained and supported by Indiana State
University.

This project is important for several reasons. It will provide a first-class
hyperspectral sensor for terrestrial ecosystem researchers at two universities
who have already demonstrated their ability to conduct cutting-edge applied and
theoretical remote sensing research. The sensor will also play a significant
role in the training of future scientists-as well as K-13 teachers-by actively
involving graduate and undergraduate students from Indiana State University and
the University of South Carolina. The instrument will also allow students in the
Aerospace technology program at Indiana State University to gain experience by
flying real scientific missions. Likewise, the instrument will enable Indiana
State University researchers to collaborate with other colleges and universities
in the region vis-a-vis WabashView. Finally, the data will be made available via
the Internet to a much larger audience that can use the data for further
scientific investigation, public policy assessment, the preparation of education
materials, or many other uses yet to be envisioned.

