* 0319202
* SBIR Phase I:  Mid-Infrared Diode Laser Sensor for Pharmaceutical Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* William Kessler, Physical Sciences Incorporated (PSI)
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,996.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project addresses an immediate
need for a real-time means of endpoint monitoring solvent drying processes in
pharmaceutical manufacturing. The specific innovation is the combination of a
novel, broadly tunable, mid-infrared diode laser source with ultra-sensitive
absorption techniques, to provide a non-contact means for sensing trace organic
solvent vapor concentrations in fluidized bed dryers and spray coaters. The
probe laser source utilizes Difference Frequency Generation (DFG) to convert
visible and near-infrared laser light to the mid-infrared. Its ability to
continuously tune over 200 cm-1 enables the measurement of organic vapors having
broad, infrared absorption bands near 3.5 microns. The Phase I objectives are to
use the DFG source to measure organic solvent vapors, determine analyzer
detection limits, and create a preliminary design for an industrial sensor. The
Phase I program will verify the technical and commercial feasibility of the mid-
infrared solvent monitor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed solvent drying
endpoint monitors will provide the pharmaceutical industry with real-time data
enabling improved drug manufacturing process efficiency and quality. The sensors
may eliminate the need for off-line residual solvent analysis that often halts
processing and holds completed product for release. There are numerous
applications for the technology, including environmental monitoring of organic
pollutants, industrial HVAC controls, breath analysis, hospital air and gas
quality control and sensors to screen for alcohol and other toxics. &lt;br/&gt;