* 0319433
* SBIR Phase I:     Novel Bioaerosol Concentrator/Sampler for Enhanced Biosensor Performance
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Steve Wright, INNOVATECH INC
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 03/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will determine
the feasibility of integrating two established particle separation technologies
with a continuous particle transfer mechanism to produce a bioaerosol
concentrator/sampler that offers significant improvements over conventional
sampling devices. Rapid biosensing/detection requires a concentrator/sampler
that can (a) efficiently collect and concentrate respirable particles (1-10 mm)
from large air volumes, (b) efficiently transfer collected particles (dry or
wet) for sampling, (c) maintain high viability of sampled bioagents, and (d) be
scaled up/down for various applications. The research plan consists of
designing, fabricating and testing a novel prototype concentrator/sampler,
evaluating particle collection/concentration performance, and evaluating
sampling efficiency and microorganism efficacy using inert particles and
biological simulates (e.g. spores). The prototype will integrate a dry cyclone
prefilter, a proprietary concentrator/sampler module, a novel containment
housing and particle extraction/sampling mechanisms. Target performance for the
prototype includes: collection/concentration efficiency of >85%, dry/wet
sampling efficiencies of >80%, and microorganism viability of >75%.

The primary commercial application of this product will be for military use and
homeland defense. This novel aerosol particle collector/sampler would also have
commercial uses in the monitoring of hazardous bioaerosols in a variety of
civilian/industrial environments. Some application areas include monitoring: (1)
hazardous particulate emissions near EPA Super Fund sites, (2) airborne asbestos
or lead paint particles during and after removal and remediation operations, (3)
PM-2.5 particles (i.e., replacing older PM-10 samplers) when collecting EPA
compliance data on outdoor air quality, (4) the spread of herbicides and
pesticides during agricultural spraying operations, and (5) the spread of
infectious diseases in hospitals, nursing homes, etc.