* 0319053
* SBIR Phase I:  Miniaturized Lightweight Broadband True-time Delay Phased-array Antennas
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Yihong Chen, Omega Optics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,969.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investiate a new
miniaturized, highly efficient, and reconfigurable optical feed transmit/receive
architecture for airborne and space-borne phased-array antennas. The system will
provide multiple simultaneous beams for a large-scale phased-array antenna
operating in broad frequency bands. The true-time delay module, employing
Erbium-amplified polymer waveguide (EAPW), has great advantages in providing
high efficiency, lightweight, and small size features when used in space-based
radar applications. The most innovative feature is obtained by the utilization
of EAPW that allows optical gain along the true-time delay lines. Optical switch
technique provides large delay selections enabling the module to operate in
ultra-broad radar bands. The scalable architecture due to the integration of
wavelength division multiplexing devices further makes the approach power
efficient and suitable for very large arrays. To demonstrate the feasibility of
this project, the simulation and experimental demonstration of Erbium-amplified
polymer waveguides and optical switches will be performed during Phase I.
Success of these tasks will lay a solid foundation for the phase II and phase
III continuation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The market for the high performance
phased-array antenna transmit/receive architectures is a rapidly growing area
for commercial applications, as well as for remote sensing. Design of a
transmitter/receiver for commercial applications suffers very similar challenges
as in military applications. Therefore, the solutions developed for remote
sensing will be immediately applied to such communication systems as satellite-
to-satellite communications and ground-based wireless
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;