* 0319663
* SBIR Phase I: Wheat Straw to Purified Cellulose Fiber Utilizing Novel Reactive Fractionation Process
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Richard Wingerson, PureVision Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,633.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
demonstrate the feasibility of producing biofibers from wheat straw using a
novel biomass fractionation technology. This fractionation process separates
lignin and hemicellulose from biomass, leaving a relatively pure cellulose fiber
fraction that is easily hydrolyzed enzymatically to sugar. The sugar can then be
converted to fuel ethanol and a variety of other chemicals, but there may also
be markets for the cellulose fiber itself. The patented process for
fractionation of lignocellulose employs a counter-flow alkaline wash with
progressive wet oxidation (reactive fractionation). The process emphasizes
cellulose purity as a key feature of pretreating lignocellulosic materials. This
Phase I project will employ the reactive fractionation process to extract the
fibers from wheat straw, to evaluate them for fiber material applications such
as paper, fiberboard, or dissolving pulp, and to assess the process economics of
fiber production.

The commercial application of this project is in the area of biomass processing
to produce valuable products (eg. biofibers). These biofibers could find use in
paper, non-paper, and engineered materials markets. The benefits of using wheat
straw as a source of fiber includes potential economic benefits to farmers, the
environmental benefits of recovering agricultural residues, and reduction of
energy and resources required to produce, harvest and transport virgin fibers
from conventional sources.