* 0319486
* SBIR Phase I:  Utility of Thin Film Deposition Sensors in High Temperature Environments
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Scott Grimshaw, Cold Springs R&D, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
address the market need for a real-time in-situ thin film thickness monitor for
use in chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and related high temperature processing
of solid-state electronic and optical devices. Current practices, which rely on
post process measurements, often result in large amounts of waste and high
numbers of failed devices. Furthermore, effects of process conditions on device
performance can only be inferred when testing is done post fabrication. By
adapting existing quartz crystal microbalance technology, it will be possible to
create a sensing and monitoring system capable of operation in excess of 900
degree centigrade. The goal of this Phase I project is to produce a complete
high temperature thin film process monitoring system for use in solid state
electronic and optical device manufacture. System elements are: 1) a replaceable
crystalline film thickness sensor, 2) a reusable high temperature sensor head,
and 3) a microprocessor controlled thin film thickness monitor based upon
commercially available technology. Industry usage examples of this technology
would include the following: 1) Real-time furnace monitoring of nitride and
oxide layers on silicon wafers used in integrated circuits 2) Process control of
organic thin film depositions used for the production of organic light emitting
diodes (OLEDs), 3) Deposition sensors for the manufacture of LEDs such as
Gallium Nitride and 4) Thin film monitoring of multi-layer dielectric optical
coatings.

