* 0319320
* SBIR Phase I:  n-Type Conducting Polymers for All-Plastic Electronic Devices
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Silvia Luebben, TDA Research, Inc
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a new class
of n-type conducting polymers and evaluate their electronic and optical
properties when they are doped with various reducing agents and used under
different environmental conditions. These n-doped conducting polymers will be
used as a cathode material to fabricate a prototype of an allplastic organic
light emitting diode (OLED). The cathodes of today's OLEDs are made of reactive
metals such as calcium or magnesium. These low work function metals are, so far,
unmatched in their ability to inject electrons into the device. Unfortunately,
these metals quickly&lt;br/&gt;degrade upon exposure to oxygen or moisture.
Cathode oxidation and delamination are largely responsible for the growth of
non-emissive spots on the emitting device area, even when the devices are sealed
against the elements. Reactive metal cathodes have been long recognized as one
of the major barriers to the commercialization of OLEDs. Thus, replacing
reactive metal cathodes with more stable materials is critical to the
commercialization of these devices. The objective of this research is to develop
new polymeric materials with suitably low work functions and good electrical
conductivity that can replace the reactive metals in cathodes for
OLEDs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;n-Type conducting polymers have many interesting
potential applications; their use has been&lt;br/&gt;evaluated for the
development of all-plastic energy-storage devices, as anode materials for
nonaqueous&lt;br/&gt;batteries, for the fabrication of all-plastic n-p junctions
and field-effect transistors, and as a cathode-replacement for OLEDs. Other
applications may include photochromic devices, photovoltaic cells,
electrochemical sensors, and catalytic reducing agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;