* 0319188
* Patterning of Drosophila Leg Sensory Organs
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Teresa Orenic, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2008
* USD 379,301.00

0319188&lt;br/&gt;Orenic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the research
proposed is to address a fundamental question in developmental biology: what are
the molecular mechanisms that direct pattern formation in developing animal
appendages? Critical to the generation of exquisitely patterned body plans of
multicellular organisms is position-specific gene expression during development.
The Drosophila adult leg provides a simple model system to investigate this
process. On the leg, a group of small mechanosensory bristles are organized into
a series of longitudinal rows, a pattern which depends largely on the periodic
expression of just two genes: the antinueral gene, hairy (h) and the proneural
gene, achaete (ac). In pupal legs, h is expressed in two pairs of longitudinal
stripes, one pair that traverses the dorsal/ventral (D/V) axis (D/V-h) and
another pair that runs along the anterior/poster (A/P) axis (A/P-h). A stripe of
ac expression on either side of each h domain defines the primordia of the leg
bristle rows. In the absence of h function, ac expression expands into the
regions normally occupied by H, resulting in disorganized bristle rows in the
adult. Hence, mechanistic insight into the periodic patterning of leg mCs can be
gained by investigating the regulation of h and ac expression.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the studies proposed will be on the
regulation D/V-h expression during leg imaginal disc development. Regulation of
D/V-h expression is surprisingly complex and is directed by dorsal (D-h) and
ventral (V-h) specific enhancers that integrate signals from the Hedgehog (Hh),
Decapentaplegic (Dpp), Wingless (Wg), and the Epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) pathways. The D-h enhancer consists of two subelements, a Hh responsive
element (D-h-HE), which activates D-h expression in a broad domain adjacent to
the A/P boundary of the leg disc, and a repression element (D-h-RE) which
functions to refine D-h expression along the A/P and D/V axes. Preliminary
studies suggest that the transcriptional repressor Brinker (Brk) acts through
the D-h-RE to repress D-h-HE directed expression. This observation suggests a
novel role for Brk in repressing expression directed by a Hh responsive enhancer
element. Furthermore, Dpp and EFGR signal through the D-h-RE to block Brk
repression of D-h expression. V-h expression, on the other hand, is controlled
by the combined input of Hh and Wg. Correspondingly, potential Hh and Wg
response sites have been identified in the V-h enhancer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic and molecular analysis of the D and V-h enhancers
will be extended with the goal of broadening the understanding of the molecular
mechanisms involved in signal integration and interactions between activators
and repressors. These studies will provide further insight into the relationship
between enhancer function and pattern formation. The specific aims are
to:&lt;br/&gt; 1. To determine how the D-h subelements, the D-h-HE and D-h-RE
function coordinately to integrate the Hh, Dpp and EGFR signals.&lt;br/&gt; 2.
To identify functional sequences in the V-h enhancer and trans-acting factors
that control spatial and temporal expression of V-h.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research proposed will take place at the University of Illinois at Chicago
(UIC). UIC is an urban campus with a diverse undergraduate and graduate
population. Both minority and nonminority undergraduate and graduate students
have particiapted in ongoing research in the P.I.'s laboratory. Other efforts to
broaden the impact of research efforts: 1. introduction of Drosophila as model
organism for development studies to students in the laboratory section of an
undergraduate Developmental Biology course and 2. yearly visits to two local
elementary schools to make presentations on Drosophila genetics and introduction
to DNA. 3. judging science fair projects for local elementary and high schools.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;