* 0319560
* Clinic-Level Law:  The 'Legalization' of Medicine in AIDS Treatment and Research
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Carol Heimer, American Bar Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Brodie Haire
* 08/31/2007
* USD 299,928.00

This project investigates the relationship between HIV/AIDS, one of the world's
most important medical problems, and the legalization of medicine, a portentous
change at the boundary between the legal and medical worlds. The "legalization
of medicine" represents the development of a complex system of rules to govern
medical care, medical research, and medical organizations and staff. Because the
legalization of medicine is as much indigenous as imposed, this study conceives
of legal systems broadly, including within its purview not only the actions and
products of the formal legal system, but the internal "legislative" and
"judicial" processes of the medical world. Among the most important components
of this medical/legal system are treatment guidelines, rules about the conduct
of research, and governance protocols. The project studies these three types of
medical rules using the example of HIV/AIDS, a disease in which all three forms
of rules are extremely important. Because its culture and practices were formed
at the same time as medicine was being "legalized," AIDS treatment, research,
and governance should be more deeply shaped by the new medical rules than would
be the case for other diseases where culture and practice were formed in earlier
eras. Because this medical/legal system has diffused beyond the United States -
sometimes freely adopted by medical workers eager for the legitimacy conferred
by American medical science and law, at other times imposed on foreign
scientists by American funding agencies and research organizations - the
research must also include an international component. Beginning with archival
research and interviews to learn how and by whom rules are formulated and
adopted, the project also includes field investigations of how law and medical
rules are actually used. Fieldwork in AIDS clinics, where research, treatment,
and administration go on side-by-side, allows the researchers to see when rules
are starting points for complex coordination, when they alert people to better
ways of doing things, and when legalism may instead degrade performance. In
particular, the researchers ask what happens when these rules are transported to
new sites where they confront the realities of medical care, clinical research,
and healthcare administration in developing countries - resource shortages,
desperate patients, incompatible laws, discrepancies between first-world
research designs and third-world research settings, culturally based
miscommunications about ethical principles, as well as the more mundane
uncertainties of the encounter between medicine and human biology. Supplementing
the research in U.S. clinics, field studies take place in Uganda, South Africa,
and Thailand, countries that vary in legal arrangements, rates of infection,
concentration of the infection in particular social groups, and access to
medical care. Whether rules are drafted by national legislatures or groups of
physicians, the creation and adoption of rules are just the first parts of a
production process that continues as rules are used as points of coordination,
as bids for legitimacy, and as moral opportunities. At this boundary between law
and medicine, in the management of HIV/AIDS research and treatment, the
production process is likely to be especially transparent because the rules are
just being written. While sociolegal scholars have long recognized that the
implementation of laws tends to be biased against disadvantaged groups, less
attention has been given to the ways these biases enter into the production of
law, particularly when law is produced outside the formal legal system. By
studying both the production and the implementation of law and by studying these
processes in situations in which already large inequalities are magnified by
national boundaries, this project uncovers the processes by which biases enter
into the production of law and therefore pave the way for creating fairer and
more balanced legal systems.