* 0320525
* SBIR Phase II:  Development and Commercialization of a Real-Time Visualization Tool for the Energy Industry
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Mark Laufenberg, POWERWORLD CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 10/31/2005
* USD 512,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a new software tool for viewing real-time electrical data for the energy
industry. The purpose of this project is to allow an advanced visualization
environment to be used with real-time power system data as input. Existing
product will be decoupled from off-line power flow cases and generalize the
visualization links so that any real-time database can be linked to the
visualization objects. The end result will be a software product that will allow
any user with secure access to view real-time power system data from any Windows
PC with a TCP/IP connection to the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The market for
this product will be all electrical utilities, independent system operators, and
regional transmission organizations in the world since they all must have an
energy management system (EMS) installed in their control center. EMS systems
have the ability to display real-time power system data obtained from meters
installed throughout the electrical grid and sent in real-time to the control
center. However this data has been essentially trapped in the control center
with no way for company employees in other locations to visualize in real time
what is happening on the system. Typically a report on real-time system
information necessitates a telephone call to an EMS operator. When implemented
this system should generate savings for the power companies which in turn will
be passed on to the consumer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;