* 0320326
* SBIR Phase I:  Selective Wafer Bonding for Wafer-Level Packaging of Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) and Related Microsystems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Chad O'Neal, Sysconn Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2004
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses
selective laser-assisted bonding for wafer-level and chip-scale vacuum packaging
of Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) and related Microsystems. This novel
method is especially suitable for vacuum bonding wafers containing devices with
low temperature budgets and for managing stress distribution. Furthermore,
sealed, encapsulated and released wafers can be diced at the wafer scale without
damaging the MEMs devices, thus offering tremendous economies of scale useful
toward commercialization. Low temperature solder, such as Pb37/Sn63, will be
used to bond silicon chips and wafers using a continuous wave carbon dioxide
(CO2) laser. Optimum values of pertinent process parameters and the capability
to produce high quality bonds at representative scales will be determined. The
study will include both lead-tin solders and lead-free solders. The bonding
process will be performed in a vacuum chamber at a pressure of less than ten
milliTorr to achieve fluxless soldering and vacuum encapsulation of silicon
dies. While the bonding temperature at the sealing ring will be close to the
reflow temperature of the eutectic lead-tin solder (183 degrees), the global
average temperature will be considerably lower due to the localization of the
laser heating. This factor will be critical for many MEMS devices, such as those
containing stress sensitive radio-frequency (RF) MEMS, optical devices and low
temperature biomaterials. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Today, 60 percent of the cost
of MEMs products is due to special packaging requirements and lack of
standardization. MEMs packaging is far more challenging than traditional
packaging, and presents technical and cost barriers. This work will develop MEMs
packaging to meet the needs of this important segment of the rapidly growing
$20B packaging industry. The goal is to have several new wafer level packaging
platforms demonstrated and ready to insert into high-volume manufacturing lines
when the market starts to regain strength. &lt;br/&gt;