* 0320338
* SBIR Phase I:  Electrochemical BioDetection Platform Utilizing Disposable Microfluidic Cartridges
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Ihab Abdel-Hamid, MESOSYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,581.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a
handheld automated biosensor for specific and sensitive detection and
quantification of proteins and/or pathogenic cells in liquid samples. The
biosensor will integrate highly-specific immunodiagnostics with ultra-sensitive
electrochemical sensors in a microfluidic format, and will have the following
features: (1) Quantitative detection of pathogenic bacteria and protein markers
in any liquid sample, (2) Low detection limit (i.e. less than 100 cfu/ml for
pathogens and less than 0.1 ng/ml for proteins), (3) Short assay times (i.e.
less than 25 minutes for bacterial cells and less than 10 minutes for proteins),
(4) Single-button, fully-automated operation requiring minimal user interaction,
and (5) Handheld, battery powered operation allowing its use in remote
locations. In this Phase I project, the utility of the system will be
demonstrated by detecting Escherichia coli (a representative pathogen) and
Immunoglobulin G (a representative protein/immuno marker).

The commercial applications of the proposed product would include health clinics
and mobile laboratories, emergency response to a possible biological warfare
threat, microbiology laboratories and environmental monitoring. The handheld
biological detection system will be capable of rapidly quantifying the presence
of extremely low concentrations of any biological agent in a short amount of
time.