* 0320980
* Synergistic Physiochemical Properties of Macromolecule-Metal Complexes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2008
* Laurence Belfiore, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

This research activity focuses on the development of macromolecule-metal
complexes that exhibit synergistic thermophysical properties, and the
spectroscopic detection of the underlying complexation. Metal cations from the
d-block and the f-block in the Periodic Table act like magnets that induce
functional polymers to occupy vacant sites in the first-shell coordination
sphere of the metal center. Consequently, the formation of self-assembled
mobility-restricting nanoclusters in solid polymeric complexes allows one to
design materials that can withstand larger forces before failure occurs and
higher temperatures prior to viscous flow or thermal degradation. This is an
extension of supramolecular design that represents a new frontier in
interdisciplinary macromolecular science and engineering. Organic-inorganic
hybrid materials are expected to contribute significantly to the state-of-the-
art in nanotechnology, and yield devices with unusually new and useful
properties via molecular engineering. At the molecular level, high-resolution
carbon-13 solid state NMR and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopies will be
used to probe microenvironmental factors that influence metal-based
coordination-driven micromixing. When paramagnetic transition metal salts form
complexes with the polymers of interest, magnetic susceptibility measurements
will be performed to investigate the spin-glass nature of these nanoclusters
that are responsible for unique macroscopic physical properties. Temperature
dependence of magnetic susceptibilities in the vicinity of the glass transition
is unprecedented. The principal investigator has contributed significantly to
the current state of knowledge of macromolecule-metal complexes, yet scientific
literature databases suggest that there has not been much activity at the
spectroscopic level to support the proposed models for metal-ligand interaction,
particularly when the dissociation of these complexes coincides with the glass
transition process.

Metal-based coordination-driven interactions at the molecular level can be
exploited in several practical areas of science and technology. For example, it
is possible to (i) compatibilize polymers that are immiscible in the absence of
the inorganic component, (ii) separate mixtures of alkenes and alkanes (i.e.,
olefin/paraffin blends) via precipitation of transition metal pi-complexes,
(iii) modify the viscosity (i.e., viscosification) of polymer solutions by
bridging chains and increasing their molecular weight, (iv) induce gelation and
simulate the response of artificial muscles to neural impulses via cyclic
expansion and contraction of gelatinous materials that contain trapped metal
cations in the presence of AC electric fields, and (v) remove heavy metal
contaminants from wastewater streams via water-soluble polymers that contain
functional groups which act as magnets for these toxic compounds. The
fundamental studies under investigation in this research project will have a
direct influence on the design and use of macromolecule-metal complexes in these
five areas of practical interest.