* 0320595
* SGER: Discrete Event Simulation of Self-Assembly Kinetics
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Russell Schwartz, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,649.00

EIA-0320595&lt;br/&gt;Russell Schwartz&lt;br/&gt;Carnegie Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary: Discrete Event Simulation of
Self-Assembly Kinetics &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop a novel computational tool for simulating generalized
self-&lt;br/&gt;assembly systems. Self-assembly systems consist of many small
components, or subunits, that &lt;br/&gt;spontaneously arrange themselves into
larger structures under appropriate conditions. Among the &lt;br/&gt;many
medically important self-assembly systems are viral protein shells, or capsids,
which form &lt;br/&gt;protective coats around the genetic material of viruses;
amyloids, fibrous agglomerations of &lt;br/&gt;proteins that are implicated in
Alzheimer.s disease, Huntington.s disease, and the prion diseases;
&lt;br/&gt;and irregular protein aggregates. For all of these systems, the
process of assembly is only &lt;br/&gt;partially understood. In addition, self-
assembly has attracted recent interest as a means of &lt;br/&gt;constructing
man-made devices and materials on the nanometer scale. Due to the small size,
&lt;br/&gt;speed, and complexity of many self-assembly processes, they have
proven difficulty to analyze &lt;br/&gt;experimentally. Simulation approaches
have therefore emerged as a crucial avenue for gaining &lt;br/&gt;insight into
the self-assembly process. This project seeks to build on the prior work in the
area by &lt;br/&gt;creating a model of the self-assembly process sufficiently
versatile to capture a wide variety of &lt;br/&gt;self-assembly systems, yet
fast enough to handle realistic simulation sizes in a reasonable time.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The basic methodology will involve combining techniques
developed in prior modeling work on &lt;br/&gt;this problem with a computational
method that has not previously been used for self-assembly
&lt;br/&gt;simulation. The simulator will use a model of self-assembly dynamics
based largely on the prior &lt;br/&gt;.local rules dynamics. model, which
provided a versatile representation of high-level self-&lt;br/&gt;assembly
behavior in terms of low-level subunit interactions. It will be efficiently
implemented &lt;br/&gt;using a computational data structure called a .discrete
event priority queue,. which will allow the &lt;br/&gt;simulator to step between
changes in discrete state (such as subunits binding to one another)
&lt;br/&gt;without the need for explicit integration over all time steps. The
result will be faster simulation of &lt;br/&gt;a highly general self-assembly
model than was possible with prior methods. The simulator will &lt;br/&gt;be
implemented in Java to facilitate ease of development, extensibility, and
portability. &lt;br/&gt;Implementation will be conducted through distinct phases
devoted to developing an object model &lt;br/&gt;(which specifies how pieces of
computer code interact with one another), coding and testing a
&lt;br/&gt;prototype simulator, and finalizing an optimized and well documented
release-quality version. &lt;br/&gt;The end result will be both a stand-alone
simulation tool and a set of computational classes &lt;br/&gt;available for
extension and use in other programs. This work will require innovation primarily
in &lt;br/&gt;mathematical models of self-assembly processes and in algorithms
for their efficient simulation &lt;br/&gt;by a discrete event queue methodology.
Further innovation will be needed in the integration of &lt;br/&gt;existing
knowledge from such areas as biophysics, algorithms, software engineering, and
user &lt;br/&gt;interface design to produce a versatile, easy-to-use graphical
simulation tool. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project can be expected to yield
several benefits. Its impact will be primarily on the field of &lt;br/&gt;self-
assembly, by providing a general tool that can be used by researchers throughout
the field for &lt;br/&gt;modeling known systems across size and time scales,
developing computational prototypes of &lt;br/&gt;novel systems, and
experimenting with interventions in both. It will also provide new methods
&lt;br/&gt;and experience to the general field of biophysical simulation through
the development of a novel &lt;br/&gt;simulation methodology, its implementation
in a computational simulator, and optimization of &lt;br/&gt;algorithms for this
problem. The cross-disciplinary nature of the project will enhance its impact
&lt;br/&gt;by providing for the computational community new variations on
problems to be found in &lt;br/&gt;biophysical systems and providing for the
biophysics community new computational techniques &lt;br/&gt;that can be brought
to bear on other problems. The work will also have educational value by
&lt;br/&gt;providing interdisciplinary research experience to students,
including two undergraduates, and by &lt;br/&gt;providing a simulator that can
be used as both a research and a teaching tool.