* 0320133
* Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Peggy Barber, Southwest Virginia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

The primary goal of this project is to increase the number of talented but
financially disadvantaged residents of the region who achieve higher education
degrees in computer science, computer technology, and engineering. The target
audience is high achieving high school students; marginal high school students
who demonstrate an exceptional interest in the science, math or engineering
fields; adult learners who are already enrolled in programs at the college; and
returning adult students who have been away from science, engineering, or
mathematics studies for several years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objectives include increasing participation and retention of academically
talented, low-income students and underrepresented groups; assessing the
academic, educational and communications skills of participants and preparing
Individual Training Portfolios for each; facilitating the personal and
professional development of students by establishing partnerships with industry
for mentors, job shadowing, internships, or research experiences; increasing
involvement in Career Center job placement activities; providing academic and
support services for increased student retention and improved academic
performance; and increasing the placement of participating students in
baccalaureate transfer programs and related employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scholars participate in a wide range of retention-related activities utilizing
an exemplary student services program. Students who require remediation will
participate in a special program to accelerate learning, however, once they
enter the program, they are expected to maintain high academic standards. In
addition, second-year scholarship recipients are encouraged to provide tutoring
to entering CSEMS students. Scholars also have an opportunity to participate in
a Summer Technology Institute that includes field trips to engineering and
information technology industries in the region and to four-year schools with
whom the institution has articulation agreements in engineering and information
technology majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, each student is assigned a
M.A.S.T.E.R. Advisor who serves as the Faculty Mentor and a Big Brother/Big
Sister mentor from a business or industry related to the major of the student.
The Alumni Office is establishing an Adopt A Student mentorship program to
encourage volunteer alumni from business and industry to participate as Big
Brothers/Big Sisters to the scholars. A CSEMS Club allows networking among
scholarship recipients, provides a monthly lecture series with industry
representatives as guest speakers, provide workshop opportunities on topics such
as job search strategies and resume preparation, and provide opportunities for
participant input and feedback. This project serves as a model for other
community colleges in areas where high numbers of unemployment has forced entire
regions to change their economic base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;