* 0320284
* Acquisition of a Beowulf Class Cluster Computer to Support Interdisciplinary Faculty Research and Graduate Student Training Using Numerically Intensive Statistical Modeling Methods
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Jeffrey Racine, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2004
* USD 113,967.00

With support from a National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation
award, Professor J.S. Racine, Senior Research Associate in the Center for Policy
Research (CPR) of the Maxwell School at Syracuse University, will establish a
32-dual-processor-node Beowulf class cluster computer in CPR to support faculty
research and graduate student training using numerically intensive statistical
modeling methods. The Beowulf class cluster computer will provide supercomputer
computing power at a relatively low cost using off-the-shelf hardware
components, open source software, and a substantial degree of platform
independence. Professor J. S. Racine will supervise the purchase, installation,
and operation of the Beowulf class cluster computer, assisted by the CPR
computer consultant, whose training in Beowulf cluster computers will be
supported by this award. Racine anticipates that initially 9 faculty members and
20 to 30 graduate students will benefit from the purchase and implementation of
this computer, and that these numbers will grow as other Maxwell School research
faculty develop projects to exploit the Beowulf cluster computer's
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applied statistical research is rapidly
evolving from a paradigm based upon parametric models coupled with inference,
which relies on asymptotic approximations, to one based on nonparametric models
and inference based on resampling. These large information-rich datasets are
ripe for nonparametric analysis, but their computational burden all but prevents
their application for such datasets. This also applies to methods that hold the
promise for improved parametric modeling. These computational obstacles can be
overcome by using a parallel computing environment, the most practical form of
which is a Beowulf class cluster computer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CPR has at least
nine faculty who either work with numerically intensive econometric methods and
who have expertise in this area, or who routinely struggle with computational
aspects of modeling large datasets. With this cluster computer, we will be able
to teach them not only the theory of these methods but how to apply them to
large, real world databases such as those they will work with after
graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Maxwell School of
Citizenship and Public Affairs at Syracuse University, in which the Center for
Policy Research is located, conducts high-quality social science research and
trains graduate students for academic and research positions, as well as
responsible government and non-governmental agency positions around the world.
Should the project be funded, researchers will be able to leverage the cluster
to apply cutting-edge statistical methods to numerous datasets housed by our
center, all of which will result in improved policy analysis and enhanced
understanding of empirical phenomena. Finally, software developed on the cluster
will, of course, be made publicly available, thereby maximizing the broader
impacts of the investment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are extremely excited to have
this resource available for use by both faculty and students in the upcoming
year. Simply put, we will be able to apply the latest numerically intensive
statistical methods to rich datasets which currently remain beyond our
computational reach.&lt;br/&gt;