* 0320666
* MRI: Acquisition of Test & Measurement Equipment for Research in Wireless and Mixed-Signal Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Yannis Tsividis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2005
* USD 250,000.00

We propose the acquisition of instrumentation that will allow the experimental
evaluation of a number of prototypes coming out of our present research in
wireless and mixed-signal circuits. A number of research areas will benefit from
such acquisition. These include high-performance oscillators, ultra-wide band
radio circuits, integrated filters for radio and intermediate frequencies,
parametric MOS circuits, nonlinear circuits with linear external behavior, time-
encoding circuits, interconnect analysis, and on-chip serial links. Whereas in
the past we have relied largely on cooperating industry to open their
measurement facilities to us for such purposes, present economic difficulties
and changes in the modus operandi of the industry have made this solution
increasingly difficult. We thus propose to acquire equip-ment that will allow us
full independence in testing at frequencies up to 50 GHz. We have identified a
number of test setups needed in our work, and have determined the most suitable
instruments for such setups after extensive consultations with four different
equipment manufacturers. The in-struments include a spectrum analyzer, a network
analyzer, a real-time sampling and a repetitive sampling oscilloscope, a noise
source, a vector signal generator, a continuous-wave microwave gen-erator, a
probe station, and include several options and supporting hardware. A shielded
room will ensure low-interference measurements in New York's harsh
electromagnetic interference environ-ment. The equipment proposed will allow us
to have a top-notch measurement facility on-premises, with a large impact on
both our research and our education programs.