* 0320695
* Development of an Infrared Spectrometer/Scanning Probe Microscope for Materials Characterization at High Spatial Resolution
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* F. James Boerio, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 07/31/2007
* USD 261,555.00

The goal of this project is to construct a powerful new research instrument for
determining the composition of materials at sub-micron spatial resolution. The
key feature of the new instrument will be the use of a scanning probe microscope
(SPM) to detect the absorption by materials of infrared radiation from a
Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer. Ultimately, the spatial
resolution of this instrument is expected to approach 50 nm. This spatial
resolution is at least two orders of magnitude better than that of infrared
microscopes that are limited by diffraction effects to a spatial resolution that
is approximately equal to the wavelength of infrared radiation (~ 2.5 - 25 mm).
Since an SPM will be used as an infrared "detector," the best features of FTIR
and SPM systems will be integrated into a single powerful instrument that can
provide information about variations in the surface composition, topography, and
properties of materials at high spatial resolution. Two general approaches will
be employed. In one, the SPM will be used to measure the thermal expansion that
occurs when a sample absorbs infrared radiation. Signals from the SPM will be
routed to the external input of the FTIR where functions such as signal
averaging and Fourier-transformation will be performed to yield the infrared
spectrum of the sample. The FTIR spectrometer will be operated in a step-scan
mode and the infrared radiation will be modulated at a frequency of about 100
kHz to limit the thermal diffusion length and enhance the spatial resolution of
the instrument. The second approach will be similar except that the SPM will be
equipped with a miniature resistance thermometer that will be used to measure
the increase in temperature of a sample when it is illuminated with infrared
radiation. This new research instrument will be used extensively in research
concerned with gradients that occur in composition, structure, and properties of
materials near interfaces in adhesive joints and composite materials and in
research concerned with phase separation in elastomers having a bimodal
distribution of long and short chains. A novel aspect of the research plan is to
make the FTIR/SPM available to remote users over the Internet.