* 0320488
* SBIR Phase I:     Advanced Controlled-Impedance Transfemoral Knee/Ankle Prosthesis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Harold Sears, MOTION CONTROL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 05/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to develop a
microprocessor controlled transfemoral knee/ankle prosthesis. This system will
include: (1) adaptive swing phase impedance (resistance); (2) control of
compliant flexion during stance phase; (3) myoelectric control of knee/foot
impedances; and, (4) coordination of knee and foot motion. This transfemoral
knee/ankle prosthesis would allow prosthesis users to walk and run more
smoothly, stably, and with less effort. Two important developments are necessary
for the realization of this objective. The first is the refinement of
experimental knee and foot mechanisms, which have previously been developed and
the second is the development of an adaptive control system, which will command
these mechanisms to exhibit appropriate impedances.

There are over 80,000 transfemoral prosthesis users in the United States and
there is an estimated a market for 20,000 transfemoral prostheses each year.
Considering all industrial nations, the worldwide market is several times that
figure. U.S. government sponsored workshops have cited .the following as high
priority goals for improved knee systems: stance phase stability, varying
walking cadences, and energy conservation. Other manufacturers have shown the
feasibility of using electronic control of hydraulic knee resistance, and the
C-leg (by Otto Bock, of Germany) controls flexion impedance during stance phase.
However all the available knees lack compliant stance and coordinated knee/ankle
motion, which this project will develop.