* 0320858
* MRI: Acquisition of Equipment for a Microgenomics Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Rathindra Bose, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2006
* USD 258,265.00

A grant has been awarded to Kent State University under the direction of Dr.
Mintz for the purchase of two instruments dedicated to measuring cell-specific
gene expression. The first instrument is a laser capture microscope, which
allows researchers to extract individual cells or groups of cells from tissues
in order to analyze their contents. The second instrument is an Affymetrix
GeneChip instrument system, which will allow researchers to analyze the
expression patterns of thousands of genes simultaneously from just a few cells
extracted using the laser capture microscope. With these instruments,
researchers can examine differences in gene activity between different types of
cells that are all mixed together in one tissue. This is of critical importance
in understanding how individual cells serve different roles within one tissue.
Many projects at Kent State in diverse areas of the life sciences will benefit
from this instrumentation. Although these instruments are often used in genetic
and molecular biology studies, we seek mainly to apply their power to ask
questions in the areas of neuroendocrinology, reproductive physiology,
environmental biology, and biochemistry. The Kent State Department of Biological
Sciences has an ongoing collaboration with the departments of Physics,
Mathematics, and Computer Science in the fields of computational neuroscience
and bioinformatics, and these instruments will add many new possible directions
for that collaboration. In addition to the benefits to Kent State's research
programs, this instrumentation will have a significant impact on the educational
experience we can give our students. Experience with this modern equipment
through individual research mentoring by faculty will strongly benefit both our
graduate and undergraduate students, and significantly enhance their ability to
obtain positions after completing their educations. In addition, the
instrumentation will be incorporated into our summer cell and molecular biology
workshop, used specifically to give formal training in techniques to interested
students. Overall, this award will enhance the scientific productivity of both
faculty and students at Kent State University and support new and exciting
directions in research.