* 0320239
* SBIR Phase I:  High Temperature High Resolution Cesium-Antimony Semiconductor Gamma Spectroscopy Detectors for Borehole Radiochemical
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Charles Beetz, NANOSCIENCES CORP
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project aims to construct a
novel elevated temperature gamma ray spectroscopy detector for borehole nuclear
geochemistry. Cesium-Antimony (Cs3Sb) is a semiconductor widely used
commercially for thin film vacuum photocathodes. In single crystal form, it has
many properties superior to Ge for gamma radiation detection: (1) a lower
electron-hole pair energy (2 eV vs 3 eV) for better intrinsic energy resolution;
(2) a higher bandgap (1.6 vs 0.7 eV) for low thermal noise, even lower than CdTe
and operation at room or elevated temperatures; and (3) a higher Z (55 & 51, vs
32) for a stopping power 4-5 times greater ~ MeV gamma rays. In Phase I, the aim
is to grow sufficiently large crystals of Cs3Sb, and fabricate them into
environmentally (oxygen, water vapor) protected room temperature radiation
detectors, to demonstrate that they may become the future of gamma ray
detectors. These detectors could replace NaI(Tl) and other scintillator
detectors, and SiLi and HPGe gamma ray spectroscopy detectors in industrial and
medical analytical instrumentation.

This development will enable new scientific instrumentation used in research and
education in chemistry, physics, planetary science, astrophysics, biology,
medicine and other places where x- and gamma- rays are used. The results will be
widely disseminated and published.