* 0320806
* Collaborative Research: Acquisition of an electron microprobe for Oregon State University with remote access facilities for Portland State University
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Adam Kent, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2005
* USD 522,385.00

EAR-0320806&lt;br/&gt;Kent&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support of the proposal will
enable us to acquire a new electron microprobe for Oregon State University. The
primary analytical mission of the electron microprobe is to produce images and
small scale chemical analyses of solid materials, including minerals, glasses,
metals, bone, ceramics and many others. Its greatest contribution to those
diverse fields of endeavor is that combination of compositional and spatial
information at the micron scale. This new instrument will replace an instrument
that has been the center of a university facility established 15 years ago to
provide analytical services to the university and to provide a link to the local
industrial community. The facility management plan is designed to provide access
to the widest number of people under the conditions that allow each of them to
efficiently produce high quality data. This aspect of the facility will be aided
by a remote operation station at Portland State University (PSU). A workstation
plus control panel will be installed at the Department of Geology at PSU and
linked by high speed internet connection to the microprobe at Oregon State in
Corvallis. This remote station will be used for teaching and research at PSU as
well as for the development of additional links with the industrial community in
the Portland area. Maintenance of the main part of the electron microprobe
(housed in Corvallis), sample change and monitoring of standards will be done by
staff at OSU. &lt;br/&gt;