* 0320195
* SBIR Phase I:  Closed Loop Drug Delivery System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Hal Cantor, Advanced Sensor Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,993.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a
device to deliver therapeutic drugs in a controlled and monitored manner. This
device will be used to control delivery of therapeutic doses of drugs, and to
monitor blood levels of such drugs continuously, with on-demand administration,
in order to minimize the dosage fluctuation that occurs through oral and
injection administration. As an example, many patients with biphasic
psychological disorders benefit from the use of lithium, including those that
suffer from acute manic and hypomanic episodes in bipolar disorder, and for
maintenance therapy to help diminish the intensity and frequency of subsequent
manic episodes. The therapeutic window of effectiveness of lithium carbonate is
very narrow. Due to the potential toxicity of lithium at blood levels close to
therapeutic concentrations, monitoring lithium levels is absolutely essential.
This Phase I project will develop a needleless lithium carbonate
delivery/monitoring system (LDMS) capable of injecting sufficient quantities of
this therapeutic agent, non-invasively through transdermal delivery mechanisms,
to maintain optimal blood levels of lithium carbonate over extended periods of
time.

The initial commercial application of this project will be in the delivery of
lithium carbonate medication to patients with bipolar disorder. Bipolar disorder
affects approximately 2.3 million American every year. The most recognized
treatment for this disease involves the delivery of psychotropic medications to
affected individuals. Many of these and other drugs have very narrow therapeutic
windows that are often at or near toxic levels. A closed loop drug delivery
system can efficiently deliver and monitor these medications in a controlled
manner.