* 0320972
* MRI/RUI:  Acquisition of a High-Speed Digital Motion Analysis System for Studying Multi-Scale Interactions in a Fluid environment.
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Jonathan Geller, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 196,195.00

A grant has been awarded to Moss Landing Marine Laboratory under the direction
of Dr. Michael Graham for the acquisition of a Multi-scale Fluid Analysis System
(MFAS). This system represents a combination of state-of-the-art instrumentation
for introducing organisms to flow in a laboratory setting, and visualizing and
quantifying organismal responses to flow. Acquisition of the MFAS will provide
researchers at MLML and partner institutions throughout Monterey Bay with the
resources necessary to study a broad range of topics in marine science. Proposed
research topics range from small-scale variability in larval settlement to the
feeding kinematics of marine fishes and the testing of the efficacy and accuracy
of sampling devices and remote sensing instrumentation. As such, the MFAS
strongly enhances the ongoing research program of MLML researchers at multiple
levels, all of which have a long history of significant contribution to the
field of marine science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MFAS will provide more than
just a research platform, as it will be directly incorporated into the MLML
curricula through established courses in marine science and a novel course
centered around the MFAS. The MFAS will be made available to MLML MS degree
students for individual course- and thesis-related research projects, as well as
undergraduate students from any of seven consortium campuses (two of which are
minority-serving institutions). In addition, the system will be used: (1) in an
established program that brings K-12 teachers to MLML in order to gain hands-on
experience in using marine instrumentation and incorporate marine research
concepts into K-12 curricula; (2) as a focal point of public outreach through
organized tours of the research facility; (3) to package the results of MLML
faculty and student research in a form conducive to broad-scale dissemination
(e.g. WWW). We predict there will be broader impacts for the general public due
to the inherently visual format in which data are collected with the MFAS. Such
data are inherently appealing to viewers and can help to break down barriers
that generally separate scientists from the non-scientific public.&lt;br/&gt;