* 0320022
* Three Workshops in Data Analysis and Mining
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen M. O'Hara
* 06/30/2005
* USD 45,000.00

Theoretical and algorithmic approaches to data analysis have played
a&lt;br/&gt;central role in the development of modern methods for handling
data.&lt;br/&gt;The massive amounts of data gathered in important present-
day&lt;br/&gt;applications ranging from the Internet to homeland security
to&lt;br/&gt;astronomy and medicine have dramatically changed the requirements
for&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and provide ample motivation for a great deal of
new&lt;br/&gt;theoretical development. Traditional data analysis tools are
incapable&lt;br/&gt;of handling the sheer size and complexity of these gigantic
data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will run three workshops on topics
related to the size and&lt;br/&gt;complexity of modern data
sets:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Data Quality, Data Cleaning and Treatment of Noisy
Data"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Compact Representation of
Data"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Geographical Information Systems: Terrain
Representation and&lt;br/&gt;Analysis
Algorithms"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Data Quality workshop seeks to bring together experts from&lt;br/&gt;different
research disciplines to initiate a comprehensive technical&lt;br/&gt;discussion
on data quality, data cleaning and treatment of noisy data.&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the workshop are to develop quantitative ways
of&lt;br/&gt;measuring the quality of data and to search for an
integrated,&lt;br/&gt;domain-independent approach to data cleaning in the
situation where&lt;br/&gt;the sheer size of data collections prevents one from
manually&lt;br/&gt;scrubbing or even monitoring them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central topic of the Compact Representation workshop revolves&lt;br/&gt;around
the following question: Can a large and potentially complicated&lt;br/&gt;data
set be replaced by a short sketch such that a certain class of&lt;br/&gt;queries
on the original data can be answered (perhaps approximately)&lt;br/&gt;by
performing computations on the short sketch? The workshop will&lt;br/&gt;explore
metric embeddings of sampling spaces with complex structure&lt;br/&gt;into
spaces that are amenable to simpler analysis; space-time&lt;br/&gt;tradeoffs for
data structures; and algorithms for analysis of data in&lt;br/&gt;the streaming
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geographical Information Systems (GIS) are called on
to store,&lt;br/&gt;combine, display, and analyze disparate types of spatially-
referenced&lt;br/&gt;data---locations of telephone poles, streets, rivers,
mountains,&lt;br/&gt;buildings, soil layers, pollution levels, voting districts
---for&lt;br/&gt;applications ranging from natural resource management to
urban&lt;br/&gt;planning. The goal of the proposed workshop is to address
the&lt;br/&gt;challenges in modern GIS by focusing on algorithmic issues
encountered&lt;br/&gt;in such systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshops will
identify areas for research and focus on future&lt;br/&gt;research
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All
workshops will seek a broad impact through a mix of
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;researchers and practitioners and by helping to
stimulate&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary collaborations. Theoretical progress on
the research&lt;br/&gt;topics in these workshops will have impact on a wide
variety of areas&lt;br/&gt;such as health care, homeland security, environmental
management,&lt;br/&gt;disaster management, marketing, bioinformatics,
psychology, sociology,&lt;br/&gt;chemometrics, astronomy, and credit card fraud
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major theme of the project is integration of
research and&lt;br/&gt;education. It is addressed through participation of
graduate students&lt;br/&gt;in the workshops, interaction between students and
DIMACS visitors&lt;br/&gt;working in related areas, and tutorial programs
organized in each&lt;br/&gt;workshop.&lt;br/&gt;