* 0320859
* MRI: Development of High Granularity Position Sensitive Single Photon Detector Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Marina Artuso, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2006
* USD 202,139.00

This proposal from the Syracuse University group requests funds to develop
instrumentation focusing on large area, high granularity, single photon
detectors, active in the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum, and
their associated electronics and data acquisition system. Two solutions will be
implemented based on two competing photon detectors. The primary application
envisaged for this system is the Ring Imaging Cherenkov Detector (RICH), a
crucial component of the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory BTeV experiment
enabling the extensive study of charm and beauty quarks, with particular
emphasis on CP violation and rare decays. The BTeV RICH will be constructed
mainly at Syracuse University. This far-reaching physics program is likely to
provide crucial signatures for new physics, that is, physics beyond our current
understanding, called the Standard Model. The rich phenomenology to be explored
with BTeV makes it a unique educational environment for our graduate and
undergraduate students. The combination of excellent physics analysis
opportunities with novel detector development will empower Syracuse University
to be one of the leading university in training the next generations of high-
energy physicists. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Interest in these instruments is
growing in a variety of fields of experimental physics and medicine. Thus, a
synergistic development of two educational modules to be included in several
experimental physics course offerings and hands-on outreach activities
periodically scheduled in the department is planned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;