* 0320341
* SBIR Phase I:  A Device for Measuring Electric Field Strength from Dropsondes and Radiosondes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* R. Paul Lawson, SPEC, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,797.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project evaluates the
feasibility of fabricating a module to measure electric field strength that can
be dropped from an aircraft through thunderstorms and hurricanes. Electric field
strength is a significant factor in the development of lightning and
microphysical particle development in thunderstorms, and recent research
suggests that it may even play a role influencing the intensity of
precipitation. Research aircraft measurements of electric field strength are
difficult and potentially dangerous because of the hazardous conditions
associated with thunderstorms, such as lightning, hail and turbulence. Droppable
devices, such as dropsondes released from aircraft flying over thunderstorms,
and devices carried aloft by balloons, such as common weather radiosondes, can
be used to probe thunderstorms safely and cost-effectively. There is currently
no commercial device available for measuring electric field strength from
radiosondes or dropsondes. &lt;br/&gt; This research in Phases I presents
significant commercial potential and opportunities for Broader Impacts through
employment of students in work study programs. There are significant potential
societal benefits from improved understanding of damaging thunderstorms and
hurricanes, and a better understanding of lightning discharges that threaten
commercial aircrafts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;