* 0320167
* SBIR Phase I:  Bio-molecular Sequence Recovery Using Statistical Signal Processing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Nader Pourmand, Xagros Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 66,237.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
signal processing methods that allow for real-time sequence recovery of bio-
molecules such as DNA. The idea is to use a single simple experiment and to
shift the burden of analysis and identification to signal processing. The
methodology allows for the use of simple instrumentation (platforms, detectors,
sensors, etc.) and compensates for them by using advanced signal processing
techniques, thereby making it ideally suited for many biotechnology
applications. Although the problem encountered is mathematically one of blind
de-convolution, what distinguishes the problem in its molecular biology
applications is the sheer number of signature signals involved that form the
aggregate signal. In this project, a novel solution based on statistical signal
processing will be developed. The technique will explicitly exploit the large
number of signals involved and will use a combination of the law of large
numbers and Wiener filtering theory.

The commercial application of this project is in the area of Genomics. The
methodology will allow for inexpensive real-time DNA sequencing. Since the
required instrumentation is relatively simple and the burden is shifted to
signal processing and computation (which can be implemented directly in standard
digital-signal-processing (DSP) chips), the detection method could be readily
integrated into a hand-held device. Such a Point-of-Care (POC) device could be
used for industrial and laboratory molecular diagnostics applications.