* 0320634
* Acquisition of High-Speed Camera and Instrumentation for Flow Visualization and Measurement
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Jennifer Rossmann, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 10/31/2005
* USD 126,515.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No. CTS-0320634&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: J. Rossman, Harvey Mudd College &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is
establishing an experimental fluid mechanics laboratory at Harvey Mudd College.
In the summer of 2002, construction began on a subsonic wind tunnel facility for
which all design decisions were made by undergraduate researchers with guidance
from the PI. This facility may be used to study a wide variety of external
flows. Its limited current instrumentation consists of a Pitot-static probe and
a hot-wire anemometer. The flow visualization equipment acquired under the grant
will significantly increase the capabilities of this facility by adding
pressure-sensitive paint as well as a high-speed video-rate and still camera
system. This equipment will enable visual qualitative and quantitative study of
complex fluid dynamics, including those of curveballs and bird wings, at high
resolution, and will significantly expand our students' exposure to and training
in experimental techniques and instrumentation. This camera system will also be
extremely useful to the ongoing research of other faculty at Harvey Mudd College
and in the Claremont Colleges Consortium, for projects ranging from droplet
formation and dynamics to lizard biomechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
following equipment will be acquired under the grant:&lt;br/&gt;(1) High-
resolution CCD camera, including lenses, PCI card and software from Roper
Scientific, (2) High-speed Phantom CMOS camera, including PCI card and software
from Vision Research, (3) Pressure-sensitive paint (PSP) kit, including LED
light source and software for data acquisition and processing, from ISSI, and
(4) Personal computer with sufficient memory for image processing, and color
printer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The equipment will have a tremendously positive
impact on several research projects, and perhaps even more significantly, on the
research training of Harvey Mudd College undergraduates. This equipment will
provide exceptional research and training opportunities for these students using
two state-of-the-art cameras and the PSP technique, furthering the College's
goal of providing substantial and meaningful research opportunities for all of
its students.&lt;br/&gt;