* 0320847
* MRI: Acquisition  of Microwave and Wireless Communications Test and Measurement laboratory
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Marc P. Fossorier, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2006
* USD 456,700.00

Acquisition of Microwave and Wireless Communications Test and Measurement
Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;With this proposal we respectfully request the NSF approval
for establishing a critically needed "Microwave&lt;br/&gt;and Wireless
Communications Test and Measurement Laboratory" in the College of Engineering at
the&lt;br/&gt;University of Hawaii. In an attempt to diversify the tourism-based
economy in the State of Hawaii, and help&lt;br/&gt;better prepare a qualified
workforce that will attract high tech companies to the State, the State
recently&lt;br/&gt;established the Hawaii Center for Advanced Communications
(HCAC) with the mission to do multidisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;research in broadband
wireless communications and promote much needed ties with industry. The center
has&lt;br/&gt;established several initiatives along these guidelines, and the
proposed laboratory facility will be used to support&lt;br/&gt;several of these
ongoing and growing number of activities. Specifically, it will help the faculty
effectively work&lt;br/&gt;on our externally funded research projects, and also
help attract industry-sponsored projects for the recently&lt;br/&gt;established
Engineering Clinic Program for undergraduates. Examples of the ongoing research
projects include:&lt;br/&gt;(a) development of low cost, high performance
antenna arrays with beam steering capabilities; (b)
propagation&lt;br/&gt;prediction modeling in urban wireless communications
environments; (c) development of computational and&lt;br/&gt;power efficient
iterative decoding techniques; (d) DSP algorithms for smart antennas, multiuser
detection, and&lt;br/&gt;cooperative diversity; (e) retoradiative antenna
arrays; and (f) RF and Quasi-Optical devices. Our faculty
has&lt;br/&gt;published hundreds of papers in these areas and the proposed lab
facility will help extend its capabilities and set&lt;br/&gt;the stage for its
future multidisciplinary research directions. As for the Engineering Clinic
program, it places&lt;br/&gt;teams (4-5 students per team) in projects proposed
and sponsored by industry, and the College charges $25k per&lt;br/&gt;project.
All raised funds go directly to support student activities including project
expenses, scholarships for all&lt;br/&gt;participating students, and travel
expenses for the final design reviews at the locations of the
sponsoring&lt;br/&gt;companies. In 2002-2003, the College was able to attract
seven projects from in and out of state companies.&lt;br/&gt;HCAC has also been
approved to participate as a partner in the NSF Industry/University
Collaborative Research&lt;br/&gt;Center (I/U CRC) at Arizona State University
and the University of Arizona, and the proposed lab facility
will&lt;br/&gt;certainly help support this as well as the growing number of
graduate and undergraduate courses being offered&lt;br/&gt;in the wireless
communications area. In addition, the proposed lab facility will help in the
implementation of&lt;br/&gt;the collaborative program between the College of
Engineering and the College of Business Administration&lt;br/&gt;aimed at
preparing the next generation of entrepreneurs in communications
technology.&lt;br/&gt;Specific components of the proposed lab facility include:
(a) a microwave network analysis lab (Agilent&lt;br/&gt;E8361A-Microwave Vector
Network Analyzer and an Agilent E4448A spectrum analyzer); (b) an
indoor&lt;br/&gt;antenna range (Agilent 8530A-Microwave receiver for antenna
measurement); (c) a wireless communications&lt;br/&gt;test-bed (Agilent E4438C
signal generator, Agilent 89610A vector signal analyzer, Spirent TSA
5600W&lt;br/&gt;universal interference emulator, and Spirent FLEX5/Q1 RF Ch.
Emulator); and (d) for the undergraduate lab an&lt;br/&gt;additional two Agilent
8720 network analyzers (in addition to access to the equipment in the above
listed&lt;br/&gt;research labs).&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: With the
phenomenal growth of wireless communications technology, and with
the&lt;br/&gt;recognized and long-standing distinguished expertise in the
communications technology area at the University&lt;br/&gt;of Hawaii (first to
propose the ALOHA protocol for packet radio systems that subsequently strongly
influenced&lt;br/&gt;the development of access Ethernet protocols), the proposed
lab facility will help support several externally&lt;br/&gt;funded (NSF, ARO,
DARPA, AFOSR, Raytheon, and TRW) research projects, help promote
integrative&lt;br/&gt;research and multidisciplinary efforts that will lead to
significant advances in developing next generation&lt;br/&gt;wireless
communications technology. This laboratory facility will also help attract
industrial sponsors in&lt;br/&gt;programs such as the Engineering Clinic for
undergraduates, and support UH participation in the NSF I/U
CRC&lt;br/&gt;program with other universities.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: With
the recognition of this technology as one of the strategic high tech avenues
for&lt;br/&gt;diversifying the Hawaii economy and better preparing the local
workforce to help attract companies and grow&lt;br/&gt;the industrial base in
the State, it is expected that the proposed lab will play a critical role in
realizing the vision&lt;br/&gt;and achieving the mission of the recently
established HCAC. It will also help attract industrial sponsors
in&lt;br/&gt;programs such as the Engineering Clinic for undergraduates, and
provide test and measurement capabilities for&lt;br/&gt;local industry and
start-ups. The impact of this NSF equipment investment will reach far beyond the
University&lt;br/&gt;and would certainly impact the entire State of
Hawaiipreparation of its workforce, growth in its high tech&lt;br/&gt;base, and
support for its local industry.