* 0320168
* Zooarchaeological Analyses of Holocene Central Coastal California Archaeofaunas
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Diane Gifford-Gonzalez, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2006
* USD 158,005.00

In this project, Dr. Diane Gifford-Gonzalez and students will undertake detailed
analysis of fauna from one large and about 18 smaller archaeological sites on
the Monterey Bay, in central coastal California. The aim of the study is to
evaluate whether and how environmental processes affected people living along
the coast over the last 6000 years. Today, global climate change threatens the
livelihoods of people and the continued survival of animal species, along the
Pacific Rim. Archaeological sites contain records of past climatic events and
human responses to them. They are thus repositories of crucial evidence on how
extreme swings in ocean and land productivity were in pre-industrial times. We
know that, just as today, global climate change affected life on both land and
sea. Although a major agricultural powerhouse in the United States and a tourist
destination for those seeking abundant marine life, the Monterey Bay area's
deeper history is as yet poorly understood. For about six years, Dr. Gifford-
Gonzalez and colleagues from the Department of Earth Sciences have been
researching the history of marine temperatures and productivity, as well as
shedding light on the disappearance of northern fur seals from coastal
California about 1000 bp. The present project follows a three-year NSF-funded
collaborative project that indicated that northern fur seals - a presently
threatened species -- have radically changed their breeding and migratory
behavior. Radiocarbon dates on their bones show their breeding colonies were not
abandoned simultaneously along the entire Pacific margin. Research results
indicate that NFS disappearance in central California did not coincide with
changes in marine upwelling patterns that could have affected their food base,
strengthening the odds that ancient people had a hand in their regional
extirpation. However, so far, we have no detailed evidence that people were
driven to wipe out fur seals due to hunger, whether the severe droughts during
the Medieval Climatic Anomaly (800-1350 AD) could have affected NFS colonies
themselves, or whether the droughts drove people to drive these animals extinct.

Dr. Gifford-Gonzalez, graduate students in archaeology, and undergraduates
chosen for special skills development will explore these questions with faunal
remains from regional archaeological sites. One of these sites, the Moss Landing
Site (CA-MNT0234) is a virtual untapped "Rosetta Stone" for regional
archaeology, with components dating from 8500 years ago to Spanish contact. This
site was well excavated and curated during FEMA-funded rebuilding of the Moss
Landing Marine Laboratories after the Loma Prieta Earthquake. However, time
demands of contract archaeology precluded the close analysis that the site
deserves, to tell its full story of climate change, human resource use, and
animal geography. This study will provide insights into the pre-modern human
land use and interactions with food species over time. Our data on historical
human and animal ecology will be available to wildlife and conservation
biologists making management decisions about such species. It will provide
excellent professional training for graduate students in archaeology and
extraordinary, on-site research opportunities for undergraduates.

