* 0320100
* STTR Phase I:     Packaging of Structural Health Monitoring Micro-Components
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Simon Spearing, Metis Design Corporation
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)Phase I project will develop
manufacturing, packaging and interface concepts for critical Structural Health
Monitoring (SHM) components. The intention is to be able to cheaply manufacture
robust actuator/sensors wafers, and isolate them from harsh operating
environments including natural, mechanical, or electrical extremes. Currently
the issues related to SHM system durability have remained unaddressed. In this
project, microfabrication techniques will be developed to fabricate, assemble,
wire and package the SHM system components for robust operation. In particular,
in Phase I of this project, the piezoelectric actuators and sensor used for
damage detection will be packaged, and then tested in hot and wet conditions.
Research continued through a Phase II program would aim to package the other
supporting components such as the battery and wireless chip, as well as
integrating all of these components together for operation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercially, SHM technologies have the potential for many
economic benefits in a broad range of commercial and defense markets. These
systems can be utilized by structures from military or civil aircraft, to cars,
ships or spacecraft. The first major benefit is that health monitoring
eliminates the need for scheduled inspections. A second major economic benefit
is that a continuously monitoring system would allow for the use of the much
more efficient condition based maintenance (CBM) design methodology of a
structure, otherwise known as need-based repair. A third benefit would be from
increased service time of the structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;