* 0320618
* SBIR Phase II:   Advanced Light Weight Thermal and Electrical Insulation Using Fullerenes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Eugene Wexler, Materials and Electrochemical Research Corporation (MER)
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 06/30/2006
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
technology to produce an advanced high efficiency multi-layer thermal and
electrical insulation using fullerenes. The recently completed Phase I project
has demonstrated absolute technical and economical feasibility of producing and
utilizing such insulation systems resulting from the unique thermal properties
of fullerenes. Fabricated samples of fullerene-based insulation were shown to
possess R-values of 36 to 40 per inch of thickness, which considerably exceeds
those of commonly available insulation materials (for example, polyurethane
(R6.7), expanded polystyrene (R3.8), and even vacuum insulated panels (R9~24)).
In addition, proposed fullerene-based insulation is very compact, lightweight
and cost-effective. During the course of this Phase II project, the team will
optimize fabrication technology, structure and properties of the proposed
fullerene-based insulation as well as perform an extended prototype study by
producing and fully characterizing various insulation systems. At the completion
of this effort, an optimized fabrication technology for producing advanced
thermal and electrical insulation systems will be demonstrated, commercial
application identified and extensive testing at a potential customer site
initiated in order to start the product certification process. Commercially, the
proposed high efficiency thermal and electrical insulation system will have
numerous applications, especially in the area of cryogenic temperatures. Based
on high performance, ultimate compactness, flexibility and lightweight, the
premier field of application will include miniature cryogenic storage and
shipping containers utilized in pharmaceutical industry, neuro- and bio-storage,
assisted reproduction, oncology research, immunology, gene therapy, tissue
banking, food industry, micro-refrigerators and mechanical freezers, etc.