* 0320534
* MRI: Acquisition of a Magnetic Property Measurement System for Nanotechnology and Materials Science Research at the University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Carlos Rinaldi-Ramos, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 05/31/2006
* USD 311,556.00

Through this grant, the University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez will acquire a
magnetic property measurement system that will support research and education
efforts in nanotechnology and materials science and engineering. The system,
based on a superconducting interference device, will allow accurate
determination of direct current magnetic properties (including magnetic
anisotropy) of magnetic powders and films, as well as bulk materials. The
equipment will allow characterization of novel magnetically-active materials
such as magnetic nanoparticle suspensions and powders, soft and hard ferrites,
metal and alloyed metallic nanoparticles, diluted magnetic semiconductors, and
magnetically-active thin films. These materials have applications as novel
magnetically-active colloidal extractants, in-vivo imaging agents, targeted
magnetic carriers, magnetic cell sorters, sensors, high-density recording media,
spintronic based systems, and components for microelectromechanical and
nanoelectromechanical systems (MEMS/NEMS). The magnetization measurement
capabilities and functionalities afforded by the magnetic property measurement
system are truly unique and will serve to enhance ongoing and future research
efforts in nanotechnology and materials science and engineering at the
University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez. Furthermore, there are no similar devices
available in Puerto Rico, making acquisition of the requested instrument a vital
step in furthering the university's research goals, as well as a valuable
addition to the Puerto Rico research infrastructure. There is a strong link
between the university and several Minority Serving Institutions through the
Nanoscale Interactions, Structures, and Applications Center.