* 0321228
* MRI:  Acquisition of Research and Education Equipment for Geometric Design and Manufacturing Integration
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Kwun-Lon Ting, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2005
* USD 304,143.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides funds for the
acquisition of a rapid prototyping machine, a coordinate measuring machine, a
three-dimensional digital scanner, and a five-axis numerically controlled
machine. It will provide the lab facilities for the participating faculty to
conduct research in reverse engineering, design and manufacturing integration,
rapid modeling of geographic information systems, design of compliant
mechanisms, photoelastic and experimental stress analysis, and finite element
analysis of advanced microstructures. It will also be used in developing micro
and nano machine tools, new graduate and undergraduate course contents and
design projects, education programs in art design and manufacturing, outreach
programs for k-12 and minority students, and service to local industries.
Faculty from five academic departments in the College of Engineering, College of
Arts and Sciences, and College of Education will be the primary users of the
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the state-of-the-art
facilities will greatly enhance ongoing research and broaden the institution's
capacity to develop new projects. It will enhance the undergraduate and graduate
programs through new course contents and exposure to new manufacturing
technology. The availability of the new lab facilities will also enhance the
ability to retain and recruit quality students for advanced studies and thus
strengthen the graduate program. With the new facilities, the university will
have a better capacity to serve the regional industrial community and the
resulting industrial projects will offer students an integrated research and
education experience through real-life engineering projects. The participation
of the Earth Science Department and the Appalachian Center for Crafts, which
have the mission to revitalize the economy and cultural tradition in the
Appalachian area, adds additional dimensions to the application of the
equipment. The use of the facilities in K-12 and minority outreach programs will
attract high school students and minorities to enter engineering and science
careers.