* 0321113
* Acquisition of a Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorter [FACS] to Support Research and Teaching in the Biological Sciences at the University of California, Riverside
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Anthony Norman, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 381,960.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of California, Riverside (UCR) under
the direction of Dr. Anthony W. Norman to acquire a fluorescence-activated cell
sorter (FACS) to significantly expand current research in the biological
sciences and to provide support for rapidly expanding enrollment and education
programs. Concentrated campus research initiatives in genomics, biomedical
sciences, cell biology and neuroscience, biochemistry and other biological
sciences will be substantially enhanced by technology to investigate fundamental
cellular mechanisms. Access to a FACS at UCR will advance the research programs
of a significant number of federally-funded, research-active faculty in the life
sciences and provide students opportunities for hands-on training that prepares
them for the complex challenges of modern interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the specific projects to benefit are
investigations to better understand the biological actions of the steroid
hormone form of vitamin D, the behavior in insects of small pieces of DNA known
as transposable elements, the p53 tumor suppressor gene, the role of certain
receptor-ligand proteins in ultraviolet light-induced carcinogenesis, and the
function of proteins called GTPases in a variety of plant cellular functions. In
addition, acquisition of a FACS will augment UCR's goals to deliver the highest
quality educational experience to undergraduate and graduate students. Toward
that end, the Principal Investigator and Co-Principal Investigators will develop
a cross-departmental course in cell sorting techniques and applications as part
of the teaching component of the Department of Biochemistry, the
Interdepartmental Graduate Program in Genetics, and the UCR Genomics Institute.
The instrument will also be available to students participating in an NSF-funded
Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Plant Cell Biology program, which
specifically targets underrepresented students and
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As one of the most diverse, rapidly growing research
universities in the nation, UCR has an exceptional opportunity to nurture high-
quality research and teaching in a multicultural environment. The current
student body of nearly 16,000 undergraduate and graduate students, with more
than 27 percent enrollment by underrepresented groups, is expected to reach
21,000 by the year 2010. The FACS will facilitate UCR's efforts to accelerate
programs in genomics, biochemistry and molecular biology, environmental sciences
and plant cell biology, will help attract and retain outstanding faculty and
graduate students in the biological sciences, and will promote the training of a
diverse group of users. The FACS will also complement existing and planned
shared-use instrumentation, thus enhancing the research and education
infrastructure at UCR.&lt;br/&gt;