* 0321846
* Plant and Fungal Diversity of Western Sichuan and Eastern Xizang, China
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2010
* David Boufford, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2010
* USD 598,526.00

This is a collaborative project between Chinese and American botanists and
mycologists to inventory the plants and fungi of unexplored areas of the
Hengduan Mountains hotspot of biodiversity in south-central and southwestern
China. The Hengduan area, roughly the size of Texas, extends from the Sichuan
Basin to eastern Xizang (Tibet) and northernmost Myanmar (Burma) and from
southern Gansu southward to the Yunnan plateau. This unique area on the
southeastern edge of the Tibetan Plateau averages over 4,000 meters in elevation
and straddles four of the major rivers of eastern Asia, the Ayeyarwady
(Irrawaddy), Nu Jiang (Salween), Lancang Jiang (Mekong) and Chang Jiang
(Yangtze). It is extraordinarily rich in vascular plants, with between 30 and 40
percent of China's roughly 30,000 species, and with more than 3,000 of them
possibly endemic. The area is of great interest for the high diversity in
several characteristic genera. For example, there are more than 225 species of
Rhododendron, more than 100 of Gentiana, more than 100 of Pedicularis and more
than 100 of Primula. It is also particularly rich in mosses and fungi. At least
15 new species of fungi and 5 of bryophytes were discovered on the most recent
field trips to the region. Extremes of geography and climate and inaccessibility
for a variety of reasons have kept much of this area unexplored and mostly
biologically unknown. &lt;br/&gt;The study will focus on collecting specimens
and information about them in the most poorly known areas, on determining
biogeographical patterns in the area and on determining the hotspot boundaries.
Specimens will be deposited in Chinese herbaria in Kunming and Beijing and in
the Harvard University Herbaria. Duplicates will be sent to specialists
throughout the world for identification and study. All collections will be
georeferenced and computerized in the field, and the data and digital images
will be made available via a WWW interface at Harvard University. Fieldwork
results will be of major use in phylogenetics, floristics, biogeography, ecology
and conservation. The project will also provide training in field techniques and
in database development and GIS for Chinese and American students. The data will
be freely available on the project's web site, and all collections - herbarium,
silica gel, and material collected by special request - will be made available
to researchers in need of them. &lt;br/&gt;