* 0321608
* SBIR Phase II:   Liquid Phase Epitaxy of Potassium Tantalum Niobate on Low Dielectric Constant Substrates
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Vincent Fratello, INTEGRATED PHOTONICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 10/31/2005
* USD 500,000.00

This SBIR Phase II project proposes to develop the Liquid Phase Epitaxy (LPE) of
potassium tantalum niobate (KTN) on a cubic perovskite substrate. In this manner
both components of the film/substrate composite may be optimized for device
performance. KTN has almost two orders of magnitude higher electrooptic
coefficients than current generation lithium niobate waveguides, which would
permit shorter path lengths, lower bias voltages or some combination of the two.
The new, low dielectric constant substrate material developed in Phase I will
enable better matching of the effective microwave dielectric constant to the
optical dielectric constant of the film material and achieve lower bias fields.
In Phase II, the researchers will develop the new substrate material to
commercial quality and size. LPE of KTN will be developed from a new innovative
flux system that allows excellent control of growth and superior film
properties. Both film and substrate will be fully characterized and optimized as
a composite. The process and product will be scaled up to full commercial size.
IPI will interact with strategic partner device manufacturers to optimize the
material and realize device applications.

Electrooptic devices are used in any photonics application where an electrical
signal can be used to change the state of a beam of light. While the best-known
applications for electrooptic devices are in telecommunications, customers can
be found wherever light is used to move information including optical computing,
analog and digital signal processing, information processing and sensing.
Devices include phase and amplitude modulators, Q-switches, multiplexers, switch
arrays, couplers, polarization controllers, deflectors, correlators, sensors,
potential transformers and optical parametric oscillators. Potential customers
are noticeably found in both the electric power industry and the military.
Initial applications in sensors will have an immediate potential for impact in
reliability of electric power distribution through failure anticipation and
prevention and conservation of electric power through monitoring and control.
The proposed work will enable electrooptic modulators, switches and innovative
new photonic device applications with lower costs, smaller footprints and lower
power budgets. All this contributes to improvements of the infrastructure of the
Internet and more rapid, lower cost deployment, especially in the local loop.