* 0321334
* Acquisition of a Laser Capture Microdissection Microscope and Functional Genomics Facility for Microbial Ecology and Developmental Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Jean Starkey, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2006
* USD 408,268.00

A grant has been awarded to Montana State University under the direction of Dr.
Timothy Ford. The grant will provide MSU with instrumentation for laser
microdissection of biological samples and for genomic analysis of the isolated
cells. Individual cells often live within larger cell populations. This is true
both for multicellular organisms and for single-cell organisms. In multicellular
organisms, cells develop into various cell types. This differentiation is due to
the programmed induction or repression of genes during the developmental
process. Single-cell organisms, including bacteria, often live in microbial
communities, where individual cells experience gradients of nutrients or toxic
waste product. These gradients affect the genetic responses of bacteria, and
ultimately impact the global cycling of nutrients. In the past, biological
characterizations of cellular activities often had to be performed on large cell
populations, following sample homogenization. However, since not all cells
within a population behave similarly, the results only represent average
activities, and do not address the activities of individual cells within the
population, which may vary at spatially localized sites. To begin characterizing
the activities of individual cells within populations, instrumentation will be
acquired to isolate and characterize cells from surrounding tissues or cellular
communities. The laser capture microdissection microscope allows the excision of
biological samples on the scale of an individual cell without damage to the cell
or to the surrounding population. The DNA microarray instrumentation, allows the
study of gene expression patterns of these isolated cells. Therefore, the
combination of these two instruments will allow investigators at MSU to gain a
better understanding of gene expression processes that occur on spatially
localized populations of cells, without the need for sample homogenization.
These studies will enhance the understanding of how cells differentiate into
multicellular organisms, and how single-cell organisms respond to and impact the
surrounding environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant proposal represented
the collective efforts of ten researchers at Montana State University, and the
grant will have a positive impact on their research programs. In particular, the
instrumentation provided here will be used for two main research endeavors that
include: (I) the study of the physiology and ecology of microorganisms, and (II)
the study of developmental biology and neurobiology. In the microbial ecology
studies, the instruments will be used for research projects including (i)
characterization of gene expression patterns in bacterial communities, known as
biofilms, (ii) characterization of gene expression in response to toxic metals,
and in the geochemical cycling of metals, and (iii) characterization of
microbial ecotypes in hot-spring microbial mat communities. In the developmental
biology studies, investigators will focus on experiments including (i) processes
involved in the development of the central nervous system, and (ii) gene
expression during the repair of damaged nerve cells. In addition to the benefit
to research at MSU, this instrumentation will enhance undergraduate, graduate
and minority educational programs. In the scientific disciplines, MSU has a
hands-on undergraduate educational program. Most junior and senior undergraduate
students in the science departments perform independent research projects that
contribute to their undergraduate thesis work. By enhancing the infrastructure
at MSU, this grant will provide these students with the opportunity to use state
of the art instrumentation, that will become an integral component for their
future careers in the biological sciences. Graduate students will also be able
to enhance their Ph.D. thesis studies through the use of this
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will provide outreach to the
community primarily through the Montana BRIN program, designed to attract Native
American students from Montana's tribal colleges to scientific disciplines. BRIN
concentrates on mentoring tribal college faculty and students on the MSU campus,
and includes summer undergraduate research programs for these students and
faculty. The grant provided here will allow these students to become familiar
with state-of-the-art instrumentation used in modern academic and industrial
laboratories. This grant will also have a broad impact of scientific importance.
Recent advances in DNA sequencing technology have provided a tremendous amount
of genome sequence information of organisms from all domains of life. Presently,
one of the main goals in the biological sciences, is to begin characterizing the
activities of these genes, many of which have not yet been assigned a specific
function. By characterizing gene expression events that occur in situ or in
vivo, it will now be possible to develop new hypotheses on the role of these
genes, and how these genes enable an organism (or cell) to thrive in its
particular ecological niche.&lt;br/&gt;