* 0321318
* Collaborative Research: Development of a Phase Doppler Interferometer for Characterization of Particle-Turbulence Interactions in Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Patrick Chuang, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2007
* USD 256,216.00

This grant supports the development of a phase Doppler interferometer (PDI) to
observe the interaction of fine-scale turbulence and droplets in clouds. The
scientific goal is to evaluate the extent to which turbulence influences
collisions and coalescence, the processes whereby cloud droplets can interact
with each other and grow to produce rain. Phase Doppler interferometry is an
optical technique for measuring both the size of individual particles in the
small volume defined by the intersection of two laser beams and the velocity of
the particles relative to the instrument. The PI will work with Dr. Raymond Shaw
of Michigan Technological University and Dr. William Bachalo of Artium
Technologies to design and build a PDI especially suited for measuring cloud
droplets. The plan is to develop an instrument capable of measuring the size,
velocity, and spacing between droplets with diameters between 2 and 200
micrometers. Special attention will be given to problems common to optical
detection devices, such as coincidence errors and the dependence of the volume
sampled on the drop size. Testing the instrument in laboratory conditions, using
existing wind tunnels and cloud chambers, will be an important part of
validating its performance. Although the ultimate goal is to mount the PDI in an
airplane for in-cloud measurements, the investigators will carry out initial
experiments on laboratory clouds and in field deployments on towers or suspended
from tethered balloons. There has long been speculation about the possible
effects of turbulence on the collision-coalescence process of rain production.
This instrument will fill an important gap in knowledge by actually observing
the turbulent motions of cloud droplets at the small scales relevant for the
process.