* 0321911
* Bayesian Rectification of Nonlinear Dynamic Chemical Process Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2008
* Bhavik Bakshi, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/2008
* USD 430,121.00

Research: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data rectification or estimation is the task of
cleaning measured data and estimating unknown variables and parameters. Accurate
and fast rectification is essential for efficient operation of chemical
processes since many tasks including model predictive control, fault detection
and diagnosis, and process optimization, utilize rectified or estimated
quantities. All methods rely on simplifying assumptions to obtain a
computationally tractable problem. However, most assumptions of existing
Nonlinear Dynamic Data Rectification (NDDR) methods such as the distributions
being of a fixed shape, are usually incorrect. This deteriorates the accuracy
and efficiency of rectification. Determining the optimal solution without such
assumptions has not been practically feasible due to formidable computational
challenges. Recent advances at the interface of statistical physics and Bayesian
statistics, combined with increasing computational power are driving a
resurgence in the development and use of Bayesian methods for solving complex
stochastic problems. This research aims to utilize these new tools to develop a
novel and statistically rigorous approach for NDDR of chemical process
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike existing methods, this approach does not
impose a pre-determined shape on the probability distributions, but allows them
to adapt according to the system dynamics, constraints, and measurements. Such
flexibility is obtained by using Sequential Monte Carlo Sampling (SMCS) methods.
The resulting approach is recursive, and does not require nonlinear programming.
Consequently, the method is expected to provide better accuracy and computation
speed than existing NDDR methods. The collaboration between chemical engineering
and statistics is expected to advance the theory and practice of Bayesian NDDR
by addressing a variety of practical situations. These include rectification
with fully or partially-specified models, simultaneous dynamic modeling and
rectification, imposing constraints, handling non-Gaussian errors, and
estimating unknown quantities such as bias, noise, and model parameters.
Theoretical properties such as convergence, effect of number of samples on
accuracy, and effect of the selected importance function will also be studied.
The resulting methods will be applied to case studies of varying complexity from
the literature and from industrial collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To encourage the use of Bayesian methods in
chemical process operation and control, appropriate educational tutorials and
software will be developed and widely disseminated. The results of this work
will be incorporated in courses in statistics and chemical engineering. Short
courses for industry will also be developed. Successful completion of these
activities is expected to result in original contributions that address critical
needs identified in the Vision 2020 report for the U.S. chemical industry and an
NSF workshop on process control. The work is also expected to have a broader
impact on U.S. manufacturing processes by improving their efficiency and global
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;