* 0321595
* Functional Analyses of Genes Involved in Meristem Organization and Leaf Initiation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Patrick Schnable, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* TEST user
* 08/31/2006
* USD 3,939,129.00

All above ground organs of higher plants are ultimately derived from specialized
organogenic structures called shoot apical meristems (SAMs). The SAM exhibits
distinctive structural organization, marked by tissue zonation and cell
layering. The structure of plant SAMs is correlated with their function, such
that new leaves are initiated from the peripheral zone of the SAM and the
central zone replenishes new meristematic cells that are lost during
organogenesis. Establishment and maintenance of these structurally and
functionally distinct zones of the SAM is achieved by differential expression
patterns and interactions of thousands of plant genes. Breakthrough technologies
have emerged that enable the identification and analysis of genes required for
meristem function in maize. Laser dissection microscopy (LCM) is a powerful
technique that permits the isolation of RNA from specific cell types within
fixed plant tissues immobilized on slides. RNA collected from 1,000-10,000 cells
is sufficient for use in microarray analyses of gene expression, which permit
the simultaneous examination of expression profiles of 15,000 to 30,000 genes.
The relatively large size of the maize vegetative meristem, approximately 250
meristematic cells are recruited into the incipient maize leaf, renders this
plant especially tractable for this experimental system. The laser-capture
microdissection/microarray technique will be used to capture cells from specific
domains of the maize meristem and newly formed leaf primordia for use in
comparative analyses of global gene expression. The differential expression
patterns of candidate genes will be verified by more traditional analyses (RT-
PCR, RNA gel blot hybridization and in situ hybridization) of transcript
accumulation in maize tissues. These experiments will microdissect gene
expression patterns in meristems and leaf primordia, and will provide novel
insight into mechanisms of plant development. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research project will generate the following set of deliverables:&lt;br/&gt;1.
LCM will be optimized and improved for use on maize SAMs. Information will be
available on a project web site at ISU and in publications.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Microarray profiles of global gene expression in the SAM will be deposited in
public web sites, maizeGDB. &lt;br/&gt;3. An EST collection from meristem-
enriched cDNA library will be developed beginning in the second year of the
project, depending on need. If developed, all EST sequences will be deposited in
Genbank and in maizeGDB.&lt;br/&gt;4. Sequence generated by students mining for
maize equivalents to already known genes from other plants will be sent directly
to Genbank and maizeGDB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outreach and training will be
enhanced in three ways:&lt;br/&gt;1. Undergraduate students from Truman State
University will engage in cutting edge genomics research. &lt;br/&gt;2. PI
Scanlon will deliver guest lectures at local high schools with predominantly
minority enrollment. &lt;br/&gt;3. The University of Georgia and the CSHL Dolan
DNA Learning Center (DNALC) will train teachers from underrepresented minority
high schools and university settings in plant genomics and
bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;