* 0321397
* MRI/RUI: 32-processor Beowulf cluster for the application of ab initio and density functional methods to Quantitative Structure Thermodynamic Relationships
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* David Magers, Mississippi College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 79,275.00

A grant has been awarded to Mississippi College (MC) under the direction of Dr.
David Magers for the acquisition of a 32-processor Beowulf cluster and
integrated parallel computational chemistry software for the calculation of
conformational energetics and molecular parameters of a series of biologically
significant molecules. All biochemical reactions require the formation of stable
complexes between the molecular participants. Thoroughly understanding the
physical basis for the recognition of small molecules by protein and nucleic
acid targets requires a detailed knowledge of both molecular structure as well
as the thermodynamics which describe the strength of the binding interactions.
It is well recognized that the structures of the reactants and the solvent
dictate these binding energetics. However, it is still not possible to predict
precisely the binding affinity of small molecules to their cognate protein or
nucleic acid targets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the advance of multi-processor
computers running in parallel, it is now possible to treat small molecules
rigorously by density functional theory and ab initio methods. Specifically, the
Beowulf cluster and integrated software acquired through the grant will be used
to examine the quantitative relationships that exist between the structure and
the binding thermodynamics of a small library of novel naphthylquinolines that
specifically recognize triple helical DNA structures. These structures such as
H-DNA are currently thought to help regulate gene expression since they have
been found to occur in the promoter regions of some mammalian genes. High level
quantum mechanical calculations will be used to predict the molecular properties
of these naphthylquinolines and then to correlate them to experimentally
determined binding energetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Committee on
Professional Training of the American Chemical Society, which sets the
guidelines for accredited undergraduate chemistry programs recently announced
updated guidelines recognizing the increasing importance of computers in
chemistry. Computational laboratory assignments have already been added to
several courses at MC, and the third semester course in Physical Chemistry is
designed exclusively around theoretical and computational chemistry. The new
computer will have a direct impact on the computer assignments in these courses
allowing larger and biologically relevant systems to be investigated. Finally,
the Beowulf cluster will increase MC's overall research infrastructure and
broaden the possibilities for collaboration with nearby colleges and
universities.&lt;br/&gt;