* 0321672
* Dispersion of Pseudomonas Aeruginosa Biofilms
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2003,12/31/2006
* David Davies, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 12/31/2006
* USD 150,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. David Davies of the State University of New York
at Binghamton to isolate, identify and characterize a factor responsible for
inducing autodispersion of Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms. In nature, bacteria
such as P. aeruginosa often grow attached to surfaces rather than suspended in
liquid (such as in a laboratory culture broth in a test tube). Surface-attached
bacterial growth is known as a biofilm. The goal of the proposed work is to
characterize biofilm autodispersion in order to develop novel methods for the
control of bacterial biofilms. The dispersion inducing factor will be isolated
from spent culture medium by solvent extraction and purified by chromatography
followed by standard structural chemical analysis. This analysis will include
infrared spectroscopy for functional group identification, mass spectrometry and
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The isolated factor will be tested to
determine its effectiveness as a dispersion inducer throughout each stage of the
isolation process. Isolated fractions containing the inducer compound(s) will be
added to simulated biofilms using a rapid screening technique and these will be
verified in tests with continuous culture biofilm populations. This work will
incorporate undergraduate student research participation during the academic
year and summer term. Student training in the departments of chemistry and
biology will include laboratory sections on spectral identification of factors
in spent medium and antibiotic efficacy testing of dispersion induced and non-
induced bacterial biofilms.

Microbial biofilms in infections and in industrial systems present significant
problems due to their resistance to treatment by microbicidal agents. This
resistance is due in large part to the aggregated nature of cells in biofilms.
It has been discovered in Dr. Davies' laboratory that cell-free spent medium
recovered from high cell density cultures of P. aeruginosa is capable of
inducing biofilm autodispersion when added exogenously to growing biofilms. The
proposed work is expected to provide a novel approach to control biofilm
formation and persistence by P. aeruginosa and lead to the development of
strategies for enhanced biofilm control and removal in industrial, household and
medical applications.