* 0321592
* RUI: Understanding unconscious transference and improving lineup identification accuracy in adult and elderly witnesses
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* David Ross, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 07/31/2005
* USD 254,999.00

Unconscious transference occurs when an eyewitness misidentifies a familiar but
innocent person from a police lineup. This phenomenon has been studied with
young adult participants and with children ranging from 5-12 years of age. This
research project expands the work on this important topic by replicating the
aforementioned studies using middle-aged and elderly participants. The
intellectual merit of the proposal is addressed in the following ways. First,
these studies represent one of the first attempts to examine unconscious
transference in the elderly. The results from the elderly and adult samples are
compared with those obtained with the child and young adult samples. This
permits a unique developmental examination of unconscious transference, as well
as other memory phenomena, across the life span because the same methodology has
been used in each study. According to recent U.S. Census data, the elderly
population in the United States is steadily increasing. Moreover, based on U.S.
Bureau of Crime Statistics reports, the elderly are likely to be victims of
crimes where they would be called to provide eyewitness testimony. Specifically,
the elderly are very likely to be victims of crimes in which they see and/or
interact with the perpetrator. Thus, it is extremely important to determine the
factors that affect the accuracy of eyewitness judgments in older adults.
Second, these experiments are theoretically motivated to determine not only if
unconscious transference occurs, but also to identify the mechanism producing
the effect and whether it varies by the age of the witness. Third, the
researchers examine how to improve eyewitness identification accuracy in
general, and reduce unconscious transference, in particular, by providing the
witness with a lineup instruction that would help him or her identify the source
of the memory for the assailant. Fourth, the researchers examine whether the
participants demonstrate a "Pop Out" effect and reach their lineup decisions
faster (within a range of 10-12 seconds) and use an automatic process as
compared to inaccurate witnesses who use a slower, more deliberate process of
elimination procedure when making a lineup identification. Fifth, because the
researchers have included an array of recognition and meta-cognition measures,
they can explore other important memory issues that are related to unconscious
transference but which span beyond that topic as well. Consequently, the
proposed research addresses the broader impact criteria as it has theoretical
and applied importance. The results of this research provide a major
contribution to the literatures in human development, memory, and the law
because it investigates a variety of memory processes, as well as unconscious
transference, and provide empirically-derived suggestions on how to improve the
accuracy of eyewitness identifications.