* 0321789
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic Behavior of Slickensided Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* James Duncan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 02/28/2007
* USD 160,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;"Slickensides" are surfaces of weakness formed in stiff clays as a
result of large shear displacements - on the order of 50 mm to 250 mm -
concentrated on a discrete surface of sliding. Platy clay particles become
aligned parallel to the surface of sliding, resulting in the formation of a
smooth surface with shear strength that is much lower than the strength of the
adjacent clay through which the slickensided surface
forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of this low shear strength in comparison
with the adjacent clay, slickensided rupture surfaces are likely loci of
displacements during earthquakes. However, there have been no studies of the
behavior of slickensided surfaces when subjected to the rapid cyclic loading
that occurs during earthquakes. As a result, engineers must rely on assumption
and judgment when estimating strengths for seismic deformation analyses, and
these vary considerably among practicing engineers. For example, for one
particular project in northern California, the difference of opinion regarding
the shear strength that should be used resulted in recommendations for
stabilization of the slopes that differed in cost by a factor of ten. At
present, there is no way to determine whether one of these designs was
dangerously inadequate, or the other was wasteful
overkill.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research program
include opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to participate in
the laboratory experiments at Virginia Tech, and for freshman through senior-
level students to observe the centrifuge experiments at UC Davis, and to work as
assistants in preparing the centrifuge models. Both UC Davis and Virginia Tech
have very active programs to recruit minority students to participate in
research through the Minority Opportunities for Research in Engineering at UC
Davis, and the Office of Minority Engineering Programs and coalition with
Historically Black Colleges and Universities at Virginia Tech. The project also
involves an active collaboration with Dr. Binod Tiwari of Niigata University,
who has considerable experience in the types of experiments involved and will
spend time at Virginia Tech and UC Davis, which will help to establish closer
relationships between researchers in Japan and in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;