* 0321144
* Proposal for MRI/RUI funds to Acquire a Vacuum Annealing Oven for Advanced LIGO Test Masses and Mini-Cluster to Analyze Bilinear Noise in Initial LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Steven Penn, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 07/31/2005
* USD 80,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the acquisition of a moderately large vacuum
annealing oven to process pieces of fused silica and other materials considered
for use by the next generation of the Laser Interferometric Gravitational wave
Observatory (Advanced LIGO). This oven will allow research into the thermal and
mechanical noise of optical materials and coatings of a size appropriate for
Advanced LIGO. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The test masses for Advanced LIGO are to be
made from either sapphire or fused silica. Sapphire is mechanically superior
under most criteria but suffers from increased loss at low frequencies and, at
present, unacceptably high optical absorption. Fused silica has low absorption
and has a mechanical loss that, for suitably prepared samples, is below the
Advanced LIGO design limits. However, this low mechanical loss has never been
seen in large samples. The PI in collaboration with other LIGO scientists will
study loss mechanisms in fused silica in an effort to make large, low loss
optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LIGO and Advanced LIGO are designed to search for
gravitational waves whose direct detection would open a new window on some of
the universe's most violent events such as black hole collisions and supernova
explosions. The annealing oven will be used in research on the critical path to
the development of Advanced LIGO. Undergraduates will participate in the set up
and use of the annealing oven.