* 0321161
* Acquisition of a High Resolution, Magnetic Sector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) Facility for the University of Notre Dame.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Clive Neal, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2005
* USD 358,000.00

EAR-0321161&lt;br/&gt;Neal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Notre Dame
quadrupole ICP-MS has been in operation for 11 years and has developed a
reputation for excellence in trace element analysis of a variety of materials.
This proposal requests funds to upgrade this facility with the purchase a high-
resolution magnetic sector field ICP-MS (ELEMENT2), a 213 nm laser ablation
unit, an ion chromatograph, autosampling capabilities, a low flow sample
introduction apparatus, a dual alpha spectrometer, and HEPA-filtration of the
ICP exhaust so low-level radioactive samples can be analyzed. The new facility
will be overseen by a full time, university employed laboratory manager already
in place who has over 15 years of experience in ICP analytical techniques. The
new facility will significantly expand the research capabilities at Notre Dame,
in Indiana, and the surrounding states. The justification for this proposal is
that research projects being conducted have progressed to the point where the
analyses now required are beyond the capabilities of a quadrupole ICP-MS, the
266 nm laser ablation unit does not give accurate depth profiles (pits are not
flat bottomed) and pits smaller than ~25 micrometers are not possible, and there
is no capability for speciation or "low-flow" studies. Research projects waiting
to use the new facility include Stabilization of Actinide-Rich Radioactive
Waste, Phytoremediation of Actinides &amp; Sc, Chemical Inputs to Groundwater,
Platinum-Group Element (PGE) Pollution from Catalytic Converters, Lunar
Evolution, PGEs in Plume-Derived Basalts, Late Veneer Studies of the Terrestrial
Planets, Acid Mine Drainage, Geomicrobiology, Biogeochemical Weathering,
Bioavailability of Heavy Metals, Cancer Research, Toxic Metals in Dietary
Supplements/Herbal Medicines, Crystal Stratigraphy, Tectonothermal Evolution of
the SW Pacific, Element Mobility in Alpine Basins, and Speciation Studies. The
new facility will enhance the outreach efforts of the new Environmental
Molecular Science Institute at Notre Dame, which has initiated a minority summer
research program for high school juniors and a REU program for under-rep-
resented students. The relatively new graduate program in the geosciences (est.
1994) continues to grow and emphasis is placed upon getting graduate students to
make use of the new ICP-MS facility as part of their research. We plan to use
the old quadrupole ICP-MS as a teaching facility for undergraduate and graduate
students. Within 2-3 years, we hope to expand this to make the PQII the
cornerstone of a capstone analytical course for science and engineering majors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;