* 0321621
* Collaborative Research:  Neighborhood Choice, Environmental Justice, and Policy Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Spencer Banzhaf, Resources For the Future Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2006
* USD 138,393.00

The environmental justice movement interprets documented correlations between
pollution and low-income minority populations as evidence of environmental
racism. An alternative explanation is that, because of income constraints or
differential tastes for environmental quality, low-income minority households
accept poor environmental quality in exchange for lower housing costs. The
observed correlations may therefore reflect the income or taste differences
between white and minority populations. This study examines the locational
decisions of households, of different race, income, and housing tenure, based on
the air pollution, school quality, and racial make-up of different communities.
To do so, it builds on a spatial equilibrium framework, which explicitly models
the endogenous sorting of households, formation of communities of specific
types, and housing prices. The study will enable tests of migratory sorting
based on environmental quality, and, through simulations, infer the effects of
various public policies addressing environmental justice issues.

This research will further our understanding of the social interactions of race,
income, housing and public goods. It will also help design public policies to
help address the correlation between pollution and income or minority
populations. For instance, targeting improvements in environmental quality to
lower-income minority neighborhoods may result in an influx of higher income
households, driving up rents for the neighborhood's original inhabitants. In
such cases, higher-income households may ironically receive the bulk of
benefits-and low-income renter households may actually be made worse off. In
this case, broader-based policies may actually be more effective for helping the
poorer populations. Our research will help evaluate these and other policy
questions. Finally, by helping develop a modeling framework that simultaneously
studies migration, community formation, and housing prices, it will contribute
to a research method that can address related topics, including studies of
schooling, transportation, and local taxation.

