* 0321664
* Comparative Analysis of Legume Genome Evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Roger Innes, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/29/2008
* USD 2,702,543.00

In the U.S., soybean (Glycine max) is second only to corn in total acres planted
and is a primary source of proteins and oils for both animal and human
consumption. A major feature of the soybean genome is a duplication event
estimated to have occurred 9 million years ago. Similar polyploidization events
are believed to have occurred multiple times in the evolutionary history of
most, and perhaps all, flowering plants, and have lead to dramatic changes in
genome structure. Major questions regarding the process of genome restructuring
following polyploidization remain to be answered. Comparative genomic analyses
will be used to identify patterns of gene rearrangement associated with both old
(9 mya) and recent (&lt;50 kya) polyploidy events in the Glycine genus.
Specifically, an approximately 1 megabasepair interval from each of six legume
taxa will be sequenced, as will the duplicated regions in the polyploid members
(12 intervals in total). These taxa include two soybean cultivars, the closest
true diploid relative of soybean Teramnus labialus and a recent polyploidy
relative, Glycine tomentella G1188, that has twice as many chromosomes as
soybean. The genomic interval to be sequenced contains several commercially
important disease resistance (R) genes in soybean, and contains both rapidly
rearranging and relatively stable chromosomal blocks. These analyses will
address fundamental questions regarding genome evolution on both short
(&lt;100,000 years) and long (&gt;50 million years) time scales, as well as
questions regarding the evolution of R genes. This sequence collection will also
facilitate identification of conserved promoter elements and non-coding RNAs,
and well as commercially useful R genes. All sequence data, physical maps, and
analyses will be made publicly available through a project web-site. This
project will also generate new public software for phylogenetic analysis of
genome rearrangements, and bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) libraries of 5
legume species.&lt;br/&gt;The project will be linked to the educational and non-
science community via direct collaborations with two hands-on science museums in
Bloomington, Indiana and Blacksburg, Virginia, and by two high school outreach
programs at the University of Minnesota and Cornell University. Hands-on
activity kits will be developed that will be used for public events at museums,
and more importantly in K-12 classrooms. Classroom use will be promoted through
a series of teacher training workshops hosted at each museum. All kits will be
specifically designed to address state academic standards in science and will
teach principles in plant biology and evolution. &lt;br/&gt;