* 0321393
* MRI/RUI for Equipment Acquisition to Increase Network Engineering Laboratory Capacities for Hispanic Engineering Students
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Othoniel Rodriguez-Jimenez, Polytechnic University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,964.00

&lt;br/&gt;Impact: The Polytechnic University of Puerto Rico's MRI/RUI for
Equipment&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition to Increase Network Engineering Laboratory
Capacities for Hispanic Engineering&lt;br/&gt;Students will significantly impact
three institutional goals: (1) Improving access to and&lt;br/&gt;increasing the
use of modern research and research training instrumentation for our
Hispanic&lt;br/&gt;students and faculty in Computer Engineering; (2) lessening
the technological and research gap&lt;br/&gt;experienced by the institution's
1,330 Hispanic students in Electrical Engineering and directly&lt;br/&gt;over
300 Hispanic students studying Computer Engineering; and, (3) integrating
education and&lt;br/&gt;research in Computer Engineering. These three
institutional and departmental goals are&lt;br/&gt;consistent with the NSF-MRI
program and the RUI program. The Hispanic faculty to be&lt;br/&gt;impacted
includes 19 full-time EE faculty members and specifically 6 faculty members
in&lt;br/&gt;Computer Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;Research: The research activities
utilizing the Network Engineering Laboratory will be&lt;br/&gt;centered on Open
Learning Objects and Inner Metadata. These include the design of Open
LO&lt;br/&gt;(OLO), which is based on Open standards, mostly XML markup
languages and their related&lt;br/&gt;tools. It exposes an interface to export
the results of LO-to-Learner interaction, and for LO&lt;br/&gt;adaptation. Inner
Metadata is the collection of layered meta-data mechanisms that are used
to&lt;br/&gt;describe the OLOs, their adaptive features, and the Learner
interaction tracing. LO objects&lt;br/&gt;designed according to this
architecture still retain the encapsulation and modularity required
to&lt;br/&gt;abstract those implementation aspects of a LO that researchers can
investigate for future&lt;br/&gt;enhancement and growth, yet they provide a
systematic and consistent interface for extracting&lt;br/&gt;the results of the
interaction with the Learner and for LO adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
of the Proposed Activity: The proposed research project
advances&lt;br/&gt;knowledge and understanding within the field of Computer
Engineering and explores creative&lt;br/&gt;concepts. Several organizations most
notably the IEEE and the IMS Consortium, have proposed&lt;br/&gt;standards for
describing Learning Objects. While these efforts substantially advance the goals
of&lt;br/&gt;interoperability, they fall short at addressing the need for
accessibility to the internal composition&lt;br/&gt;of the Learning Objects
(LO). Under present standards, the LO remains an opaque entity
from&lt;br/&gt;which valuable information cannot be easily gleaned or harvested,
nor introduced or adapted.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of the Proposed Activity:
Research in this area will fully integrate&lt;br/&gt;education and research
activities by utilizing the IDEAL eLearning environment as a platform
to&lt;br/&gt;test and explore these and similar issues from a unique
perspective; that of a potentially very&lt;br/&gt;large learner pool as
available through the web. The research activities to be undertaken in
the&lt;br/&gt;enhanced Network Engineering Laboratory will equally serve to
expose PUPR to collaborate in&lt;br/&gt;Computer Engineering research with other
engineering colleges and universities in the United&lt;br/&gt;States.