* 0321724
* Techniques for Efficient Finishing and Physical Linkage of Gene-Enriched Shotgun Sequences
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Carol Soderlund, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,414,729.00

The overall goal of this proof-of-concept project is to develop genomic
resources for maize that will link together sequences available from other
ongoing projects (DBI-0221536 [PI: Schubert] and DBI-0211851 [PI: Messing]). The
maize genome is approximately 3,400 million base pairs (MB) in length, yet the
genes only cover about 150-450 MB or 20% of the genome. Preliminary results
indicate the remaining 80% of the genome comprises repetitive DNAs, much of
which is highly methylated. The genes are thought to be distributed as small
islands throughout the sea of repetitive DNA. Methods to isolate and sequence
the genes are currently being evaluated since it is not feasible or cost-
effective to tackle the whole genome at this time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first part of this project will use HypoMethylated Partial Restriction (HMPR)
libraries to bridge small methylated regions within genes that are lost in gene
enrichment methods that filter out repetitive DNA based on methylation. The HMPR
sequences could allow contiguous gene sequences to be assembled by bridging
these gaps. The second part of this project is to generate and sequence
Methylation Spanning Linker Libraries (MSLLs) that will provide a bridge over
the sea of methylated repetitive DNA from one gene island to the next. The HMPR
and MSLL library clones will be sequenced from both ends and the sequences
assembled with the available maize genomic sequence. The end results should
contribute to the development of a scaffold of gene-rich sequences positioned
across the maize genome map.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All sequence information will
be released immediately to GenBank. A web-based display will be created at
http://www.genome.arizona.edu to provide access to the project results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;