* 0321449
* High performance thermal profiling of photonic integrated circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Janice Hudgings, Mount Holyoke College
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

0321449&lt;br/&gt;Hudgings&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Just as the dramatic success of
ever more complex silicon integrated circuits has required the development of
strategies for detailed on-chip testing and wafer-scale probing, future progress
in complex photonic integrated circuits (PICs) will rely on the development of
non-invasive techniques for wafer-scale optical profiling of integrated
optoelectronics. This proposal is to develop thermoreflectance techniques that
will allow us unprecedented access into the propagation of light within complex
photonic circuits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop a thermal profiling
technique using thermoreflectance imaging in combination with a new total energy
balance model for external heat exchange that will enable non-contact, three-
dimensional thermal imaging with spatial resolution on the order of 100 nm, less
than 1 ms temporal resolution, and temperature resolution of 1-100 mK. This is
an order of magnitude better than commercial IR microscopes, and it is much
faster than liquid crystal thermometry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This state of the
art technique will enable the PI to achieve the following technological
advances: &lt;br/&gt;1) Noninvasive optical profiling of PICs, 2) Development of
a novel technique for extracting carrier temperature distribution from lattice
surface temperatures of optoelectronic devices, 3) Three-dimensional thermal
imaging, and 4) Measurement of thermal transients inside working optoelectronic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will significantly enhance the
infrastructure for research and education by creating a partnership between
Mount Holyoke College, a top-20 undergraduate liberal arts college for women and
MIT, one of the world's premier technical universities. Furthermore, the
proposal integrates research with education at all levels of study: over the
duration of the three year research plan, 6-8 undergraduate women students from
Mount Holyoke will work on this project, in collaboration with a graduate
student from MIT. Mt Holyoke places a particular premium on the integration of
cutting-edge research into the education of the next generation of women
scientists and engineers, so undergraduates will be heavily involved in all
aspects the proposed research. Finally, because Mt Holyoke is a women's college
with an unusually diverse student body, the proposed research comprises a
remarkable opportunity to broaden the participation of underrepresented students
in science.&lt;br/&gt;