* 0321170
* Development  of a low-cost 64 bit cluster supercomputer for engineering and physics simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Thomas Hauser, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 08/31/2006
* USD 158,877.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No. CTS-0321170&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: J. T. Hauser, Utah State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
grant focuses on combining two leading-edge technologies, dual-processor
AMD&lt;br/&gt;Opteron systems and Flat Neighborhood Networks (FNNs) based on
Gigabit Ethernet, to develop a uniquely designed cluster supercomputer. In
addition to providing a 64-bit memory address space, the Opteron uses a new
memory architecture that should avoid the memory performance degradation
normally associated with shared-memory multiprocessors. Similarly, using a FNN
interconnection pattern makes it possible to achieve single-switch latency
despite having more nodes than a low-cost network switch has ports. FNNs also
provide the possibility to optimize the networking characteristics toward the
communication patterns of applications running on the proposed cluster
supercomputer. This project will provide a low-cost alternative to commercially
available high performance cluster networking solutions such as Myrinet and
Quadrics. The software to design and optimize such a network will be made
available for free, so that other research groups can design and build their own
cluster with FNNs. The proposed system will also provide valuable insight in the
performance of a newly designed memory system for large applications compared to
other available memory system designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research to be
conducted includes computational fluid dynamics, ecohydraulics, fusion plasmas,
geophysical fluid dynamics and computational chemistry. To meet the rising
demand for students skilled in high-performance computing, the College of
Engineering will introduce a course in parallel computing for engineering
applications targeted at senior level undergraduate and beginning graduate
students. This course as well as a one-week workshop on cluster computing will
also be open to students in mathematics, physics, chemistry and computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the proposed cluster supercomputer
will enhance current relationships with nearby national laboratories such as the
Idaho National Engineering and Environmental Laboratory (INEEL). USU faculty and
graduate students are developing very computationally intensive CFD models in
conjunction with INEEL engineers. The visibility arising from this cooperative
effort will further enhance the goal of attracting more students and
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;