* 0321376
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Confocal Microscopy for Life Science Research and Cal State Fullerton
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Robert Koch, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 07/31/2006
* USD 394,094.00

A grant has been awarded to California State University, Fullerton under the
direction of Dr. Robert Koch to bring confocal microscopy to the research and
research training activities of the life sciences faculty in the Departments of
Biological Science and Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry at Cal State Fullerton. This
acquisition will bring the fundamental research tool of confocal scanning laser
microscopy to the study of cell function by the faculty and students at Cal
State Fullerton in keeping with its serious commitment to research and research
training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The establishment of the Confocal Microscopy
Laboratory will advance the collaborative research of faculty with their
students in fields like cell biology with the study of cell signaling and
cytoskeletal reorganization in ascidian sperm cells, neurobiology with the study
of nicotinic acetylcholine receptor diversity in molluscan neurons, molecular
microbiology with the study of mechanisms for bacterial resistance to
antibiotics, developmental biology with the study of muscle development in
nematodes, biochemistry with the study copper and iron transport in intestine
and mammary glands, biology of aging with the study of superoxide dismutase
expression in nematodes, comparative physiology with the study of muscle fiber
development and endothermy in fishes, and physiological ecology with the study
of gut structure in carnivorous and herbivorous fishes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new research programs made possible by this grant will
benefit all students, but, because Cal State Fullerton is a Hispanic serving
institution, it will have a particularly important impact on minority student
research training programs like Minority Access to Research Careers, Initiative
for Minority Student Development, Minority International Research Travel,
Bridges-to-the-Doctorate, McNair Scholars, or Undergraduate Mentorship in
Environmental Biology where as many as forty minority students per year will
have access to the new instrumentation. This grant has the potential to impact
more than 600 students per year who go through undergraduate and masters level
curricula in the two departments involved. Thus, the establishment of the
Confocal Microscopy Laboratory will have a tremendous influence on research and
research training activities as well as on the overall educational experience in
the life sciences at Cal State Fullerton.&lt;br/&gt;