* 0321567
* Workshop: The Roles of Mathematics and Computation in Systems and Integrative Biology, USU Campus, Logan, Utah, Spring 2003
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* James Powell, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 03/31/2004
* USD 34,060.00

The Roles of Mathematics and Computation in Systems and Integrative
Biology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At both the large (population, community,
ecosystem) and small scales (chemical and chromosomal) quantitative techniques
are widely acknowledged to be useful in answering biological questions.
Arguably, these efforts have produced interesting mathematics, statistics, and
quantitative advances. However, at scales larger than DNA but smaller than
populations, the biological and mathematical communities have failed to take
full advantage of one another. In systems or integrative biology this failure is
particularly telling. Systems biology is primarily concerned with how biological
components interact to produce adaptive behavior at a larger scale of
integration. We interpret systems biology broadly to encompass areas such as
intracellular genetic and protein network dynamics during development,
integration of tissue responses to create dynamic homeostasis at the organism
level, the emergence of higher cognitive function from neural networks, as well
as the organization of social systems by the movement and interaction of
individual organisms. Such questions can clearly benefit from advances in
mathematical, statistical, computational, and engineering analysis. There are
several reasons for enhancing the mathematical and computational components of
systems biology. As a positive benefit, since there have been many scientific
payoffs in genomics, bioinformatics and environmental biology, which have
largely embraced quantitative methodology, it seems natural to investigate what
similar opportunities exist in systems biology and what key issues need to be
addressed to achieve these opportunities. A second reason is that the increased
successful emphasis on mathematical and computational approaches in competing
disciplines such as medicine, genomics, and proteomics, will reduce funding
opportunities for systems biology if it does not also embrace these analytical
methods. An opportunity for deeper understanding of integrated living systems
may be lost if we fail to exploit advances in the mathematical and computational
sciences. We propose to organize a small workshop to help chart how
mathematical, statistical and computational methods are most likely to be useful
in integrative or systems biology, what stumbling blocks exist, and how to
motivate increased utilization of quantitative methods and participation of
mathematical and computational specialists in biology at these neglected scales.
Through directed discussion among a group of leading researchers and educators,
the workshop will i) identify the most effective ways that quantitative analysis
can fundamentally enhance research and education in Integrative Biology, ii)
identify immediate and long-term educational needs [requirements] for developing
those multidisciplinary skills that will facilitate the future use of
quantitative approaches in Integrative Biology, and iii) outline goals and
strategies to support increased use of quantitative methods in systems biology
at these neglected scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What is the intellectual merit
of the proposed activity? The workshop is organized to address pressing
questions on the multidisciplinary use of quantitative methodologies in systems-
level biology: how may such approaches most fruitfully be used, are all the
keystone pieces in place for their use, and what technologies and training must
be developed to fully utilize these technologies? By examining these questions
and proposing answers it is hoped that the workshop will facilitate a whole new
vein of scientific breakthroughs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What are the broader
impacts of the proposed activity? Systems biology, by its nature, is integrative
and serves to increase understanding of relationships among smaller-scale
systems. Particularly when enhanced with models, such understandings tend to
systematize knowledge, therefore aiding with general instruction and education.
More specifically, one of the objectives of the workshop is to discuss what
training is necessary to facilitate advancing the role of mathematics and
computation in integrative biology. This is likely to involve educational issues
at all levels in all fields involved: biology, math, statistics, computer
science, and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;