* 0321267
* Acquisition of Proteomics Equipment for Research &amp; Training
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Mark Young, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2007
* USD 487,352.00

A grant has been awarded to Montana State University under the direction of Dr.
Edward Dratz from the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry for the
acquisition of proteomics equipment for research and training. The dawn of the
post-genomic era is leading to extraordinary opportunities and terrific
challenges for understanding fundamental processes in biology. A central
question is how the various gene products (primarily proteins) work together to
accomplish biological functions and allow the organisms to adapt to changing
circumstances. The genome of an organism is quite static (apart from rare
mutations), whereas the proteins expressed by the cells in organisms are highly
dynamic and change rapidly in response to stimuli. Proteomics is the study of
the proteins that are up- or down-regulated or changed in post-translational
modifications (PTMs) in response to biological or environmental stimuli. Typical
proteins may have many different PTMs, which usually affect the protein's
activity and/or cellular localization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ten groups of
investigators from five departments (Chemistry and Biochemistry, Plant Sciences,
Land Resources and Environment, Microbiology and Cell Biology and Neurosciences)
and the Center for Biofilm Engineering at Montana State University will make
heavy use of the proteomics equipment and proteomics training capability that
will be provided by this grant. The projects cut across many fields, including
adaptation of hyperthermophilic archaea to extreme environments, development of
new, ultrasensitive multiplex detection methods in functional proteomics,
mechanisms of biofilm formation in marine bacteria and regulatory pathways in
biofilm control, two different studies of neurodevelopment in chick and xenopus,
and mechanism of axonal sprouting in the rat brain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
crucial outcome from acquisition of the equipment and support is broad cross-
training opportunities for postdoctorals and for students at many levels in the
use of advanced proteomics methodology. Montana State University has a long
history of combining research and teaching and strongly integrating
undergraduate students into research laboratories during the academic year and
during the summer (with several REU Programs). Two of the REU programs are
designed to attract Native American students from Tribal Colleges in
Montana.&lt;br/&gt;