* 0322057
* Interacting Responses of C and N Cycles to Altered Biodiversity, Elevated CO2, and N Enrichment
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2009
* Peter Reich, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 11/30/2009
* USD 1,806,015.00

The proposed research addresses the integrated effects of several global change
factors on interactions among ecosystem processes in a temperate grassland
ecosystem. The complex interactions and feedbacks among organisms, various
chemical elements and the physical environment will be studied using the BioCON
controlled environment facility at the Cedar Creek Natural History Area,
Minnesota, where atmospheric CO2, nitrogen (N) deposition, and plant diversity
are simultaneously manipulated. The are to determine: (1) the interacting
effects of elevated CO2, N enrichment, and plant diversity on the dynamics of
coupled carbon-nitrogen cycles as they influence community and ecosystem
properties and processes, including primary productivity, plant composition,
carbon storage, and soil N dynamics; and (2) how these interactions are mediated
by microbial mutualists, pathogens, decomposers, and other taxa of the soil food
web. Hence the focus is explicitly on the interactions between plant and
microbial biodiversity and processes that influence ecosystem C and N cycling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research include the
fact that this will address issues of major importance to society regarding the
potential impacts of human activities on environmental processes at local to
global scales. BioCON will also enhance the infrastructure for research and
education, representing a unique facility open to and encouraging new
initiatives from interested scientists and students. Students will be from all
levels, undergraduate, graduate student, and postdoctoral researchers and
includes undergraduates summer internships. There are links to the University of
Wisconsin's Center of Excellence for Faculty and Undergraduate Student Research
Collaboration and the Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology Program
at Northern Arizona University that involves Native American and Hispanic
undergraduates. The project also will both build on and contribute to
ongoing&lt;br/&gt;partnerships with local public schools through the Cedar Creek
LTER Schoolyard program. Finally, the senior personnel include four women
(including three early-career scientists) and one minority.&lt;br/&gt;