* 0322974
* A Novel Approach to Fault Modeling, Diagnostics, and Prediction in Motor Drive Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Nabeel Demerdash, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 08/31/2007
* USD 358,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop novel and effective approaches to
modeling, diagnosing, and predicting faults in electric motor drive systems.
Such systems are used throughout industry. Failure of motor drive systems has
serious impact, including plant shutdown, negative environmental effects, and
worker endangerment. Accurate diagnostics and fault prediction will increase the
reliability of such systems and minimize the problem of failures in the field.
We address three fundamental problems in developing a motor drive diagnostic
system: 1. The difficulty and cost of obtaining large amounts of motor drive
field failure data. 2. The difficulty in developing accurate, specific, robust,
and fast diagnostic techniques. 3. The lack of methods for predicting future
motor drive failure. Thus, there are three primary objectives: 1. Generate large
datasets of high fidelity simulations, which requires significant advances in
the Time Stepping Coupled Finite Element-State Space techniques. 2. Develop
reconstructed phase space modeling techniques for characterizing motor drive
waveforms. The resulting models will form a comprehensive database for
diagnosing motor failures. 3. Develop methods to predict the onset of faults
through a novel system tracking approach based on Extended Kalman Filter banks.
The transition between incipient and full-fledged faults will be tracked and
predicted. With our industrial partner, Rockwell Automation, a sample of fault
simulations and fault signatures will be verified on actual motor drives. A
larger set will be verified using a configurable motor drive system. A prototype
diagnostic system will be developed and tested on a centrifugal pump test bed.