* 0322207
* Microgravity Transport Processes in Fluid, Thermal, Materials, and Biological Sciences Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Satwindar Sadhal, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 05/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

The proposal is to support the attendance and participation of young faculty,
postdoctoral researchers, and graduate students at the Microgravity Transport
Processes in Fluid, Thermal, Materials, and Biological Sciences Conference in
Davos, Switzerland, September 14-19, 2003. The purpose of this conference is to
bring together scientists in the thermal-fluid, materials and biological
sciences and provide a forum for the exchange of technical ideas, and explore
arenas of interdisciplinary research. The common thread in these different areas
of microgravity science is the important area of Transport Phenomena. The
expectation is that there will be identification of cross-disciplinary areas
where expertise can be shared and healthy new research programs may be
developed. The conference is organized so that there are no parallel sessions
and all attendees are expected to participate in the different sessions. Each
session will open with one invited keynote lecture followed by other papers. In
addition, time will be allocated for informal discussions on selected topics
that emerge at the conference. This conference has gained international exposure
and this aspect is being cultivated by setting up an organizing committee that
is made of scientists from United States, Europe, Russia, Italy, Japan and
Canada. The travel funds will be used exclusively to support untenured faculty,
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and under-represented minorities,
including women. &lt;br/&gt;