* 0322662
* Democracy and E-Rulemaking: Comparing Traditional vs. Electronic Comment from a Discursive Democratic Framework
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,03/31/2006
* David Schlosberg, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Priscilla Regan
* 03/31/2006
* USD 260,287.00

This research proposes to bring recent theoretical writings on democratic values
and processes to bear on the crafting of policy using the input of the public
via the Internet. Government agencies must now provide the opportunity for web-
based electronic public comment, to meet the notice and comment requirements of
the Administrative Procedures Act. This is a radical change in the way agencies
relate to the public, yet there is very little social science evaluating this
transformation. To date, the move to e-rulemaking has been justified using the
value of efficiency. The Administrative Procedures Act championed democratic
values such as the transparency of information, expanded public participation,
and the accountability of agencies; this project will explore precisely these
values in the context of e-rulemaking. The past decade of deliberative
democratic theory raised numerous issues regarding discourse, diversity,
respect, group life, and democratic authenticity. This research applies these
issues to the actual implementation of new forms of electronic public
participation. Specific questions include: Is electronic participation one-way,
or discursive? Given the digital divide, is participation more diverse or less
diverse than past forms of public comment? Are some types of comment (for
example, legalistic or scientific) more acceptable to agencies than others
(emotional or ideological)? Do those who engage in e-rulemaking commentary show
more respect for others' positions than those who use traditional modes of
comment? Do the preferences of citizens change as they are exposed to those of
others in online commenting? Is electronic participation group-based, or
isolating? Is participation authentic: does it have an actual effect on
rulemaking? Data will come from three different rulemaking cases, chosen for
both diversity and public interest in the issues. The project combines
qualitative and quantitative methodologies in examining the questions, using
qualitative textual data analysis of citizen comments, revised rules, interviews
with agency personnel, and a quantitative analysis of a telephone survey of
citizens who commented using both traditional and electronic formats. The
project findings will provide evidence as to whether current uses of the
Internet as a public participation mechanism are expanding democratic practice,
and so agency legitimacy, by implementing the values and practices of current
deliberative democratic theory. Given the absence of data on Internet-based
public participation in regulatory rulemaking, findings will help to guide the
ongoing development of e-rulemaking practices. They will provide key information
for agencies now required to bring e-rulemaking systems online, and provide
empirical data for deliberative democratic theorists on issues central to
current debates.