* 0322101
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Application of the Saturation- Based Controller to Self-Excited Oscillators and Systems with Limited Energy Sources
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Ali Nayfeh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2008
* USD 30,741.00

0322101 &lt;br/&gt;Nayfeh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
a cooperative research project between Professor Ali&lt;br/&gt;Nayfeh,
Department of Engineering Sciences and Mechanics, Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State University (Virginia Tech.), Blacksburg, Virginia and Dr. Ayman El-
Badawy, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Al-Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt.
They plan to study the suppression of the large-amplitude vibrations of self-
excited systems and systems with limited power supplies. The control strategy
will be based on the saturation phenomenon exhibited by multi-degree-of-freedom
systems with quadratic nonlinearities possessing a two-to-one autoparametric
resonance. The strategy consists of introducing a second-order controller, and
coupling it to the plant through a sensor and an actuator, where both the
feedback and control signals are quadratic. Therefore, the desired
nonlinearities can be introduced into the complete plant/control system even
when the plant does not exhibit any nonlinear behavior. When the plant is forced
near resonance, its response saturates at a small value, and the remaining
oscillatory energy is channeled and absorbed by the actuator. The investigators
will implement the technique by using a digital signal processing board and a
modeling software. They will develop an adaptive control strategy using an
effective frequency-tuning mechanism to maintain the two-to-one internal-
resonance condition. Adaptive control makes it possible for the system (or
structure) to adapt to a variable environment in the interest of continuously
optimizing its performance. The investigators will examine the use of a logic
gate with Schmitt-trigger action on the input to measure the system frequency
because of its accuracy and because it is immune to noise
disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project involves analytical and
experimental approaches, and combines the complementary expertise of the US and
Egyptian scientists. The self-excited oscillations are encountered in a number
of important engineering systems, and the suppression of these oscillations,
especially under the constraint of limited power supplies, is an important
problem. The development of the active nonlinear feedback control will have many
applications. The project will support an Egyptian scientist to work at Virginia
Tech and will include interaction of students at both universities. &lt;br/&gt;