* 0322720
* Growth and Characterization of Nitride Based Nanowire Heterostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Venkatesh Narayanamurti, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 07/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

Major advances in the physics and applications of semiconductors have been made
through structures with reduced dimensionality. Until recently, most of the
nanostructures studied relied on quantum wells and quantum dots, structures with
one and three-dimensional carrier confinement, respectively. Recent
demonstrations of new materials science and applications turned to the less
explored nanowires, structures with two-dimensional confinement. The field of
semiconductor nanowires appears to hold great promise of achieving functional
material structures at the nanoscale. Indeed, the ability to synthesize high
quality materials and our ability to determine their properties are improving
very fast. However, the electrical properties of nanowires are not yet well
understood and there is a great need for characterization methods capable of
evaluating single nanowires. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the semiconductors of
interest of the last few years has been GaN, a large bandgap material that
promises to extend the range of optical devices well into the visible. The
possibility of combining GaN, InN, and AlN into ternary and quaternary alloys
allows for the design and implementation of high performance heterostructure
devices. The absence of lattice matched substrates for the nitrides and the
large lattice constant differences between the binary compounds result in high
density of dislocations that impair performance of many devices. The presence of
dislocations also makes it difficult to determine fundamental properties of
these materials. Novel methods of preparing GaN and related heterostructures are
clearly needed. The vapor-liquid-solid growth offers a radically different route
to the formation of highly perfect nanowires of these semiconductors and their
heterostructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal we plan to synthesize
coaxial and longitudinal heterostructure nanowires based on GaN by vapor-liquid-
solid growth, and to use advanced scanning probe methods developed in the P.I.'s
lab to carry out electrical measurements on ensembles of nanowires and single
nanowires. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit The possibility of modifying
and adjusting properties of materials at a very fundamental level makes
nanotechnology attractive across a range of fields, from physics and chemistry
to biology. High quality nanostructures and nano-scale methods of evaluating
them are needed to determine and realize the full scope of this field. It is
also beginning to be clear that heterostructures, a key element in any device
applications of nanowires, must be synthesized and characterized with high level
of precision in order to understand their properties and device applications.
This proposal addresses the two key problems of the field of nanostructures;
advanced synthesis and sophisticated measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact This proposal addresses scientific and educational issues of current
interest to many disciplines. The project is interdisciplinary in nature and
combines fundamental physics and materials science with advanced engineering.
The combination is expected to provide excellent training for graduate students
and a post-doctoral associate. The PI has a strong commitment to enhancing
undergraduate education through research experiences and undergraduate students
will be encouraged to participate through a REU program. He currently has 2
undergraduates working in the area and a second year female graduate student
will be working on the project.&lt;br/&gt;