* 0322981
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Organizational Architecture and Institutional Context - An Investigation Using Indian Business Groups
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Raja Kali, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2006
* USD 25,000.00

Description: This award supports a US-India cooperative research project
entitled Organizational Architecture and Institutional Context- An Investigation
Using Indian Business Groups. US PI Raja Kali, University of Arkansas and
Professor Jayati Sarkar, Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research
(IGIDR), Mumbai will study Indian business organizations with particular
emphasis on governance of the business group. While business groups dominate
private-sector industrial activity in emerging/transition economies such as
Brazil, Chile, Hong Kong, India, and Indonesia; they are typically hybred
organizations that do not classify in standard ways as either firms or markets.
The objective of this research is to study the evolution of Indian business
groups and answer questions such as what determines the prevailing mode of
contractual governance, how does contractual governance affect the size and
scope of the organization, and what are the implications for economic growth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This research is driven by a need for greater
understanding of the institutional foundations of a smoothly functioning market
economy. During the past decade, emerging economies have exhibited persistent
difficulties in moving toward market-oriented systems of economic organization;
however, the research on the industrial organization of transition is sparse.
Both US and Indian investigators are well qualified to carry out this research,
the IGIDR is one of India's most advanced and well-equipped research institutes
for the social sciences with access to many of the most important national and
international databases for research on development. This research is mutually
beneficial; it includes graduate students on both sides and will strengthen
networks for further binational collaboration.