* 0322129
* Collaborative Research:  History of Cartography in the Twentieth Century
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Matthew Edney, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2008
* USD 221,111.00

Project Abstract SES 0322129 David A. Woodward, University of Wisconsin, Madison
"History of Cartography in the Twentieth Century"

This proposal requests support to complete Volume Six of the History of
Cartography, a 1,500-page, one million-word scholarly multi-level encyclopedia,
with roughly 900 entries prepared by some 150 researchers and approximately 800
illustrations. The research focuses on the history of mapping sciences and
technologies in the twentieth century. The mission of the History of Cartography
Project is twofold: to complete a standard, worldwide reference work on the
history of mapping in its technological, cultural, and social contexts; and to
make major philosophical and methodological statements about the motives for
making maps, the agents and processes used to make them, their functions, and
their role in forming society's views of space and place. Of the six projected
volumes, two have been completed (Volume Two was published as three books) and
Volume Three (one million words, 6,000 manuscript pages) was submitted to press
at the end of 2002. A proposal for Volume Four was submitted to the National
Endowment for the Humanities in July 2002, and plans for Volume Five will
follow. The encyclopedic approach for Volume Six will allow it to be compiled in
an efficient manner and will constitute a truly international effort. A
comprehensive, well-organized encyclopedia should not only stimulate research on
map history, but increase awareness of maps and geographic information among
geographers and historians of science and technology. Information in the book
will be easily searchable by the reader, both by headwords and the volume index,
and the extensive bibliography and suggestions for further research at the end
of each article will provide valuable signposts. The format will also lend
itself far more smoothly to electronic publication, a possibility that must be
anticipated. The research for Volume Six will capture and consolidate the key
technological transitions in cartography during the twentieth century. Although
these transitions, taken singly, are certainly not unique to mapping
technologies, it is difficult to imagine a more revealing platform on which to
illuminate the series of technological revolutions in information science: in
information gathering (surveying, GPS, air photography, remote sensing),
computer infrastructure and graphic design, and the access to geospatial
information (in map libraries, GIS clearinghouses, and digital libraries as well
as over the internet). Volume Six will document the most profound revolution
that cartography has experienced while firsthand sources are still available.
Its lasting impact will lie in the accuracy with which we document the
transition to electronic cartography and society's reaction to digital mapping
and geospatial data. Furthermore, the likely impact on research in the history
of science and technology should be substantially greater than for the other
volumes in the History series because of markedly stronger ties in the twentieth
century with science and engineering, increased involvement of cartographic
technology in public administration and warfare, and the far wider use of maps
by the media and the public.





