* 0322380
* Multidimensional Analysis of Quality of Life
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Thomas McDade, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2006
* USD 157,290.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Researchers in a wide range of academic and policy-oriented
fields have made progress in defining and measuring specific aspects of quality
of life (QOL). This research will develop an integrated index that captures
multiple dimensions of QOL. Further research in this area is important because
indigenous groups around the world are becoming increasingly incorporated into a
global economy, with implications for their cultural, psychological, and
physical well-being. This project will investigate these issues among the
Tsimane' of lowland Bolivia, an Amerindian population of foragers-
horticulturalists undergoing substantial cultural and economic transition. The
team of researchers will develop a culturally-specific measure of QOL using
cultural consensus methods from cognitive anthropology, and will integrate this
measure with other commonly applied indicators of quality of life, including
economic success, nutritional status, biomarker of psychological stress, into a
comprehensive, multi-dimensional, objective measure. In addition the researchers
will evaluate the relationship between subjective and objective measures of
quality of life.&lt;br/&gt;Data will be collected from individuals over 12 years
of age in 12 villages (N=600). Data will be collected over a two-year period.
The research uses tools from several sub-disciplines in anthropology, including
cultural consonance, or success in achieving locally-defined norms for a high-
quality lifestyle, economic variables such as income, consumption, and wealth,
short and long-term nutritional status, a physiological measure of psychological
stress, and a subjective measure of QOL developed for cross- cultural use by the
World Health Organization. A common metric will be employed in the construction
of a comprehensive, objective measure of QOL, and econometric models will be
used to explore the relationships between objective and subjective QOL, and its
individual, household, and village-level correlates. &lt;br/&gt;The research
will contribute a more comprehensive assessment of QOL that can inform scholarly
and public debate surrounding the local impact of global processes; will bridge
the Cartesian divide between objective and subjective states in anthropology;
and will provide the basis for an anthropological contribution that integrates
local cultural knowledge into QOL research. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the research include the establishment of a long term field site that will
provide training and mentored research experience for students from the U.S. and
from Bolivia. &lt;br/&gt;