* 0322022
* BE/CBC: Atmospheric Deposition, Transport, Transformations and Bioavailability of Mercury across a Northern Forest Landscape
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Charles Driscoll, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,868,830.00

This award investigates mercury cycling in a mercury-impacted lake in the
Adirondacks of New York, an acid-sensitive forested area with high
concentrations of mercury in fish relative to other lake districts in eastern
North America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental premise of this research is
that canopy processes enhance atmospheric mercury deposition to northern forest
ecosystems. The transport and transformation of mercury and the supply of methyl
mercury to aquatic biota is controlled by the pathway of deposition, redox-
controlled microbial transformations, and landscape characteristics (e.g.,
vegetation, wetlands, surface waters). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atmospheric
deposition of mercury to forest ecosystems is enhanced by processes within the
canopy. Mercury entering the forest floor, largely via throughfall and
litterfall, may be a factor of two or more greater than wet deposition.
Following deposition, mercury undergoes a series of complex pathways and
transformations, which interconnect with other element cycles and ultimately
control the supply of methyl mercury to aquatic biota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific objectives of this study of Biocomplexity in the Environment are to
quantify the inputs, transformations and losses of mercury species in an upland
northern hardwood forest; determine conditions controlling the complexation,
immobilization and net methylation of mercury; and assess the fate, transport
and bioavailability of atmospheric mercury deposition across the Adirondack
landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this project
addresses the cycling of mercury in the environment, an element identified as
being of risk to human health in certain concentrations and under certain
environmental conditions. The research will provide a unique learning experience
for undergraduate and graduate students supported by the research. Also, the
investigators envision a wide ranging educational public outreach effort that
takes advantage of a successful program being run in conjunction with the
Adirondack Ecological Center and the Adirondack Museum.