* 0322797
* NR: Practical Strategies using Smart Antennas for Mobile Ad Hoc Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Harish Sethu, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2007
* USD 299,989.00

This project will establish a novel, interdisciplinary framework for multiple
layers of smart antenna equipped mobile ad-hoc networks (MANETs). A smart
antenna system uses an antenna array with a digital signal-processing capability
to transmit and receive in an adaptive directional manner for reduced
interference and higher throughput. A smart antenna system also has the ability
to change its directionality in response to the environment. The main
contribution of this project will be in the design and simulation of practical
MANET systems making use of smart antennas. In particular, this research effort
will build a new model for MANET system study based upon thorough multi-layer
modeling of realistic system operation. While cross-layer optimizations have
been considered across higher-level layers (including the application layer),
little research effort has gone into optimizing the physical layer for improved
higher layer functionality. Meeting dynamic Quality of Service (QoS)
requirements in MANETs as well as increasing scalability, security, and energy
efficiency are recognized cross-layer MANET design issues that can be enabled by
the proposed research. Numerous theoretical developments in the area of
Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) systems provide an opportunity to
characterize MANETs in which nodes make use of smart antennas at both ends of
the communications link. Through this project, a relationship will be
established between antenna designs, antenna placements, scattering
environments, and MIMO channel capacities on MANET links in actual systems.
Space-time coding techniques and beamforming strategies will need to be coupled,
for the first time, with dynamic neighbor discovery algorithms to create and
maintain ad-hoc links in a dynamic propagation environment. The user density,
mobility, and channel characteristics unique to dense urban environments and
hybrid indoor/outdoor environments will be taken into account when designing
these MANET links. Finally, this project will develop novel routing algorithms
that will consider the unique requirements imposed, and the potential advantages
gained, by the use of smart antennas. The goals of this effort will include
stable routes as well as maximal sharing of routes amongst multiple sources for
increased computational efficiency and non-aligned directional paths for reduced
interference.