* 0322902
* The New York Research Data Center
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Neil Bennett, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Prop ID: 0322902 &lt;br/&gt;P I: Bennett, Neil G. et
al&lt;br/&gt;Organization:National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
&lt;br/&gt;Title: The New York Research Data Center &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award provides initial support for a consortium of thirteen universities and
research institutions to establish two new Research Data Centers (RDC) at Baruch
College of the City University of New York and at Cornell University. These RDCs
will enable social science researchers in the New York Region to analyze a wide
range of confidential Census Bureau data on firms and individuals without the
need to establish long-term, long-distance research operations in another city.
The New York RDCs are interdisciplinary in structure and conduct, and hosts
research emphasizing urban issues (such as housing and demographics) as well as
international concerns (including immigration and the impact of trade).
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Research Data Centers enable researchers to
analyze internal Census Bureau business data (such as the Longitudinal Research
Database and the Censuses of Manufactures and Services) and individual-level
data (including income data that are not top-coded, and geographic data down to
the block level). Notably, highly detailed data allow researchers to link
information across time and data sources. For example, RDC users can merge
business data with longitudinal geographic information, or combine data on
voting behavior with measures of individual economic well-being, or match
individual records across Decennial Censuses to further the understanding of
racial and ethnic identity. As these examples suggest, the New York RDC will
facilitate the conduct of research of significant scientific merit and policy
relevance. In addition, this research will fulfill the primary criterion for
RDC-related activity-namely, that all projects aid the Census Bureau in
improving the quality of either its data or its methods. The New York RDC' s
particular intellectual merits hinge on the breadth, depth, and strong policy
orientation of the intellectual community that it will serve. The
comprehensiveness, diversity, and caliber of the sponsoring Consortium suggest
that this RDC will be very active and productive. The various policy centers
represented in the Consortium also ensure that research will be policy-relevant.
Finally, the expected interdisciplinary focus on urban and international issues
will introduce the benefits of the RDC program into new research and policy
arenas. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The opportunity to conduct research at the
New York RDC will be especially advantageous to young scholars. The intensive
time investment required to master RDC data analysis suggests that payoffs will
be particularly high for RDC skills gained early in one's career. The value of
these skills and the research they promote are evidenced by the successful
careers of many former RDC research assistants at prestigious academic and
research institutions. Thus, a New York Research Data Center is likely to
specifically benefit research assistants and young scholars who pursue RDC
research. The high level of activity expected from the numerous Consortium
members indicates that the New York RDC is likely to become a major training
ground for empirical social scientists. These beneficiaries will be drawn
largely from the pool of staffs and students of Consortium members, which have
unusually high numbers of historically underrepresented groups, such as
minorities and women. Furthermore, the New York RDC has the strong potential to
provide a unique new forum to catalyze and promote collaborative,
interdisciplinary research among New York area social scientists. &lt;br/&gt;