* 0322611
* fMRI and DOI Investigations of Deception
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Giorgio Ganis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 12/31/2008
* USD 899,962.00

This project has three main goals. The first is to investigate the neural basis
of deception. This goal will be achieved by using established neuroimaging
technologies (fMRI), thus going beyond the traditional approaches based on the
measurement of peripheral variables such as skin conductance, which have not
proven highly valid. The second goal is to validate a novel taxonomy of lies
based on prior research conducted in the PI's laboratory. The idea of
subdividing lies into different categories and studying these categories
separately is a major conceptual advance in the study of deception because the
traditional approach has treated deception as a unitary phenomenon: either one
is lying or one is telling the truth. In the proposed taxonomy, lies are divided
according to two dimensions: 1) whether they are spontaneous or memorized in
advance, and 2) whether they are isolated (i.e., unrelated to each other) or fit
into a coherent story. The different types of lies are conceptualized in terms
of the cognitive processes they are likely to engage. One of the methodological
strengths of the proposed approach is that the brain regions supporting the
hypothesized cognitive processes engaged during the different types of lies will
be independently identified for each participant (by using a set of
"neurocognitive localizer" tasks). These additional data will provide important
constraints for the interpretation of the results in the deception conditions.
The third goal is to use the resulting knowledge to develop a new technology for
detecting the neural processes associated with different types of lies. This
technology is known as diffuse optical imaging (DOI), and relies on measuring
the absorption of near-infrared light in the cerebral cortex to track cortical
processes. Although in its infancy, DOI has the advantage of being relatively
inexpensive and portable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of the
brain processes that underlie deception can potentially benefit society in
several ways. First, it is likely to advance our knowledge (and consequently
collective awareness) of the limitations and potential of lie detection methods.
Second, the understanding gained in this work about the neural processes
underlying deception may lead to more effective lie detection methods; this
could be very important in forensic settings. Third, the development of an
affordable technology (DOI) that can be used to study the neural correlates of
deception could eventually revolutionize the field of lie
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will strengthen the collaboration
between researchers whose main area of expertise is cognitive neuroscience and
researchers whose expertise is in physics and engineering. Such collaborations
weaken traditional barriers between disciplines and allow scientists in training
(students, assistants, postdocs) to acquire a greater range of skills and
experience. The PI's lab has a long history of training scientists who have gone
on to make independent contributions, and that practice will be continued. This
project offers educational opportunities for students and junior researchers. On
the technical side, they will not only acquire training in fMRI, but also have
the unique opportunity to learn the novel DOI technology and participate in its
development at various levels; on the content side, these studies cut across
several lines of research that are often not integrated. In doing so, they
provide students and junior scientists with an unusual breadth as well as an
opportunity to learn to integrate what appear to be parallel research domains.
In order to disseminate the results of the research as broadly as possible,
significant findings will be reported primarily as journal articles, and
preliminary data will be discussed with other investigators at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;