* 0322925
* Gas Foil Bearings for Oil-Free Rotating Machinery - Analysis Anchored to Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Luis San Andres, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 05/31/2007
* USD 255,475.00

NSF PROPOSAL # 0322925&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GAS FOIL BEARINGS FOR OIL-FREE
ROTATING MACHINERY - ANALYSIS ANCHORED TO EXPERIMENTS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LUIS
SAN ANDRES&lt;br/&gt;TURBOMACHINERY LABORATORY&lt;br/&gt;MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
DEPARTMENT&lt;br/&gt;TEXAS A&amp;M UNIVERSITY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MAY 16,
2003&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Further advancements in
high performance turbomachinery operating at extreme temperatures mandate the
development of gas film bearings/seals with coatings (solid lubricants) to
procure compact units with improved efficiency in an oil-free environment. Gas
foil bearings (GFBs) operate best at high speeds and temperatures, yet are
limited in load capacity and prone to show rotordynamic instabilities. Current
analyses cannot estimate accurately rotor-GFBs dynamic forced performance, thus
resulting in extensive empirical developments. The absence of physical modeling
on the material coatings exacerbates this deficiency. Thus, each GFB is
essentially a custom piece of hardware, with resulting variability even in
identical units, and limited scalability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-year
research program will advance the technology by developing a comprehensive
computational model predicting the static and dynamic forced performance of
GFBs. The model will include thermo-elastic deformations of the foil and elastic
members (bump strips), including hysteresis-dry friction from coatings and local
contact zones. Exhaustive rotordynamic and materials tests with commercial GFBs
will validate the model, including the identification of rotordynamic force
coefficients and evaluation of coating endurance and
wear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses to the needs of 22 U.S.
turbomachinery manufacturers and users aiming to maintain their technological
advantage. The proposed work is a signature program of the Mechanical
Engineering department at Texas A&amp;M University and an integral part of the
recently established Mexican-American U.S. Latino Research Center (MALRC). The
interdisciplinary MALRC addresses to Hispanic issues in Texas, and through the
Turbomachinery Laboratory performs activities towards the recruitment and
retention of Hispanic students in engineering and training the future faculty
serving in Texas higher education institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visit the
following sites at Texas A&amp;M University for further
information:&lt;br/&gt;Rotordynamics Laboratory/Turbomachinery Laboratory
&lt;br/&gt;Mexican-American Latino Faculty
Association&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;