* 0322147
* Modeling, Analysis, and Control of Variation Propagation in Manufacturing Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Shiyu Zhou, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2007
* USD 181,610.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a methodology for modeling,
analysis, and control of variation propagation in complicated manufacturing
processes. Process variation and inconsistency are the major quality concerns in
a manufacturing process. For a complicated manufacturing process involving
multiple operation steps, the process variation at different steps will be
accumulated on the product and propagates along the process. This project aims
at developing a systematic methodology to describe and reduce the process
variation and hence improve the process quality. A quantitative variation
propagation model will be developed. Both analytical and empirical methods based
on product/process design and engineering knowledge are used to link the key
process variation sources and key product quality characteristics in this model.
This quantitative model allows system theory and advanced statistical techniques
(e.g., variance component analysis of linear mixed models) to be adopted in
order to conduct forward and backward analysis of variation propagation. The
forward analysis can identify important process stages and provide guidelines
for design improvement, while the backward analysis can quickly identify the
root causes of quality variations. The research results will be finally
validated in industrial settings.

If successful, this research project will contribute to the science base of
process control and quality improvement for manufacturing processes. Using the
developed methodology, vast amounts of information from product design, process
design, in-process sensing, and product quality inspection will be integrated
under a quantitative model. This integrated model lays a foundation to develop
effective techniques of variation propagation analysis and quick variation root
cause identification. Effective implementation of the developed methodology in
industry will provide a set of powerful tools for computer-aided product/process
design and process monitoring and diagnosis for variation reduction, and thus
provide a competitive boost to U.S. industry. The research accomplishments will
be transferred into undergraduate and graduate curricula as well, which will
generate long-term impact on the education of quality engineering and
manufacturing.