* 0322894
* US-Nigeria Cooperative Research:  Computational Intelligence Techniques for Reactive Power / Voltage Control of Large Power Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Ganesh Venayagamoorthy, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Patterson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 30,000.00

Venayamagoorthy&lt;br/&gt;0322894&lt;br/&gt;Around the world the demand for
electric power is dramatically outpacing available generation and transmission
resources. Furthermore, an increasing number of digital users require a higher
quality of electricity. Although a number of power system devices are now used
to minimize system losses and to improve voltage profiles of the power grid, the
response of these power system devices with the existing control is slower than
the rate at which changes in the system occur. In this joint project a U.S.
scientist from the University of Missouri-Rolla and two Nigerian scientists from
Abubakar Tafawa Balewa University will apply computational intelligent
techniques to improve the control response of these power system devices, thus
decreasing system losses and improving system voltage profiles at all times.
This project's research collaboration and educational cooperation will be
achieved via faculty and student exchanges between the U.S. and
Nigeria.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intelligent coordination of power system devices
can improve the quality of service, increase efficiency of the power
transmission system, and ultimately decrease the overall production cost. The
research findings will have broad application and will contribute to enhancing
the operation of electric utilities of both developing and developed countries.
&lt;br/&gt;