* 0322406
* US-Bangladash Workshop: Distributed Internet Infrastructures for Education and Research, December 2003, Dhaka, Bangladesh
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Saifur Rahman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 28,172.00

0322406&lt;br/&gt;Rahman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports a
U.S.-Bangladesh Workshop on Distributed Internet Infrastructure for Education
and Research, to be held in December 2003 in Dhaka, Bangladesh. The U.S.
organizer is Dr. Saifur Rahman, Department of Electrical Engineering, Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia. The Bangladesh
organizer is Dr. Siddique M. Kabir, Institute of Information and Communication
Technology, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, (BUET) Dhaka,
Bangladesh. The workshop agenda will cover the following subjects: Next
Generation Internet (NGI), Options for enhancing Internet facilities in
Bangladesh (and other developing countries), Collaborative Internet-based
education and research, Low-cost technologies and solutions for electric power
and telecommunications, Optimal investment on resources, Electronic village
concept, Electronic library and content management, and Adaptability with
emerging technologies. The proceedings will identify selected areas of high
priority, as well as provide a literature guide for cooperative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The workshop objectives are consistent
with the interests and priorities of the two countries. The U.S. delegation will
include scientists who are active in the field of computer and communications
research and in Internet development and applications.&lt;br/&gt;The eight U.S.
participants include at least one female scientist. The results of the workshop
will include identifying joint research topics of interest to the United States,
Bangladesh and other countries that are in developing Internet applications for
education and for research. This workshop is supported by the Office of
International Science and Engineering and the Division of Advanced Networking
Infrastructure and Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;