* 0322686
* US-Oman Cooperative Research:  Understanding Karstic Aquifers
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* David Loper, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 30,720.00

0322686 &lt;br/&gt;Loper&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports a
cooperative research project between Dr. David Loper, Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Institute at Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida and Dr. Mohammed Al-
Lawatia, Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Sultan Qaboos University, Al-
Khodh, Oman. They plan to study the behavior of water and pollutants in aquifers
by analyzing data on flow rates obtained from flow meters to be placed at
strategic locations within the conduit system of Wakulla Springs, Florida and by
cross-correlating this data with events which affect the flow, including tides,
atmospheric pressure variations and, most importantly, up-gradient rainfall. The
analyses will employ a number of statistical procedures and methods, including
Fourier and wavelet spectrum analyses and dynamic-regression and non-parametric
models. Additional insight will be sought by analyzing variations of flow,
temperature and electrical conductivity at those locations in the spring and
cross-correlating them with other relevant data such as water levels in streams
and wells within the watershed of the spring. The results of the statistical
analyses will provide the basis for the development of improved models of flow
and transport in karstic aquifers. The use of statistical analyses and cross-
correlations of relevant geophysical data to decipher the behavior of karstic
aquifers is a relatively new approach. The proposed study will expand on this
approach and endeavor to bring it into the mainstream of mathematical tools
available to geohydrologists &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The management of
underground water resources is a major societal challenge. Wise management must
be based on sound scientific understanding of the behavior of water and
pollutants in aquifers. This understanding is difficult to achieve in most
aquifers because they are inhomogeneous. The extreme of inhomogeneity occurs in
karstic aquifers. A prototype of a karstic aquifer is the Woodville Karst Plain
in Leon and Wakulla Counties of Florida. The statistical techniques to be
employed in this study have the potential to be powerful tools with which to
study complex geophysical systems. The scientific methodologies and
understanding developed in this study will be applicable to aquifers in other
geographical regions. In particular, the knowledge of the behavior of karstic
systems gained by the proposed study will benefit water managers in both the
United States and Oman. The two scientists have complementary skills. They will
exchange data and results applicable to the two countries. This project is
funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division
of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;