* 0322852
* Scientific Computing Research Environment for the Mathematical Sciences (SCREMS)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Traian Iliescu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2005
* USD 107,748.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Traian Iliescu&lt;br/&gt;Proposal:
0322852&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific computing equipment is being requested
for rapid solution of large eddy simulation (LES) models. In particular, the
investigators study improved boundary conditions for complex engineering flows
(one of the main hurdles in the development of LES). Current models suffer from
failure to correctly capture subfilter-scale motion in the regions where
boundary layer theory is not valid such as recirculation, separated flows, etc.
The initial approach is to use approximate deconvolution methods for partial
recovery of subfilter scale information. Additionally, the investigators intend
to study the role LES may play in the development of reduced-order modeling for
state estimation in feedback control. The ability for LES to compute large scale
structures efficiently and accurately could be important for the real-time state
estimation required for most flow control applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators intend to develop a scientific computing platform for addressing a
number of modeling issues (such as appropriate boundary conditions and
convolution kernels) for general three-dimensional turbulent flows. More
mathematically sound models will lead to better understanding of flow phenomena
such as density currents believed to have a significant influence on global
ocean models. Better models are also important for atmospheric models and other
geophysical flows. Furthermore, we intend to use this computational platform to
address a number of practical optimization and control issues such as the
optimal placement of control actuators and flow sensors, and the construction of
fast (i.e. near real-time) reduced-order models for fluid systems.&lt;br/&gt;