* 0322975
* Large-Scale Web Research Testbed
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Dan Boneh, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2006
* USD 439,828.00

This project, establishing a very large repository of current and historical Web
content, supports two group research efforts:&lt;br/&gt; Management of the Web
content and&lt;br/&gt; Analysis and mining of the content.&lt;br/&gt;The current
facilities have been instrumental in examining many aspects of the World Wide
Web (WWW). These aspects include experimentation toward understanding, optimally
utilizing, and improving the Web. The facility has enabled researchers to try
out various hypothesis and techniques for indexing and modeling WWW information.
The system's highly configurable crawlers collect a large number of Web pages,
storing them locally for testing novel algorithms, such as ranking, filtering,
or Web linkage mapping on the collection. The current WebBase is underpowered;
for example, the crawling speeds are limited by CPU performance (retrieved pages
are compressed before being stored), and often by virtual memory space. Removing
these two bottlenecks will enable sustaining a higher Web sample rate and
covering larger areas of the Web. An upgraded testbed, developed by scaling up
in size and processing speed of the current hardware facilities of an existing
system called WebBase, will be used to study and evaluate different Web
crawling, archive refreshing, data compression, and storage and indexing
techniques. Moreover, the project investigates problems related to data
extraction, semantic search, searching for non-text objects, access control,
cross-temporal analysis, and mining patterns or relationships between entities.
Problems to be addressed include: How to&lt;br/&gt; Collect ever-growing amount
of Web data, and keep it up to date,&lt;br/&gt; Provide improved search
capabilities over such data, better exploiting the semantics of data and user
requests,&lt;br/&gt; Efficiently process high-volume real-time data streams,
&lt;br/&gt; Organize a Web archive that captures the "history" of the Web,
and&lt;br/&gt; Deal with new types of sources (e.g., the hidden web or chat
rooms) and new types of data (e.g., images).&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the new
WebBase facility will support teaching at various universities by providing a
testbed where the students can develop new searching, indexing, and user
presentation ideas. WebBase draws together faculty in the areas of data mining,
security, natural language processing, and database systems; consequently, the
areas enhance each other. Thus, the infrastructure will support: &lt;br/&gt;
Experimental research in a critical area: management and exploration of Web
information;&lt;br/&gt; Researchers at institutions that do not have sufficient
facilities for large-scale Web crawling; and&lt;br/&gt; Teaching of courses on
information retrieval and data mining.&lt;br/&gt;