* 0322146
* Risk-Based Methodological Framework for Scenario Tracking and Intelligence Collection and Analysis for Terrorism
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* John Monahan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 473,399.00

Disruption of a terrorist attack depends on having information facilitating the
identification and location of those involved in supporting, planning, and
carrying out the attack. Such information arises from myriad sources such as
human or instrument surveillance by intelligence or law enforcement agencies, a
variety of databases and documents concerning transactions, and tips from a wide
range of occasional observers. Given the enormous amount of information
available, a method is needed to cull and analyze only the data relevant to the
task, confirm its validity and eliminate the rest. This method must help to link
separately obtained information about potential attackers, targets and methods
of attack in a fashion that helps an analyst team to discover an otherwise
unknown attack in preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal has the major
premise that in planning, supporting, and carrying out a terrorist plot, those
involved will conduct a series of related activities for which there may be some
observables and other acquirable evidence. Those activities taken together
constitute a threat scenario. Information consistent with a realistic threat
scenario may be useful in thwarting an impending attack. Thus, the methodology
requires a comprehensive set of realistic threat scenarios that would form a
framework for collection and analysis of information. It also requires a process
for judging the validity and usefulness of such information. The key questions
for the proposed research are: how to produce a comprehensive set of threat
scenarios; how to winnow that to the set of most likely scenarios; what
supplementary intelligence is worth pursuing; how to judge the relevance of
available information; and how to validate and analyze the
information.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A key element in the research is the
application of Hierarchical Holographic Modeling (HHM). HHM is a methodology
developed to support risk analysis. It provides a means for a team of analysts
to evaluate a risky situation from a multitude of perspectives. In this research
effort, HHM is used to identify target attributes that can guide the selection
of a method of attack and target related people (e.g., employees at the targeted
location) that can possibly contribute to an attack. This information can be
used to start establishing other attack related linkages between methods, people
and targets. If these attack related linkages are unusual, they can provide a
sound basis for stimulating more concentrated efforts to intercept the potential
attack. HHM requires a multi-dimensional evaluation of target vulnerabilities
that provide attackers with the opportunity to be successful. The results of
this project should provide useful insights about how to anticipate and more
readily discover terrorist attacks in the planning phase. In addition the
research will explore approaches for implementing its results into existing
information system efforts related to countering terrorism.&lt;br/&gt;