* 0322240
* The Development of Knowledge Capabilities under Conditions of Novelty:  The Case of Alliance Management in the Life Sciences Industry
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Charles Dhanaraj, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 08/31/2006
* USD 248,179.00

Industries requiring the development of innovations, such as pharmaceuticals,
rely on alliances to speed up theses processes. Increasingly, practitioners and
researchers realize that cooperative relationships provide not only access to
new markets and technologies, but also provide opportunities to extend their
capabilities and knowledge. A learning perspective is particularly germane for
explaining the choices made in managing alliances and builds on theories of
knowledge creation, retention, adaptation and transfer. Since each alliance is
unique and requires an individual assessment, this is learning under conditions
of novelty. We build on research addressing the impact of the parent firms, the
processes, and structures on knowledge acquisition and alliance
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following are research questions: What is the
impact on firm capabilities of building alliance management know-how for
achieving its goals and how is this adapted over time? At the alliance level, do
parent commitment and investment in a formal Alliance Management Process (AMP)
improve alliance success? Does AMP enhance or impede the knowledge transfer and
acquisition process? How do corporate expectations of alliance performance
impact resource commitment and alliance success?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We address
the development of dynamic learning capabilities within a pharmaceutical though
the context of a formal AMP. We will assess how alliance know-how is stored and
adapted based on past experiences and the dynamic nature of alliances. We are
interested in how this knowledge builds alliance and innovative capabilities
over time. Second, we investigate factors that impact alliance success and
knowledge development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be accomplished in three
phases: (1) Studying the development of knowledge over time within the AMP; (2)
two year assessment of the utilization of knowledge and the implications of AMP
on the development and commercialization of new drugs in forty alliances; (3)
Primary data from 120 alliances addressing knowledge development and alliance
effectiveness triangulated with data from a secondary
database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;