* 0322526
* Technology Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Ryan Brovold, St. Cloud Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2007
* USD 206,248.00

&lt;br/&gt; Fifteen low-income students receive scholarships of up to $3125 per
year and support services to assist them in the successful completion of a
degree in Microcomputer Support and Network Administration, Computer Programmer,
Microcomputer Programmer, Land Surveying / Civil Engineering,
Architectural&lt;br/&gt;Construction Technology, Computer Aided Drafting and
Design, Machine Tool Technology, Industrial Electronics Technology, or
Instrumentation and Process Technology. Recruitment and retention are the
primary strategies. Admissions staff promotes the CSEMS program to internal and
external populations using a variety of recruitment techniques and Financial Aid
verifies eligibility. Minority groups and women are specifically targeted. The
Placement Office assists all students in finding jobs. Upon graduation, CSEMS
scholars take their place among professionals advancing the field of knowledge.
The project includes a special Student Services Support Task Force, as well as,
faculty and industry mentorship. The college commits faculty, student service
staff, and administrative resources to insure successful implementation of the
grant. CSEMS scholars are involved in hands-on learning, including industry-
based projects, and other experiential learning. Results of the CSEMS project
are disseminated to other Minnesota schools through workshops, presentations at
conferences and through a website posting.&lt;br/&gt;