* 0322752
* Scientific Record Keeping & Responsible Research Conduct
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* David Resnik, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 07/31/2005
* USD 125,000.00

Although almost everyone agrees that good record keeping is important in
science, little empirical research has been conducted on researchers' record
keeping practices, or the degree to which poor record keeping practices create
problems for the integrity and quality of research. This study will provide a
better understanding of the role of record keeping in scientific research. This
award supports the first two phases of the research.

Phase 1 will document the problems that institutional officials who are charged
with investigating and adjudicating allegations of research misconduct encounter
when they examine research records. This phase will gather information via semi-
structured telephone interviews, which will allow respondents to describe the
most common and most serious problems encountered. Phase 1 will also collect
their institutional policies concerning research records. Phase 2 will convene
four focus groups of research faculty to review potential problem areas in
record keeping identified in Phase 1, to provide more information for refining
the normative standards, to identify barriers to good record keeping practices,
and to assist in development of one or more questionnaires for Phase 3. The
focus groups will help insure that the questionnaire or questionnaires address
the most important research record keeping issues, and that the questions are
worded clearly and effectively. The immediate outcome from this initial effort
will be a report to NSF documenting the results from the interviews and focus
groups, a semi-final version of the questionnaire(s) and the results of the pre-
test with focus group members, and an assessment of the value of proceeding with
a full survey of record keeping practices by research faculty and students in a
number of fields.