* 0323670
* Dissertation Research:  The Rise of the Digital Organism: How Computers Shaped Biology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Angela Creager, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 9,896.00

Electronic computers have become a sine qua non of almost all research in modern
biology and medicine. The overwhelming majority of those who investigate
biological processes--from the molecular level to the global--employ computers
to help them make observations, manage data, perform calculations, design and
test theoretical models, and discuss their findings. Serving in these
capacities, computer technology has radically transformed how biologists
approach their subject matter, both in academic research&lt;br/&gt;settings and
in the multi-billion dollar biotechnology industry. The ubiquitous computer has
profoundly influenced the way in which members of the scientific community and
of broader society understand themselves in relation to other organisms and the
environment. Yet for all of the practical and conceptual changes associated with
computers in late-twentieth century research, professional historians have only
begun to study the impact of computer technology on the life sciences. In part,
this is due to the paucity of historical analysis of biology during the last
quarter of the twentieth century. Nevertheless, the existing publications on the
computer's impact on physics and meteorology as well as the ongoing debates on
the emergence of "big" molecular biology over the past five decades indicate how
a thorough exploration of the computer's influence on biology would be valuable
and how one could use the framework of existing work to launch such an
exploration. By investigating biologists' original motives for bringing
computers into their laboratories, and by examining how they actually made use
of these computers, this Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement
Grant will shed light on how biology's objects of study, especially the
enormously complex gene, were transformed from exemplars of systems that
computers could not describe into exemplars of systems that computers could
describe. The project will approach this problem by examining how three postwar
projects concerning the scientific uses of computers shaped research practices
and conceptions in biology: 1) the early advocacy for the use of computers in
biological research, led by Robert Ledley, Lee Lusted, and Bruce Waxman; 2) the
joint MIT-National Institutes of Health-Digital Equipment Corporation LINC
(Laboratory Instrument) project; and 3) the Stanford-based DENDRAL (Dendritic
Algorithm) project, led by Edward Feigenbaum, Bruce Buchanan, and Joshua
Lederberg. Beyond reconstructing how computers came to be standard equipment in
the laboratories of biologists, the project aims to understand how the notion
that the organism is analogous to digital computer software became so deeply
entrenched so quickly. NSF funds will support trips to archives at MIT,
Cambridge, Stanford University, and NIH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;