* 0323497
* Product Modularity รป The Link Between Product Architecture and Product Life-cycle Costs
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* John Gershenson, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Judy M. Vance
* 06/30/2007
* USD 301,439.00

This project focuses on establishing a method for understanding qualitative and
quantitative connections among product architecture, product modularity, and
life-cycle costs. Product architecture - the structure of assemblies, sub-
assemblies, and components - has an enormous impact on the costs associated with
each life-cycle phase of a product - manufacturing, assembly, service,
retirement, etc. Component grouping into modules is one of the critical early
decisions made by designers. This work aims to provide the relationship between
modularity decisions and life-cycle product costs that designers lack by
quantitatively relating each to product architecture. The expected result will
be a validated, implementable design method that includes these quantitative
relationships and it is hoped to explicitly show, and therefore encourage, the
application of validation to design methods. If successful, this research will
yield a fundamental bridge between the elements that a design engineer controls
early in the engineering design process and the long-term life-cycle costs of a
product. After application by design engineers, the result should be
dramatically reduced product life-cycle costs and dramatically reduced product
development cycle times. In the longer term, this research in product
architecture should yield fundamental linkages that enable true up front
concurrent engineering where products and processes are designed for minimum
total life-cycle costs.

Throughout this project, the PI will team with Ph.D. students in the life-cycle
engineering laboratory and undergraduate researchers through the Michigan King-
Chavis-Parks Initiative for underrepresented students. The PI also plans
research / teaching opportunities with classes in life-cycle engineering, senior
capstone design, and new product development.