* 0323374
* NR:     Collaborative Research:     Wavelength Sharing Mesh-Restorable Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Arun Somani, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2007
* USD 203,797.00

Recent advances in optical wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) and optical
switching have enabled the development of next generation computer networks, to
operate at several Terabits per second. A side impact of this development is
that fault tolerance has become even more important, since a single failure may
now result in much greater loss of information. The proposed research will
investigate critical problems in the design of survivable optical wavelength
division multiplexed (WDM) networks that are based on mesh topology. The novelty
of the proposed work is two-fold: first is the consideration of wavelength-
sharing wavelength routed networks (WRWS), where multiple individual sessions
may share a wavelength, and the second is consideration of multiple simultaneous
link failures. The goal is to provide reliable connections, based on
deterministic and probabilistic requirements, to the clients using the network.
This topic constitutes an important component of the nation's critical
infrastructure protection, given that optical WDM networks are fast becoming
part of the high-speed national wide-area backbone infrastructure. The
underlying goal is to obtain practical and tractable optimal and near-optimal
solutions for networks with a large number of nodes (50 - 100), with several
fibers per link and more than 100 wavelengths per fiber; an additional objective
is achieving sub-millisecond restoration times, compared to the few-seconds
solutions of today. The proposed research will address the performance
comparison and cost-benefit tradeoffs of wavelength-sharing and optical burst
switching (OBS) mechanisms.