* 0323066
* Sensory Pathways Involved in Female Reproduction
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Lique Coolen, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* J. Steven de Belle
* 08/31/2005
* USD 200,002.00

Abstract: Lique M Coolen Proposal # 0323066 Sensory Pathways Involved in Female
Reproduction

Sexual behavior is a complex motivated behavior dependent on multiple intrinsic
and extrinsic factors. In male and female rats, somatosensory and visceral
sensory information derived from the reproductive organs during mating is
particularly important for expression of sexual behavior as well as the
consequences of behavior. However, little is known about the neural pathways
processing sensory information related to mating. Using expression of immediate
early genes, such as Fos, several studies have demonstrated neural activation in
the thalamus, amygdala, and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis that is
specifically related to vaginocervical stimulation in females and copulation in
males. Thus, these areas appear to receive sensory inputs related to these
events. However, it is yet unknown what spinal pathways relay these inputs to
the brain. Recently, Coolen and coworkers have identified a candidate pathway
for relay of sensory information related to copulation in male rats. This
pathway consists of a population of neurons in the lumbar spinal cord with
projections to the posterior thalamus. In the current proposal, the functional
involvement of this candidate pathway for processing of sensory stimuli
associated with vaginocervical stimulation will be investigated using behavioral
and endocrine analysis following lesions and pharmacological manipulations.
Together, these studies will fill an important gap in our understanding of
neural pathways that process sensory information related to reproductive
function in female rats. Sensory inputs during mating are required for
neuroendocrine and behavioral changes essential for pregnancy success. Thus,
these studies will shed light on the neurobiological basis of these changes and
will further advance our knowledge of the underlying mechanisms of female
reproduction. These studies will greatly benefit the research field of
behavioral neuroendocrinology and may lead to future development of additional
treatments for assisted reproductive technology and female sexual dysfunction.
This project will involve undergraduate and graduate students, and will promote
research opportunities for underrepresented minorities pursuing research
careers.

