* 0323679
* Collaborative Research:  Finite Element Modeling of Ball Burnishing and Selection of Process Parameters
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Ioan Marinescu, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2007
* USD 119,394.00

The research objectives of this study are to (1) develop a reliable finite
element process model for ball burnishing, which is a mechanical surface-
finishing process that is often used to improve the surface quality and fatigue
life of highly stressed machined components, (2) use this model to understand
the process mechanics and analyze the effects of the initial surface layer
properties generated by (hard) turning, and (3) demonstrate process optimization
using the proposed model. The approach to be employed includes (1) determining
material properties of the machined surface layer as input to the process model,
(2) developing a finite element simulation model (in 2 and 3 Dimensions) and
using the model to analyze the effect of process parameters, (3) conducting ball
burnishing experiments to verify/refine the model predictions, and 4)
demonstrating the process optimization of a representative hard burnished
component using the developed model and validate the results in production
conditions. This work will comprise a collaboration between Ohio State
University, the Technical University of Aachen, Germany, and the University of
Toledo, and three interested industrial partners, Hardinge, Scientific Forming
Corporation, and Ecoroll, that will provide free software, hardware, and
suggestions to the study.

The process combination of hard turning and ball burnishing provides a good
alternative to grinding and honing operations and helps to improve the fatigue
life of structured components. The results obtained from this research will
provide an efficient analysis tool for many industries to optimize the
burnishing operation and to improve the surface quality. In addition, the
results of this project will contribute to cost reduction and increased
competitiveness in machining industry. Through the collaborative effort with the
academic and industrial partners, the results will be conveniently transferred
to the scientific community and applied in production. This study will also
demonstrate to industry and universities, as an example, how Finite Element
Method-based process modeling can be used efficiently to optimize process
conditions and enhance the effectiveness of manufacturing operations.