* 0323769
* The Oregon Route-Views project
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* David Meyer, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Rita V. Rodriguez
* 08/31/2009
* USD 599,953.00

This project, providing data in the form of views of routing tables ordinarily
hidden inside of autonomous systems (ASes), contributes to the work of
researchers interested in evaluating routing protocols. The Oregon Route-Views
project (conceived in 1995 as a tool for Internet operator), accessible from any
Internet connected hosts, provides a real-time view of the Internet routing
table from the perspective of the ASes that provide their routing tables
(referred to as "peering") via Border Gateway Protocol (BGP). Route-Views has
afforded operators access to this data, and thus the ability to see the state of
their routes in order to make educated decisions about routing policy or route
announcement changes. The effect of those changes can be seen immediately; hence
routing problems may be quickly diagnosed. Routing Information Base (RIBs), or
routing tables and BGP update packets to support fine grained monitoring and
research efforts is kept in the Route-Views Archive providing a unique view of
Internet topology. Planned work includes studying the challenges that affect the
quality and usefulness of its products: Servers are distant from the data
sources, leaving BGP sessions vulnerable to outages that affect the data path
and result in loss of data. A distributed set of collection servers addresses
the problem. Commercial routers are not designed for data collection tasks; the
Cisco Systems 7206 router has been the primary server. A software solution,
called Zebra, might be used to overcome limitations; but has current code base
scaling issues. Some new data point of interest will be added. Since the data
sets are quite large, a flexible mechanism is needed to extract subsets, based
upon, for example, a period of time or a particular prefix. Package tools and
APIs (Application Programming Interface) are required for these operations. Data
collection and archiving were not part of the original design. Efforts are
needed to improve the speed, accuracy, and reliability of collection, and
additional hardware to archive the massive data sets. Tasks include: regular
backups, restoring from tape, monitoring and logging network events, managing
configuration changes, adding and deleting peers, user support, software
upgrades, and dissemination of Route-Views operational information to users.

Broader impact: The service data that this project provides will continue to be
the basis for growth statistics, global connectivity mapping, research of
dynamics and vulnerability of the global routing system, and many other research
efforts nationwide. The expansion of data collection sites and additional
archives should improve the platform for researchers and operators.