* 0323421
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Glycosylation Studies of Rabies Virus Glycoprotein Produced in Transgenic Plants
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Charles Arntzen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2007
* USD 30,000.00

Description: This award is for joint research in molecular biology entitled US-
India Cooperative Research: Glycosylation Studies of Rabies Virus Glycoprotein
Produced in Transgenic Plants. The collaborators are US PI Lokesh Joshi, Arizona
State University and Professor Ramanjini Gowda, University of Agricultural
Sciences, Bangalore. They will study the glycosylation pattern of viral protein
expressed in plants and will generate the full-length viral glycoprotein through
agrobacterium-mediated nuclear transformation. The research objectives are to
express the rabies viral protein antigen (RGP) in tobacco and muskmelon and
purify the recombinant protein; and secondly, characterize the specificity of
glycosylation patterns and determine the glycans residues in plant derived viral
glycoprotein. The proposed research will provide important understanding of
N-glycosylation structures and processes in distantly related plants that could
ultimately contribute to the development of edible vacines against rabies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Utilizing RPG produced in transgenic plants to
generate recombinant proteins is a novel approach that has potential advantages
such as cost-efficiencies and contamination safe factories. The research will
add to fundamental knowledge about the carbohydrate pattern and roles of
glycosylation on the rabies virus glycoprotein. The collaboration will exploit
the complementary expertise of the US and Indian investigators. There will be an
exchange of scientists, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows under this
award. This project is supported by the Government of India's Department of
Science and Technology (DST) under the NSF/DST joint program.