* 0323591
* Why Genes are the Center of Molecular Biologists' Attention
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* C. Kenneth Waters, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Fixed Amount Award
* Ronald Rainger
* 08/31/2005
* USD 103,196.00

Genes are at the center of a broad range of biological research. But why? The
goal of this project is to answer this question and in doing so (1) improve
understanding of the power and limitations of gene-centered research and (2)
enhance understanding of the nature of scientific knowledge. There are two
opposing views about why genes are at the center of attention. Champions contend
that genes (or genomes) are the fundamental causal agents that provide the
instructions for development and for all subsequent functioning that goes on
within the organism. Critics counter that there are no fundamental causal agents
within the organism. Attention is focused on genes, they claim, because
biologists have swayed by genetic determinism.&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is a
philosophical investigation of molecular biology and genomics to develop the
idea that genes are at the center of attention because they provide an entry
point for investigating a broad range of biological processes, not necessarily
because genes cause or explain these processes. Advancing this account will
entail developing two epistemic themes. The first is that bodies of scientific
knowledge, such as molecular biology, are often organized as approaches for
investigation rather than theories for generating representations. The second is
that scientific approaches, such as the gene-centered approach, yield inherently
partial descriptions that represent some aspects of complicated phenomena at the
cost of obscuring other aspects. The result will be to construct an account of
what genes do in terms of causality, drawing upon abstract philosophical models
of causality and causal explanations. It will clarify why genes can be utilized
as a tool for investigating a broad variety of processes. It will also delineate
limitations of gene-based explanations. These limitations, however, will not
necessarily impugn the science since the success of gene-based research rests on
its investigative utility regardless of whether the explanations ultimately
yielded from this research will be directly based on the impact of
genes.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research is that it will advance
the philosophical understanding of biological knowledge. The research will
provide a new explanation of why so much of today's scientific research of what
goes on within organisms is gene-centered. This answer will be philosophically
informative and scientifically defensible. The research will also provide strong
motivation for two important epistemological ideas concerning the nature of
scientific knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research should provide the
public with a better basis for assessing the merits of gene-centered research
and understanding that despite the successes of gene-centered science, the
causal role of genes is often exaggerated by those who publicly promote gene-
based research. The two epistemological views concerning the structure of
scientific knowledge and its partiality should also make a broad impact because
they suggest that the nature of science is often misrepresented in popular
accounts of scientific knowledge and in science education. The importance of
genomic research is not that it will reveal the blueprint of life, but that it
provides a basis for investigating a broad range of biological processes. This
project should provide science educators the basic knowledge for presenting a
much different and more accurate account of gene-centered biology to science
students and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;