* 0323069
* Modeling and Control of Wafer Scale Yield Improvement in Chemical Mechanical Planarization (CMP)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Abhijit Chandra, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2007
* USD 492,881.00

The objective of this project is to enhance wafer yield in IC manufacturing by
enhancing the wafer scale uniformity in material removal rate during a chemical
mechanical planarization process. Reduction and elimination of edge exclusion is
of particular interest to this project. An integrated model based control
approach will be pursued. An analytical model relating the material removal rate
to the wafer - pad interface pressure and wafer backside loading profile will be
developed. The model predictions will be verified first under static conditions
and from material removal rate data. An active control algorithm based on the
above model will be developed. In particular, the curvature control algorithm
will be pursued. This will be implemented first in software, and then in
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that this project will develop
understanding to relate nano-scale nuances of the chemical mechanical
planarization process to macro-scale design considerations. This will facilitate
efficient optimization and control of process parameters, which is currently
done mostly through trial and error iterations. Through Industry-University
collaboration, the proposed project will aid in human resource development by
exposing graduate and undergraduate students to novel methods of controlling
nano-scale material removal processes. Currently a 3-5 mm wafer edge exclusion
is used to harvest "usable" chips on wafers, and this affects about 20 percent
of the chips on a 300 mm wafer. If successful, this project will directly impact
and enhance the yield of such processes.