* 0323036
* IMMEX Fayette Consortium:  Community Integrated Problem Solving
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Gregory Drake, Fayette County Public Schools
* Standard Grant
* Karen F. Zuga
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,120,009.00

This project is designed to position students competitively for multiple career
paths, including information technology and engineering. IMMEX problem solving
engages students in scientific inquiry where students frame problems from a
descriptive scenario, distinguish relevant from irrelevant information, plan a
search strategy, gather information, and reach a decision that demonstrates
understanding. These simulations integrate standards-based curricular content
and technological issues commonly encountered in careers in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics. The "IMMEX-Fayette Consortium" is a comprehensive
project for students and teachers providing students in grades 7-12 a solid
foundation in science and mathematics. This is a community-integrated model in
which teams of teachers, students, business partners and higher education
faculty construct interactive, problem-solving simulations. Summer technology
institutes for teachers and students are followed by integration of technology
and IMMEX problem solving during the school year. Business partners conduct
presentations to provide students with real-world applications of science and
mathematics. To foster continued involvement in STEM-related careers, a student
fellowship program is an integral part of the program in grades 12-14. Students
interested in technology careers and who demonstrate proficiency in problem
solving get to explore their interests further through internships with business
partners during their senior years and first two years of college.