* 0323966
* SGER: Microbial Observatories: Initiation of a Microbial Observatory for Anaerobic Electrophiles in Marine Sediments
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2004
* John Urbance, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. J. Gregory Zeikus and John W. Urbance of
Michigan State University to establish an observatory for microbial
electrophiles in marine sediments. The goals of the research are to enrich,
isolate, and characterize the microbial populations that can either grow on
electricity as the electron donor or generate electricity from natural energy
sources found in sediments. Novel bioelectrochemical reactor systems containing
specially designed metal-graphite electrodes will be filled with sediment and
the redox potential will be carefully controlled by a potentiostat. After 2-5
weeks of incubations, the bacterial populations grown on the cathode or anode
surfaces will be analyzed by high throughput rDNA sequencing and microscopy.
Then, novel cathodophile and anodophiles will be isolated from the biofilms and
characterized microbiologically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They are testing the
hypothesis that electrophiles are an important part of microbial diversity and
that, based on the exact potential of the anode or cathode used in the
enrichments, different populations will exist. Most of the extreme diversity of
microbes has gone undiscovered because of lack of suitable enrichment and
isolation techniques, which in part this project will provide. These studies may
discover important new microbes for use in fuel cells, generation of electricity
from waste treatment, or for the bioelectrosynthesis of chemicals, drugs, and
fuels.&lt;br/&gt;