* 0323685
* EPNES: Robustness, Efficiency, and Security of Electric Power Grid in a Market Environment
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Yu-Chi Ho, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 08/31/2007
* USD 470,000.00

In conjunction with Southern California Edison and Northeast Utilities, the goal
of the research is to develop theory, models, and methods for reliable,
affordable, and secure power. Two tasks will be performed:&lt;br/&gt;Robustness
of Complex Systems. Like many critical infrastructures, a power grid can
experience cascading collapse where a seemingly small event cascades into a
massive inability of the system to carry out its function. Our first task is to
develop simulation-based methods for reducing vulnerability to
collapse.&lt;br/&gt;Economic and Gaming Considerations. Two fundamental market
issues are considered. The first is the auctions used by Independent System
Operators. We believe that current auctions are improperly designed resulting in
higher than necessary costs to customers. A correct formulation and a novel
methodology are proposed. The second issue is from the perspective of power
providers, and focuses on methods that optimize day-ahead decisions while
considering real-time markets and managing risks. &lt;br/&gt; Our results will
be validated against benchmark problems, the New England and California Power
Markets. The intellectual merit lies in our recognition of the complexity, and
tries to address the problems from a different perspective. The key idea for the
first task is to use a model that not necessarily providing the exact
performance value, but providing the correct performance order. This is based on
the well-known fact that order is much easier to determine that value, and
consequently a model only needs to capture the essential features that dominate
the collapse behavior. Similarly, the second task would require solving mixed-
integer problems with a non-separable structure. Rather than insisting on
optimal solutions, our key idea is to obtain near-optimal solutions with
quantifiable quality in a computationally efficient manner based on a novel
"surrogate optimization framework." &lt;br/&gt; The electric power
infrastructure typifies the characteristics shared by virtually all critical
networked infrastructures (transportation, finance, banking, emergency services,
government, communications, media, manufacturing, social, etc.), therefore the
proposed research will have broader impacts on other infrastructures. In
addition, through courses, seminars, conferences, and summer programs for high
school students and teachers, we shall reach out to students and professionals
at various levels.&lt;br/&gt;