* 0323514
* Interactive Design with Engineering Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Vadim Shapiro, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Judy M. Vance
* 07/31/2007
* USD 385,941.00

Interactive computer-aided design is critically dependent on the ability to
rapidly generate and evaluate numerous design alternatives at all stages of the
design process. This is to develop computational foundations, algorithmic
infrastructure, and a fully integrated software system for interactive
parametric mechanical design with embedded engineering analysis -- that will be
performed on demand, fast, concurrently, and transparently. The technology will
be demonstrated on a range of typical engineering analysis tasks, including
those that are difficult to solve with traditional mesh-based methods.

At the core of the technology is a novel method for representing engineering
field problems in terms of functions of approximate distance fields to geometric
features. The salient feature of the approach is that it allows satisfying all
prescribed boundary conditions exactly and without meshing. Furthermore, the
approach may be combined with many other traditional techniques, liberating them
from dependence on meshing. This unification of geometric design and field
modeling in a single conceptual and computational framework should substantially
advance the field of computer aided design and engineering. This research holds
a potential to transform the way physical fields are modeled, analyzed and
simulated -- in design and beyond, in other branches of science and engineering.
It also offers a compelling educational framework that can be taught on an
undergraduate level, and is already supported by the developed software tools
with unprecedented flexibility and ease of use.