* 0323596
* Collaborative Research: Life in a Changing Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Jeanne Altmann, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,528,998.00

Environmental change is a cornerstone of major theories of human origins.
Adaptation to environmental variability--seasonal, random, and directional over
decades--is also a key feature of savanna baboons, a large, widespread species
of non-human primates that shares many features with humans. The current
investigations will focus on the baboon population of Amboseli, a population
that has experienced extensive environmental change over the past several
decades for which information is available, and that has persisted in the face
of this environmental change. Behavior, the centerpiece of the current
investigations, plays a pivotal role in adaptation to environmental variability.
It has both immediate, short-term consequences for maintaining internal
stability and profound long-term consequences for the lives of individuals and
for the evolutionary trajectories of populations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current project will evaluate and test predictions about behavioral and
physiological consequences of environmental change, and about the effects of
environmental change on birth and death rates. Estimates of gene flow patterns
in the study population will also be developed using newly applied statistical
methods in combination with genetic markers. By incorporating demographic,
behavioral, environmental, genetic, and hormonal data in an integrative
framework, the work will serve several specific goals. (1) It will provide
detailed information on how environmental change affects fitness components and
related traits. (2) It will elucidate the extent to which individuals are
differentially affected by, and respond to, environmental change. This will
provide important insight into traits that confer an adaptive advantage in the
face of environmental change. (3) It will provide important information on the
impact of short time-scale environmental change, and on the population structure
of a species experiencing such change. (4) It will provide vital data on how
organisms adapt to environmental change. This is highly relevant for biological
conservation in the current period of rapid, anthropogenic climate change. This
project is, of necessity and design, intrinsically interdisciplinary. It will
both utilize and enhance integration of concepts, data, and techniques across a
range of social and biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
greatly expand the investigators' long history of training American and Kenyan
students-training activities that are intimately connected with the research
goals. Recent human resource development has focused on training for 6 post-
doctoral fellows, 7 Ph.D. candidates (2 of them Kenyan), 3 M.Sc. students (2 of
them Kenyan), 24 undergraduates (including 5 African-Americans and 3 Hispanic
women), and 1 high school student. The investigators also actively collaborate
with 4 Kenyan scientists and are working with them on relevant in-country
capacity-building activities. Proposed exchange visits and a working group
meeting in Kenya will further advance these goals and lay an even more solid
base for enduring impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also extend the
investigators' activities toward enhancement of infrastructure and dissemination
of results. The PIs are among the first to refine and apply non-invasive
techniques for obtaining and utilizing genetic and hormonal samples, techniques
that are of increasing importance worldwide for ethical, scientific, and
regulatory reasons. In addition, a major task of the investigators in the past
few years has been to design and implement a comprehensive database that
includes the many diverse data sets associated with the long-term baboon
project. The database design has been shared with a number of other scientists
upon request. In addition, a website has been developed for their field research
project (www.princeton.edu/~baboon), which serves as a vehicle for providing
information and data to the public, students from K through post-graduate, and
colleagues. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;