* 0323882
* Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarships
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Paul Villegas, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 09/30/2008
* USD 400,000.00

Fifty-eight needy students majoring in Computer Science, Engineering,
Mathematics, Manufacturing and Construction Management have the opportunity to
be beneficiaries of a Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics (CSEM)
scholarship to enhance their opportunity to complete a degree in a technical
major. The scholarships are administered by the Mathematics, Engineering,
Science Achievement (MESA) Engineering Program (MEP), whose major objectives are
to recruit, retain and graduate educationally disadvantaged students pursuing
technical majors. The students selected for a scholarship are expected to
progress in their chosen technical discipline and required to meet with their
faculty advisor and counselor in the MEP program to discuss progress, academic
advising, and other retention efforts administered by the office. The CSEMS
project alleviates a financial burden for many students on our campus. It also
creates additional opportunities in the area of practical work experience and
professional development. The project receives extensive support from our campus
and community to include faculty, students, professionals and local industry
support. Additional resources for CSEMS participants continue to grow, including
an upgraded computer lab with donated equipment from industry and individual
donors. The previous CSEMS project included extensive participation of under-
represented groups and has made a significant impact on retention and
professional development of the students. This scholarship program also helped
to create SOCES (Students Obtaining Career Experience & Scholarships), which
created internship opportunities for our student