* 0323742
* College of Menominee Nation STEM Curriculum Enhancement Project
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Verna Fowler, College of the Menominee Nation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2008
* USD 2,474,854.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the shortage of under-represented
ethnic minority participation in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) College of Menominee Nation (CMN), a 1994 Land Grant
institution designated as a Tribal College and University under Executive Order
13020 proposes in partnership with the National Science Foundation to enter a
cooperative agreement designed to remedy that circumstance through a four-tiered
STEM CURRICULUM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT. The proposed program would refine the 4
STEM related learning outcomes articulated in the college.s eleven Guiding
Principles for demonstrable student learning, through a multi-faceted curriculum
revision designed to integrate mathematical and computational sciences across
the curriculum in General Education Requirements; assure their integration in
Breadth curriculum, and significantly impact Emphasis (major) requirements
through refinement of existent programs, and development of two new STEM majors
unique to the site and situation of the regional and reservation economy:
Environmental Health; and Materials Science. In respect to the latter
initiative, CMN brings to the project collaborative public partners: The Agency
for Toxic Substances and &lt;br/&gt;Disease Registry (ATSDR) an agency within
the National Institutes of Health, Center for Disease Control,
&lt;br/&gt;Department of Health and Human Services; and the National Forest
Products Laboratory of the U.S. Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
respectively. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Led by Vice-President of Academic Affairs,
a Menominee descendant, who will serve as Principal Investigator for the
project, day-to-day operations of the project will be facilitated by a Project
Coordinator and Curriculum Development Specialist and an Administrative
Assistant to be hired under this cooperative agreement. The Vice-President will
convene a project management team representing the units under her supervision
including the Deans of Student Services and Auxiliary Sites, The Assessment of
Student Learning (ASL) Coordinator and her assistant, and STEM faculty (9 of the
full-time faculty of 15.) The proposal seeks support to augment faculty in
Mathematics and Computational Sciences with two additional full-time faculty
hires, as well as funding for STEM faculty release time at .20, and support for
adjunct hires necessary to fulfill schedule requirements. Assessment of Student
Learning (ASL) will be a significant component of this project, and a .60
dedication of ASL Coordinator.s and support staff time is included as an in-kind
contribution by the college. A position in Student Services will be created
under this proposal for .50 STEM Tutor/Advisor and Student Records Specialist.
Student stipends for 15 participants in an STEM Honors Leadership Program are
included in the proposal as well as STEM faculty summer support totaling 3.0 FTE
to conduct the summer Honors Leadership cohort program and related program
costs. Modest support for instructional materials and supplies is included in
the budget of $2,388,886 over a five-year period. &lt;br/&gt;