* 0323153
* Decentralized Control of Networked Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Fernando Paganini, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 08/31/2006
* USD 243,000.00

This project is focused on decentralized control of networked systems, including
both problems of control of communication networks, and also control of
spatially dis- tributed systems with specifications on their mutual
interconnection. A key common feature to the problems under consideration is the
mandatory decen- tralization in the control algorithms. Despite the well-known
difficulties in imposing such information constraints to control systems design,
we are motivated by recent successes in special problems, which indicate that
perhaps the time has come for a more fruitful interac- tion between control and
networking. In particular, in some of our recent work on Internet congestion
control, we have been able to devise decentralized algorithms that have prov-
able properties over arbitrary network topologies, overcoming some limitations
of currently deployed TCP protocols. This work, which we plan to continue in
this project, is already leading to prototype implementations which are being
tested in high-speed networks. One of our main goals in this project is to
expand this area of research to a number of other network resource allocation
problems that involve decentralized feedback, such as multicast flow control and
routing control in the Internet, and an even broader set of questions for
wireless networks: power control, bandwidth allocation and their interaction
with flow control. A second thrust of this project concerns a different kind of
relationship between control and networks: namely, the decentralized control of
a network of spatially distributed, mutu- ally interacting dynamical systems. We
also build here on our previous work on distributed arrays, which identified a
procedure that renders tractable decentralized control synthesis, at the expense
of some conservatism. Our plan here is to extend these methods to control- ling
networks of systems in more general topologies, such as vehicle formation
problems, and also to combine this approach with model predictive control (MPC)
running at each unit. The broader impacts of this project are of two kinds: one,
judging from our recent successes in Internet congestion control and the ongoing
experimental collaborations, there is a distinct possibility that this kind of
alternative algorithms could be deployed, or at least influence the development
of next-generation protocols; the impact of this would be substantial. Secondly,
the interdisciplinary quality of the work described here can have great
educational impact, not only for the students involved but also through more
unified curricular offerings in control and networks. Indeed, the significant
common ground between these and other related disciplines (optimization, game
theory) makes this a very fertile area, and also one that reinvigorates the
presence of Controls in Electrical Engineering departments such as our own. 1