* 0323015
* SGER: Recognition of a New Brown Algal Order with Resolution of the Taxonomic Position of Punctaria Glacialis Rosenvinge
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Robert Wilce, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 07/31/2005
* USD 51,293.00

In this Small Grant for Exploratory Research, Dr. Robert Wilce of the University
of Massachusetts will work with his Canadian colleague Dr. Gary Saunders of the
University of New Brunswick to study the ecology, life history, and reproduction
of two enigmatic brown algae of high arctic waters. Currently known as Punctaria
glacialis and Platysiphon verticillatus, these benthic browns of the sublittoral
occur in scattered locations in the high arctic, and will be sampled from known
localities on Baffin Island. Reproduction and complete life history stages are
not known for them, but preliminary evidence from Wilce's prior work suggests
that the algae form endosporic gametophytes which grow very slowly under the ice
over the long winter season, giving rise to filamentous microthalli either
directly or perhaps through small motile cells (these however not observed). No
currently recognized family of browns would accommodate such a strange life
history, and reclassification may prove warranted. Material will be collected to
initiate cultures in the laboratory to follow reproductive stages, to provide
sections for electron microscopy of cellular details, and to extract DNA for
sequencing of nuclear and plastid genes for phylogenetic comparison with other
brown algae. Support will also be provided to graduate student Christopher Lane
to work in Prof. Wilce's laboratory learning culturing and EM techniques, while
continuing his molecular phylogenetic studies of brown algae with Prof.
Saunders.