* 0323657
* GOALI: RF Performance of Si-Based RITD for Mixed-Signal Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2010
* Paul Berger, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2010
* USD 300,000.00

0323657&lt;br/&gt;Berger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The drive to develop advanced
semiconductor devices and circuits is fueled by&lt;br/&gt;the wealth of
electronic and optical properties of heterostructures made possible by band
structure engineering. Tunnel diodes (TD) can be integrated with transistors to
create novel quantum nonlinear functional devices and circuits due to the unique
property of a tunnel diode's negative differential resistance (NDR). Such
integrated circuits have demonstrated enhanced performances in circuit speed,
reduce component count and lower power consumption. Previous circuit work
incorporating TDs, at places like Motorola Laboratories, has been limited to
III-V compound semiconductors only. However, until recently, it was not
practical to translate this to the low-cost and high production volume Si world.
But recent developments in Si-based TD technology by the PI and other
researchers are challenging this roadblock. One aim of this proposal is to seek
ways to integrate Si-based resonant interband tunnel diodes (RITD) with Si/SiGe
transistors to meet the challenges in the wireless communications by
transferring&lt;br/&gt;this III-V-based TD circuit technology to Si. The PI
seeks to capitalize upon recent DC performance milestones achieved within his
laboratory on Si-based RITDs, namely peak-to-valley current ratio (PVCR) up to
3.8 at room temperature or peak current densities Jp exceeding 150 kA/cm 2
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to boost Si wireless capabilities that
could eventually lead to an&lt;br/&gt;entire radio on a single Si chip or other
interesting fusions of digital and analog circuits. Further, tunnel diodes have
been shown to be very radiation hard and were used extensively in some of the
first communication satellites in the 1960's, thus lending their introduction
into military and non-terrestrial applications as well. Partnering with Motorola
Laboratories in the form of a Grant Opportunities of Academia in Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) is testimony to the level of interest and curiosity of industry
to explore this technological pathway further, before embracing it. Motorola is
willing to share their circuit and system experience as well as apply their in-
house analog modeling of these nonlinear Si/SiGe TDs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide an environment where students can be trained in a
broader&lt;br/&gt;perspective of the research process, from device physics,
material and device processing, to device and circuit testing and modeling.
Collaborative efforts required in this project will allow graduate and
undergraduate students not only to have natural exchange and supervision with
PIs, but also to have strong interactions with scientists in government and
industry research laboratories, which will facilitate their acquisition of
knowledge and provide an initial research experience that promotes the notion of
teaming in their future careers. At Ohio State (Berger), undergraduate research
is expected to play a large component in the proposed research. Discussions have
already commenced with the EE Honors Program representative and the PI to ramp
up towards a collective REU Site submission in Fall 2003. In lieu of this, the
PI will submit requests for REU supplements as well as the REU Site request. The
PI has a long and established history of using undergraduate researchers through
REU supplements. Recruitment of underrepresented peoples has been and will be a
facet in the PIs research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical merits of
this project derive from its impact on (i) increase circuit speed&lt;br/&gt;due
to shortened path lengths and increased functionality, (ii) reduce component
count (more computational power per unit area), (iii) lower power consumption
(fewer components per logic function), (iv) compact the layout using 3-D
integration of tunnel diodes above/below transistors, and (v) extend RF wireless
technology.&lt;br/&gt;