* 0323578
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Development of Evolvable Hardware Design Methodology
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Wagdy Mahmoud, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/2005
* USD 24,000.00

0323578&lt;br/&gt;Mahmoud&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
a joint research project between Dr. Wagdy Mahmoud, Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Tennessee Technological University, Cookeville, Tennessee
and Dr. Alaa Sheta, Electronics Research Institute, Cairo, Egypt. The goal of
this research is to develop a methodology for designing and evolving practical
digital hardware designs. The investigators plan to develop a methodology for
automating the design of practical evolvable digital hardware on field
programmable gate array (FPGA) platforms. Evolvable Hardware (EHW) methodology
is necessary for designing hardware structures that are re-configurable and
fault tolerant and that can operate properly for many years in extremely harsh
conditions and adapt to changes in their environment. The methodology will
address two challenges facing EHW designers; scalability and portability, and
will enable automating the hardware adaptation process through the replacement
of traditional digital design methods with evolutionary techniques. The
capability of the system will be demonstrated through the implementation of two
digital arithmetic circuits. The investigations will enhance the emerging and
interdisciplinary field of EHW.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The Evolvable
Hardware (EHW) methodology has numerous applications including space exploration
missions, and remotely operated circuitry. Developing the methodology for
designing and evolving practical digital hardware designs requires the
application of artificial evolution techniques to the design process of the
hardware circuitry. The project should lead to improving current design
techniques or to the development of new ones. The research work will include
graduate students at the two institutes, and may lead to the development of
graduate courses in this promising field. &lt;br/&gt;