* 0323876
* Computer and Mathematics Scholar Support Coalition
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Helen Strassberg, CUNY York College
* Standard Grant
* Lesia L. Crumpton-Young
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

Interdisciplinary (99)-York College, City University of New York (CUNY), is
using $100,000 annually from NSF in creating a comprehensive scholars program in
Computer Science, Information Systems Management and Mathematics. The funds are
to provide $3,125 scholarships to 29 students and to cover administrative
support for the project. A community-based approach to retaining students in the
CSEMS disciplines is being implemented. Scholars are recruited through broad
advertisement and cooperation from local high schools and colleges within the
CUNY system. The Selection Committee is basing its decisions on student's
academic ability, motivation, and demonstrated financial need. Scholars are
benefiting from current programs, including the Job Placement Center, tutoring,
and modern computer facilities. The project team is also providing a mentor
system with activities that bring students, counselor, faculty and high
technology partners together on a regular basis. This mentoring system is
forming relationships and networks between the Scholars and the industry
partners and graduate school connections. Student support activities called
"Scholar Community and to Scholars" is in place to offer a student retention
component to the project. The supporting activities are: 1) Faculty Mentors; 2)
Annual Open House; 3) Monthly Meetings of Scholars, Mentors and Partners in High
Technology; 4) Monthly Seminars from our Partners in High Technology Business;
5) Personalized Counseling; and, 6) Annual Scholars Reception. The goals of this
project are to: 1) Increase the number of students recruited and enrolled in the
CSEMS disciplines; 2) Increase the quality of support services and educational
opportunities available to students enrolled in the targeted curricula and to
CSEMS Scholars; 3) Increase the number of students retained and graduated in the
CSEMS disciplines; 4) Recruit technology companies to be a part of the Project
Team; and, 5) Expand the interaction and involvement of the students and the
high technology companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project
offers an opportunity to financially handicapped and underrepresented students
to study current, rigorous curricula with the guidance of high-technology
industry leaders. The Project Team is composed of all the necessary leadership
for a Scholars Community, professors, counselor, and high technology industry
partners. The PI has the leadership ability, the infrastructure to make the
project function smoothly and the full support of the Department and College.
The program relies on longstanding structures, such as the Math and CS Club, an
experienced counselor and modern computer facilities. All building blocks are in
place for a successful program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
project is based on a plan that promotes interaction between faculty, scholars,
high technology representatives and strong curricula with activities that are
bring together all of the partners on a regular basis. Scholars are benefiting
from broad-based exposure to both the academic and the industry views of the
high technology fields. Underrepresented groups are naturally benefiting since
the student body is composed mainly of minorities (75%) and women (71%).
Partnerships formed among faculty and business are fostering communications that
are essential in the fast changing STEM fields, which is leading to further
collaborations that are benefiting the students. Society is benefiting from
these Scholars who are being prepared to participate in the high technology work
force of the future.&lt;br/&gt;