* 0324305
* FEMA's USAR Task Force Deployments: Implications for The Management of Emergency Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Benigno Aguirre, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2007
* USD 323,798.00

&lt;br/&gt;FEMA's USAR Task Force Deployments: Implications for The Management
of&lt;br/&gt;Emergency Response&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Urban Search and Rescue
taskforces (USAR) sponsored by FEMA are a&lt;br/&gt;key component of the federal
emergency response system. This study&lt;br/&gt;examines the a. extent to which
these taskforces are impacted by known&lt;br/&gt;problems at search and rescue
(SAR) operations, as well as the solutions&lt;br/&gt;they have developed to
these problems, and b. their interaction with law&lt;br/&gt;enforcement
agencies, in what has become a critical factor in the&lt;br/&gt;conduct of
present day SAR operations. Specifically, the research&lt;br/&gt;analyzes the
relationships among FEMA USAR taskforces and support&lt;br/&gt;personnel, DoD
support personnel, local agencies and state emergency&lt;br/&gt;management
offices, other state and regional agencies present during&lt;br/&gt;major
deployments, law enforcement agencies (FBI, local and state&lt;br/&gt;police),
and volunteers. It also looks at the operation of the
emergency&lt;br/&gt;medical system (EMS) during USAR deployments, particularly
the securing&lt;br/&gt;and routing of injured persons and their transportation
to medical&lt;br/&gt;facilities. The study identifies areas of cooperation and
conflict&lt;br/&gt;among these social actors, and changes in SAR operations and
their&lt;br/&gt;impact on organizational culture, information, training, and
purpose. &lt;br/&gt;It also develops an inclusive description of the types of
collective&lt;br/&gt;actors that are present during USAR
deployments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focus groups from ten USAR taskforces and
approximately 100 in-depth&lt;br/&gt;interviews with representatives from other
agencies and groups that&lt;br/&gt;participated in nine USAR national deployment
sites are done to develop&lt;br/&gt;a useful blueprint for local, state, and
federal agencies and private&lt;br/&gt;organizations to follow during
participation in SAR operations. The&lt;br/&gt;intent is to improve the
effectiveness of disaster responses and&lt;br/&gt;contribute to the social
science understanding of the emergent&lt;br/&gt;multi-organizational SAR system
as a form of organized, adaptive crisis&lt;br/&gt;response activity.&lt;br/&gt;