* 0324233
* An Ice-Tethered Profiling Instrument for Sustained Observation of the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* John Toole, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 07/31/2006
* USD 652,840.00

P.I. Toole (WHOI) Proposal #: 0324233&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: An
Ice-Tethered Profiling Instrument for Sustained Observation of the Arctic
Ocean&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to design,
build, and test an automated, easily deployed Ice-Tethered Profiler (ITP)
capable of returning daily high-vertical-resolution measurements of upper ocean
temperature and salinity in the Arctic Ocean during all seasons over a three-
year lifetime. The buoy will transmit data in near-real time and be low-cost,
allowing systems to be considered expendable, avoiding the need for expensive
recovery operations. The ITP will be designed to support third-party plug-in
modules such as surface meteorological sensors and acoustic systems. This
development will build on the past success of ice-tethered drifters supporting
multiple discrete subsurface instruments as well as the WHOI-developed Moored
Profiler. The PIs envision a loose array of approximately 20 ITPs throughout the
Arctic Ocean for observation of annual and interannual variations of the upper
ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two systems will be fabricated and deployed on a
planned cruise in mid-2004. Based on the performance of these units, the
instrument design will be modified if necessary and two more systems will be
constructed for deployment on a cruise of opportunity in 2005. During this time,
in consultation with the polar research community, the PIs will develop a plan
for establishing and maintaining an array of ITPs that will contribute to a
sustained Arctic Ocean observing system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;