* 0324833
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Collaboration on Thin Ground: Contract Production Arrangements Between Taiwanese Firms and their American MNC Customers in the PC Industry
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Erik Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 12/31/2004
* USD 7,500.00

This dissertation project examines the Original Equipment Manufacturing/Original
Design Manufacturing arrangements between Taiwanese firms and their American MNC
customers in the personal computer (PC) industry. It focuses on the issue of
cooperation between them as contract production partners and addresses the
question of how they have managed to initiate, sustain and deepen their
cooperation in an industry generally considered to be relatively knowledge
intensive given their cultural differences and the weakly regulated global
economy. Its secondary task is to determine the quality of cooperation found
between these firms by contrasting it with instances of customer-supplier
cooperation found in economies that are known to be endowed with thick culture
and institutions. The project employs the approach of multiple comparative case
studies. Data is collected through archival research as well as structured
interviews with relevant firms in Taiwan and their American customers and, if
necessary, in-depth interviews with Taiwanese government officials. Through
examining the phenomenon of inter-firm cooperation across national borders, the
project is expected to shed light on the more general problems in social
sciences of how and what kinds of cooperation are possible in a thin cultural
and institutional environment. It is also expected to have broad empirical
significance given the growing recognition of the importance of inter-firm
cooperation in those parts of the world not blessed with a rich socio-
institutional infrastructure and in developing countries eager to engage in
industrial upgrading by taking advantage of the spread of MNCs-led international
production networks in the high-tech sectors.

