* 0324123
* The Look College of Engineering Connects Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Cesar Malave, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

The Texas A&amp;M University CONNECTS Program hosts 96 incoming engineering
students who are high achieving, low income, first generation to college. There
are &lt;br/&gt;32 CONNECTS students who receive NSF CSEMS scholarships. These
students demonstrated the highest financial need. Other scholarships for
students with less financial need come from foundations, industry, and personal
donors. The broader impact in this project is how the program builds social
capital for the students by providing connections to information not typically
available to first generation, low income students attending college. Clustering
them in the same engineering, math, and science courses and placing upper
division peer teachers in the math and engineering courses provide these
connections. These CONNECTS participants are also clustered in the same
residence halls so they can study and form friendships with students with common
academic goals. Additionally, connections are enhanced by faculty and industry
mentors. These mentors provide academic excellence and leadership workshops.
They also provide continuous feedback from the students to sources of
assistance. The engineering course focuses on math reasoning, learning
strategies, reflection, and understanding the value of engineering. Raised
retention and learning increases are the determining factors that demonstrate
success. The intellectual merit of this project is in how the program combines
research from the TX LS AMP, Foundation Coalition, learning styles of females
and under represented minorities, and uses the research to provide a model that
is inclusive of all issues surrounding the retention and graduation of under
served populations in STEM. The combination of interventions is the model of the
future instead of single interventions. &lt;br/&gt;