* 0324537
* A Novel Robust Feedback Controller Design Methodology for Exploiting Directional Preferences
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Suhada Jayasuriya, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2007
* USD 269,994.00

The main objective of the proposed work is to develop a new feedback design
methodology that takes advantage of directional preferences that are possible in
multi-input multi-output systems. Over the last six decades a considerable body
of knowledge has accumulated in the design of feedback control systems. In spite
of the many developments that have occurred, classical control still occupies a
central role in feedback control design. Proposed work will exploit the true
advantages offered by classical design. One fundamental difference between SISO
and MIMO designs is that there are directional influences in the MIMO problem
whereas there is no such influence in the SISO problem. On closer examination of
existing design methodologies such as and QFT it is clear that available
flexibility with directional properties are not taken advantage of. As a matter
of fact all these methodologies essentially enforce performance in all possible
directions. The reason for this is that design or synthesis is focussed on a
closed loop system transfer function. For example, even when an output
disturbance is known to be in a specific direction the sensitivity transfer
function matrix is made small in all possible directions although it is not
necessary. We propose a new paradigm of directional feedback control of MIMO
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research would provide new tools to enable
the solution of numerous advanced control problems that may not be solvable with
existing methods. For example, with the advent of new control effectors and
sensors it is anticipated that very high performance systems will possess highly
redundant actuators and sensors that will enable the incorporation of many
hitherto not considered performance requirements. High performance aircraft will
likely incorporate highly redundant control actuators, may not have vertical
tails, may be capable of very high g-maneuvers with large attitude rates and
will operate over extended flight envelopes with highly nonlinear aerodynamics.
Reconfigurable control will become ever so important. It can be envisioned that
reconfigurable controls will allow design and implementation of systems that
will perform automatic, on-line optimization of system performance in the event
of damage or system failures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful resolution of
proposed objectives will have an immediate effect on fault diagnosis and fault
isolation in machinery and structures, redundancy management and reconfigurable
control system design by making available a new set of design tools. Condition
based monitoring of complex expensive equipment such as automated manufacturing
systems, turbomachinery, and drive trains can improve safety and reliability as
well as reduce the staggering O&amp;M costs. The annual cost of poor maintenance
to US industries is currently estimated at $50 billion. &lt;br/&gt;