* 0324680
* Collaborative Research:  Particulate Organic Carbon in the Upper Ocean Derived from Historical Bio-Optical Data and Satellite Observations of Ocean Color
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Dariusz Stramski, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2008
* USD 177,302.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0324680 / OCE-0324346&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this research project, investigators from the Scripps Institution of
Oceanography and University of Southern California will work to establish bio-
optical relationships for deriving particulate organic carbon (POC)
concentration in the ocean from optical measurements. These relationships will
be applicable to data collected from ships, unattended moorings, drifters, and
satellite ocean color sensors. The approach to be taken is based on the use of
historical in situ data collected by various researchers. Over the years,
extensive bio-optical data have been collected in various regions of the world's
ocean, which are now available through JGOFS and NASA's SeaBASS databases. These
and other historical data sets will be reanalyzed to derive optical
relationships for studying the POC dynamics in the ocean. It is expected that by
taking a full advantage of the already collected data, a substantial progress in
this area will be made. The research team will interact with several researchers
who generated basic data that will be used in this project, and these contacts
will also ensure that all related research efforts will be well coordinated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project us expected to provide important scientific
contributions to our understanding of the ocean reservoir of POC and its role in
ocean carbon cycle. The project builds on significant science questions and
unexplored opportunities for the application of optical techniques to the study
of POC in the ocean. Optical measurements have already proven to be a major
device for studying chlorophyll a and primary production on regional, basin, and
global scales. However, the major currency of interest for understanding ocean
biogeochemistry is carbon, not chlorophyll a. The impact of the proposed work
stems from the fact that the combination of bio-optical relationships with new
technologies (satellite sensors, unattended in situ platforms) will provide a
capability to acquire information about POC in the ocean on previously
impossible scales of time and space. The proposed project is a step towards a
long-term research goal, which is to apply the bio-optical algorithms to the
global ocean color data in order to study POC dynamics on synoptic, seasonal,
and interannual time scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has a number of
broader impacts. Among them, it will represent a major component of the Ph.D.
research of a graduate student. Moreover, the investigators will create project-
specific websites with the compiled data and results, which will be specially
designed both for the science community and general public. &lt;br/&gt;