* 0324816
* Innovative Information Technology for Space Weather Research
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Christoph Keller, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,057,000.00

Solar activity, summarized descriptively as space weather, is closely related to
the near Earth environment. Changes in space weather can have adverse effects on
many aspects of life and systems on Earth and in space. This project uses
innovative computation and information technologies for real time space weather
monitoring and forecasting to help government and industry prevent these adverse
effects.

The project has three components. (1) Technologies of image processing and
pattern recognition, such as image morphology segmentation, Support Vector
Machines (SVMs), and neural networks are used to detect and characterize
important solar activities in real-time. Automatic forecasting of Earth-directed
coronal mass ejection from the sun and subsequent geomagnetic storms will be
possible based on such detection and real time reporting of solar events. (2)
State-of-the-art parallel computing techniques are combined with phase diversity
speckle imaging techniques to yield near real-time diffraction limited images to
study solar activity and space weather in a way that could not be done before.
(3) Web based software tools are being developed to post processed data, events
and forecasting in real time, and to be integrated with solar activity and space
weather prediction Web pages.