* 0324609
* University of Florida 2003/2004 Special Year in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* William Hager, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2004
* USD 30,000.00

The 2003/2004 Florida Special Year Program in Mathematics, in applied
mathematics, is in the area of multiscale analysis and applications. Four
conferences will be held:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 1. Conference on mathematical
methods in imaging and vision.&lt;br/&gt; 2. Conference on multiscale
optimization methods and applications.&lt;br/&gt; 3. Conference on computational
methods in multiscale analysis and applications.&lt;br/&gt; 4. Student
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three conferences are organized by the
Mathematics Department in collaboration with Computer and Information Science
and Engineering, Industrial Systems and Engineering, Mechanics and Aerospace
Engineering, and industry. These conferences highlight recent mathematical
innovations, including&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(a) variational, probabilistic,
statistical, and geometric methods in image analysis and vision,&lt;br/&gt;(b)
pattern recognition and statistical classification in image
analysis,&lt;br/&gt;(c) multilevel and multiple scale methods in
optimization,&lt;br/&gt;(d) multigrid and homogenization methods for partial
differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conferences include both junior
and senior researchers and student participants. The student workshop, organized
by the UF SIAM Chapter, provides an opportunity for graduate students to play a
principal role in organizing a conference and in presenting their ongoing thesis
research to an audience composed of their peers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conferences held during the 2003/2004 Mathematics Special Year Program:&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;http://www.math.ufl.edu/special03/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;would have
broad impact in the sciences, engineering, and industry. The conferences will
broaden the educational experience and career options of the participating
students, and will give graduate students a broader perspective of their
research field. The mathematical technology presented at the imaging conference
is important for medical diagnostics where high accuracy is needed for
determining appropriate medications and dosages. The technology can also be
applied in other domains like computational physics, computer and information
science and engineering, and finance. The optimization conference showcases
recent computational methodologies having applications to scheduling, optimal
control of manufacturing processes, the design of faster and more reliable
computer chips, parallel computing techniques for solving difficult scientific
problems, and many other areas. The conference on multigrid and asymptotic
analysis focuses on recent numerical methods that are used in many fields
including oil exploration where acoustic signals are used to detect structure
beneath the surface of the earth, nondestructive testing of materials, where
external measurements of electric fields are used to detect imperfections
beneath the surface of the material, and medical modeling used in the design and
development of new diagnostic sensors.