* 0324729
* MPS Internships in Public Science Education - MPS-IPSE: Sensing the Radio Universe
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Michael Castelaz, Pisgah Astronomical Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 12/31/2006
* USD 246,938.00

AST-0324729&lt;br/&gt;PI: Michael Castelaz&lt;br/&gt;Inst:
PARI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general public's experience with the
universe is often limited in space and &lt;br/&gt;time. The observable universe
beyond the thin slice of the visible spectrum is often overlooked. Strikingly,
newspapers and magazines, television and radio, and the internet, broadcast
almost daily news about discoveries in astronomy that have been made at radio,
millimeter, infrared, ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma-ray wavelengths. How can the
public relate to these discoveries? This project, led by Dr. Michael Castelaz,
will develop a new portable planetarium program that will immerse the audience
in the radio universe to give them first hand experience with a part of the
electromagnetic spectrum they might not otherwise ever be aware of. The program
will employ a radio view of the sky projected on the portable planetarium dome,
and an accessory projector simulating a pulsar by flashing light, sound, and
touch through beepers that the audience will be given. The program will be
accompanied by a multimedia presentation that can be used beforehand in a
lecture or class situation, or used in the portable planetarium itself. The
multimedia presentation will also be available on a website.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of the radio sky program requires the
synergistic efforts of individuals with a broad range of talents from physics to
electronics, from art and computer graphics to education. A team of
undergraduate multimedia and physics majors will develop and build a projection
cylinder for the portable planetarium that projects the view of the universe as
seen at radio wavelengths, i.e., the radio sky. The students will also develop
and build the pulsar projector accessory for the cylinder. The key to the use of
the new projector will be the student developed multimedia program which will
describe the radio sky. Over a two-year period the project will involve 12
students who will work with a professional planetarium operator, two
professional astronomers, and a multimedia expert with planetarium experience.
The programs the student teams develop will impact the western North Carolina
region where more than 50,000 students and general public will be visited with
the portable planetarium in classrooms and public open houses. On a broader
scale, portable planetariums have been sold in over forty-five countries around
the world with an estimated 12 million individuals participating in portable
planetarium programs each year. The project has the potential to reach these
individuals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the MPS Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***