* 0324498
* Equipment Proposal:  Directional Wavemaker System for the 3-D Tsunami Basin
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Harry Yeh, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2006
* USD 183,857.00

This action is to support the development of a state-of-the-art wavemaker system
for long-wave (tsunamis) generation in a laboratory wave basin. The system
comprises an array of 11 side-by-side paddles that are moved horizontally in
piston-like motions by 12 axes of linear motion devices. The motion of each axis
is produced and controlled by a precision linear-motor unit that provides the
most sophisticated load positioning available today. The complete system will be
capable of generating arbitrary long-wave forms that propagate in arbitrary
directions.

The wavemaker system will be installed in a precision wave basin being
constructed at Oregon State University. Although separate from the NEES (Network
for Earthquake Engineering Simulation) tsunami wave basin, it will be an
accurate 1/8th scale model and a complementary facility to the NEES wave basin.
The directional wave capabilities will enhance significantly research using the
NEES wave basin, as well as expanding the set of basic research areas on
nonlinear long-wave dynamics in 3-D domains.

The model facility will provide a more manageable and less expensive facility
for exploring and planning research efforts in the larger facility. It will also
enable researchers to obtain accurate information on scale effects between
different size laboratory facilities that will be useful in extrapolating
results from the large NEES facility to even larger field scales. Research using
the wavemaker system will take full advantage of the NEES program in terms of
dissemination, education, and broader collaboration.