* 0324981
* The Institutional Dimensions of Global Environmental Change International Program Office
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Oran Young, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 08/31/2006
* USD 405,000.00

Research on the complex interactions among human and natural components of the
integrated Earth system have highlighted the need to understand both individual
and collective perceptions and actions of human beings, because people operate
both as individuals and as members of groups and institutions. Institutions
figure prominently both as causes of large-scale environmental changes and
through direct response and through establishment of the frameworks of responses
to changing environmental conditions. This award provides renewed support for
the International Project Office (IPO) of the Institutional Dimensions of Global
Environmental Change (IDGEC) project. IDGEC is one of four major core projects
of the International Human Dimensions Programme on Global Environmental Change
Programme (IHDP), which is an international collaborative research program
overseen by the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), with
cooperation from the International Social Science Council (ISSC). The IDGEC
Science Plan lays out a research program that addresses the role of institutions
in causing and confronting large-scale environmental changes. The plan focuses
on issues of causality, performance, and design, and it draws attention to
analytic themes relating to institutional fit, interplay, and scale. The IDGEC
IPO provides a range of services designed to maximize the likelihood of IDGEC
projects being successful in meeting the goals of the science plan. Among the
functions undertaken by the IPO are staffing for the IDGEC Science Steering
Committee, the project's main administering body; conducting liaison with IHDP
staff and leaders; promoting IDGEC science; presenting and publishing IDGEC
scientific results; and managing and mobilizing the IDGEC network. Major
emphasis of the IDGEC IPO are developing opportunities for members of the
network, exploring the uses of web-based conferencing to promote IDGEC science,
and initiating a policy links publication series.

The IDGEC-IPO plays a critical role in the success of this research project by
catalyzing and coordinating a global network of scientists pursuing a common
research agenda. Through continued support for the IPO, the infrastructure for
the conduct of current and future international collaborations focusing on this
important set of problems will be strengthened, and the U.S. will give a
positive signal to other nations regarding the value and utility of major
international collaborative efforts

