* 0324442
* Collapse Analysis and Displacement Estimates of Degrading MDOF Structures for Performance-Based Seismic Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Ashraf Ayoub, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 12/31/2004
* USD 74,951.00

Collapse Analysis and Displacement Estimates of Degrading MDOF Structures for
Performance-Based Seismic Design, CMS proposal 0324442&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ayoub,
USF&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic design methodologies have recently adopted the
new general concept of performance-based procedures. The new concept has been
reflected in several codes of practice. New analysis procedures have been
developed to estimate seismic demands for performance evaluation. Most of these
procedures are based on simple models, and do not take into account degradation
effects, a major factor influencing structural behavior under earthquake
excitations. More importantly, most of these models do not predict
&lt;br/&gt;collapse of structures under seismic loads. The main objective of
this research project is to develop a procedure for incorporating degradation
effects for seismic demand evaluation of MDOF systems. A new numerical platform
that permits analysis of degrading structural systems was already developed by
the P.I. Energy-based approaches were used to define several types of
degradation effects. The newly developed models were added to the material
library of a widely used commercial software for seismic analysis of MDOF
structural systems. The models also permit collapse prediction of MDOF
structures under seismic excitations. The proposed work consists of several
tasks. First, a numerical study on collapse prediction and displacement
estimates of degrading SDOF systems will be conducted. Second, a statistical
parameter study is performed in order to study the effectiveness of scaling
earthquake records for MDOF analysis of degrading systems. Third, an extensive
numerical study is conducted on degrading &lt;br/&gt;MDOF systems to estimate
maximum inelastic displacements for use in performance-based seismic code
provisions, and to determine strength levels that subject the structures to
collapse for collapse-prevention limit state design purposes. Finally, seismic
fragility analysis will be performed, where fragility curves for a collapse
criterion for a large spectrum of structural systems will be generated
numerically. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the research
project is to include degradation effects in performance based seismic design
methodologies. To perform this task, accurate constitutive models of degrading
materials have to be developed. Currently, few if any deterioration models exist
in a general three-dimensional frame analysis program. The research project
employs newly defined energy-based degrading models that have been incorporated
into a commercial nonlinear seismic analysis program. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the proposed research project is to provide an opportunity to
expose students and structural engineers in the Tampa Bay area to new design
techniques. This will be performed through the development of new courses on
inelastic analysis of structures, and performance-based procedures, that will be
available on the interactive web-based teaching tool Blackboard5. The project
also represents an opportunity to involve students at USF, especially of
underrepresented groups, in a research work of &lt;br/&gt;national interest on
seismic hazard mitigation, as currently one such minority student is already
involved in a similar work. Finally, the statistical outcomes of the proposed
research will be documented in a database format to be available on the
internet, which will provide important information to the whole structural
community. &lt;br/&gt;