* 0324756
* Workshop Event: Programming Languages/Environments for the Educationally Disadvantaged
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2005
* Margaret Burnett, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2005
* USD 39,096.00

This is funding to support a research event for 10-14 promising doctoral
students from the United States and abroad, along with distinguished research
faculty, which will take place in conjunction with the 2003 IEEE Symposia on
Human-Centric Computing Languages and Environments (HCC 2003), to be held
October 28-31 in Auckland, New Zealand, and sponsored by the IEEE Computer
Society. Many schools in minority and rural areas struggle to provide even the
basics of education, let alone technological training, to their students, who
become educationally disadvantaged adults; this problem can also exist for
certain groups in schools that serve some populations better than others. With
little experience or confidence in their ability to deal with technology,
educationally disadvantaged people face serious obstacles when trying to cope
with software designed by and for "information haves." Whether and how software
with the power of programmability can be viable for disadvantaged populations is
the subject of this event, which will bring together and build community among
young researchers working on different aspects of the research problem, whether
their "home" research community is in Computer Science, Sociology, or Education.
The workshop will emphasize to attendees (both the graduate students immediately
involved and general conference participants) the crosscutting nature of
research relevant to this pressing research problem, which has received almost
no prior study. Goals of the workshop include building a cohort group of new
researchers who will then have a network of colleagues spread out across the
world, guiding the work of new researchers by having experts in the research
field give them advice, and making it possible for promising new entrants to the
field to attend their research conference. Student participants will make formal
presentations of their work during the workshop, and will receive feedback from
the faculty panel. The feedback is geared to helping students understand and
articulate how their work is positioned relative to other human-computer
interaction research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis
research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and
whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. Extended
abstracts of the students' work will be published in the conference proceedings,
which has wide print and electronic distribution. The conference steering
committee will evaluate the workshop outcome, and the results will be made
available to the organizers of possible similar future
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The workshop will help shape
ongoing and future research projects aimed at alleviating a pressing problem of
relevance to a great many people within our society. This event will promote
discovery and learning, by encouraging the student researchers to explore a
difficult and challenging open problem, through involvement of a panel of well-
known researchers whose task is to provide constructive feedback, and through
inclusion of other conference participants who will also learn from and provide
additional feedback to the students and to each other.