* 0324209
* Scholars for the Technical Workforce of the Future Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Helmut Knaust, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

This project provides support for thirty (30) students in the following
disciplines civil, mechanical, industrial, electrical, computer, metallurgical
and materials engineering, computer science The objectives
are:&lt;br/&gt;Continue support for current NSF CSEMS
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;Provide scholarship support for an increasing number of
students over the course of the grant period by identifying new recipients to
replace those graduating and/or moving on to advanced degree programs at other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;Include a special emphasis for supporting El Paso
Community College CSEMS scholars transferring to UTEP.&lt;br/&gt;Support an
infrastructure that enriches scholars' experiences and professional development,
creating opportunities for broad interaction and mentoring among UTEP faculty,
undergraduate, masters, and doctoral-level students.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. This project builds on its current efforts having funded a total of 84
Scholars since 2000. Of these, 34 have completed their degree programs. A well
articulated infrastructure is in place to recruit and identify 30 CSEMS scholars
15 undergraduates, 15 graduates drawn from the pool of eligible computer
science, civil, electrical and computer, mechanical and industrial, and
metallurgical and materials engineering, and mathematical sciences majors.
Students identified through a pool drawn from the UTEP Scholarship Office's
database as well as those suggested by faculty, receive a letter inviting them
to apply to the program. A committee of faculty representing the targeted
disciplines assesses the applicants against outlined standards, selecting those
who most closely match the criteria. Scholars benefit from participating in
University and College of Engineering sponsored job fairs, other employer
sponsored venues and a range of professional training activities to enhance
their overall development and ensure their advancement.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. In an environment focused on providing both access and quality
education to the largely under-educated population of the region, UTEP CSEMS is
poised to make a significant contribution to creating a diversified scientific
and engineering workforce. No more is that evident but in the caliber of
students having already participated in the program, young men and women who
clearly have within them the potential for providing the leadership that
industry and research need to effectively provide for the future of this
country.&lt;br/&gt;