* 0325428
* ITR:  Monitoring Emotions while Students Learn with AutoTutor
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Arthur Graesser, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,256,000.00

This research investigates emotions during the process of learning and reasoning
while college students interact with complex learning environments. College
students learn about introductory computer literacy or conceptual physics on the
web by an intelligent tutoring system, called AutoTutor. AutoTutor helps
learners construct explanations that answer difficult questions by interacting
with them in natural language and by helping them use simulation environments.
AutoTutor has an animated conversational agent and a dialog management facility
that attempts to comprehend the learner's contributions and to respond with
appropriate dialog moves (short feedback, pumps, hints, prompts for information,
assertions, answers to student questions, suggestions for actions, summaries).
The emotions of the learner are monitored during this learning process by
integrating state-of-the-art affect sensing technology with AutoTutor.
Confusion, frustration, boredom, interest, excitement, and other learner
emotions are classified on the basis of facial actions, body posture, pressure
on the mouse, speech acts in dialog, mastery of the material, and the timing of
interactions. One strand of research develops the affect-sensing technologies
and tests their validity in classifying the learner emotions. A second line of
research investigates whether learning gains and learner impressions are
influenced by dialog moves of AutoTutor that are constrained by the learner's
emotional state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance education and
natural language dialog technologies through a system that promotes deep
learning of material in a fashion that is sensitive to the learners' emotions. A
learning environment that monitors learner emotions is likely to be more
motivating and personally relevant to the learner. &lt;br/&gt;