* 0325531
* Benchmarking Integrated FACTS and Modern Energy Storage Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Mariesa Crow, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 07/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

The electric power system is one of our nation's critical infrastructures.
Interruptions create enormous economic and social impact. Momentary outages and
voltage sags alone account for $25-400 billion/year in the US. When coupled with
FACTS technology, modern energy storage systems (ESS), such as batteries,
flywheels, SMES, and super-capacitors, can improve stability, power quality, and
the reliability of power systems. Many power system problems can be impacted
more effectively by utilizing active power control. Integrating energy storage
system into FACTS devices can provide dynamic decentralized active power
capabilities and give transmission service providers much needed flexibility for
mitigating transmission level power flow problems and lead to more economical
power delivery, better power quality, and improved reliability. This project
will develop a scientific framework to guide the technical decision-making
process of when, where, and how to integrate FACTS/ESS into the bulk power to
alleviate dynamic perturbations and improve transmission congestion and loop
flows. This work will generate benchmark systems for three energy storage
technologies (battery, SMES, and super-capacitors), and develop a modular
benchmark power grid model for evaluating ESS performance. This study will
culminate in a comprehensive set of guidelines and metrics for the
implementation of FACTS/ESS in power systems. The intellectual merits and
tangible outcomes of this research include the development of theoretical
understanding of power system responses to dynamic active power
injection/absorption, a comprehensive characterization of the primary energy
storage technologies with the corresponding power electronic interfaces, and a
comparison of the different FACTS/ESS with respect to typical applications.