* 0325281
* ITR:  Collaborative Research:  Representation and Learning in Computational Game theory
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Michael Littman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2009
* USD 375,400.00

Computational Game Theory is a rapidly emerging discipline at the intersection
of computer science, economics, and related fields. It is becoming a fundamental
tool for understanding and designing complex multiagent environments such as the
Internet, systems of autonomous agents, and electronic economies. The objective
of this program is the development of powerful new representations for complex
game-theoretic and economic reasoning problems, and strategic learning
algorithms for adjusting their parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Special emphasis
is being given to models permitting the specification of natural network
structure in the interactions within a large population of players, and models
generalizing the spirit of financial markets, in which interactions take place
via global intermediate quantities. Powerful recent machine learning methods
such as boosting and exponential updates are also being applied to the more
subtle and complex setting of learning in games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
expected results of the program are a rich set of new modeling methods for game-
theoretic applications, and computationally efficient algorithms for reasoning
with them, including the computation of Nash, correlated, and other equilibria,
as well as efficient learning methods with known convergence properties. Special
emphasis will be given to formal analysis, and the resulting methods will
provide a new toolbox for researchers in economics, social science, evolutionary
biology, and other fields in which game-theoretic approaches are common. The
findings of the program will be widely disseminated through international
conferences and journals, as well as more specialized workshops deliberately
bringing together researchers from the different relevant
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;