* 0325024
* MII:  UTEP Distibuted Computing Lab:  Creation of a Pipeline for Minority Participation in Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Joseph Pierluissi, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 08/31/2007
* USD 750,514.00

This project, establishing a Distributed Computing Laboratory (DCL) based on a
Beowulf cluster, aims at supporting multiple research projects, in particular:
Neuro-Fuzzy Systems Modeling, Simulation, and Applications, Cluster Architecture
and Networking, General Distributed Computation Techniques, and Enhancement of
Spatial Resolution in Electrocardiography through Improvements in Numerical
Methods. This last project will serve as a bridge to the new Border Health
Science Center in El Paso. The DCL will afford students the opportunity to carry
out hands-on projects in Artificial Neural Networks, Operating Systems, Computer
Network Protocols, and Computer Architecture. Initially the following 3 projects
will directly benefit from the infrastructure proposed: Distributed Processing
Research, Simulation of Neuro-Fuzzy Hybrid Systems, and Enhancement of Spatial
Resolution in Electrocardiography.

For educational and outreach activities, the Lab will serve as a hub that
creates a pipeline of minority and women students from high school through
graduate school. The cluster will be utilized in three interleaved efforts: To
Perform specialized outreach to intelligent minority and female high-school
students labeled "at risk;" Provide enrichment of educational activities in
CISE; and Involve students in research, using the DCL as a catalyst to promote
multi-disciplinary collaborations that would benefit from this form of
computing.

Each objective contributes to creating a pipeline for minority students that
creates a larger number of motivated entering students, leads to higher
retention and attainment of degrees, and provides qualified professionals
experienced in CISE research activities. Thus, the work is geared to attract and
retain under-represented students, developing a solid collaborative research
backbone, enhancing its educational program, and improving participation of a
diverse student population in computer engineering disciplines. The outreach
plan includes a DCL summer camp with students in the project participating in
UTEP's Engineering and Science EXPO. Enhancement of the educational program is
expected to lead to improved recruitment and retention, increased transition
towards graduate programs, and a stronger integration between research and
education at the graduate and undergraduate level