* 0325402
* ITR: Collaborative Research - An Information Management Infrastructure for Product Family Planning and Mass Customization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Timothy Simpson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2007
* USD 407,892.00

This grant provides funding to investigate an information management
infrastructure to support the planning and development of families of engineered
products and systems for mass customization. The research will be conducted by a
multi-university team comprised of faculty from the Pennsylvania State
University, Bucknell University, the University of Missouri-Rolla, and the
University of Massachusetts-Amherst. The research will address three information
technology challenges that include an information management infrastructure, a
graphical modeling environment, and an agent-based synthesis framework to
support product family planning and customization. First, a generalized
information management infrastructure will be developed to facilitate capturing
information regarding component sharing and reuse within a family of products.
Next, a graphical modeling environment will be created to facilitate product
family planning and construction, requirements specification, and customer
preference capture. Finally, an agent-based synthesis framework will be
developed to help configure platform concepts and customized variants within a
product family. The research will be conducted in collaboration with industrial
and government partners that include Pratt &amp; Whitney, General Motors,
Apprentice Systems, and the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will expand the utilization
of information technology across engineering by developing a novel approach for
managing design information related to product family planning for mass
customization. The work will extend current representation and interoperability
standards for product design repositories. The theoretical foundations developed
for product family planning and information management will provide the basic
framework for the development of an experimental prototype graphical modeling
environment to test the validity of the proposed representation and agent-based
synthesis methods. This modeling environment will also contribute to the
development of integrated and interactive solution procedures for product family
planning and synthesis. The project also has an educational component to it. The
grant will foster undergraduate and graduate student exchanges between the four
universities that are involved in this research, and projects based on the
proposed research will be integrated within six undergraduate and six graduate
courses at the four universities. Technology transfer will also occur with the
industrial partners involved in the research.&lt;br/&gt;