* 0325872
* IERI:  Tools for mathematics communication in education
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Bruce Char, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,030,694.00

This project will develop software to support the high-volume mathematical
communication of MathForum, an internet-based learning community headquartered
at Drexel University. MathForum involves thousands of middle school and high
school students from across the nation and hundreds of teachers and volunteers.
All of them spend much of their time communicating mathematical content without
any support from specialized tools: the learning curve of even the best existing
tools being too steep for widespread adoption. This situation not only impacts
the appearance and clarity of the communication; it also isolates the community
from state-of-the-art computer algebra tools and makes it unsuitable for the
next generation of communication devices. Moreover, it prevents sophisticated
reuse of archived materials because there is no structure that can be used as a
basis for search other than character strings.

This project will remedy the situation by developing tools that support the
creation of mathematical content, improve the retrieval of existing material,
provide a link to computer algebra systems, and prepare MathForum for the
introduction of new communication technologies. The development of the tools
will be coordinated with MathForum, and continuous user assessment will be done
to ensure that the tools produced will be useful to the target audience.

These communication goals are achieved by making our human-computer interface
exploit domain-specific information and context, and by allowing it to draw on
data derived from MathForum's extensive archive of past interactions. By linking
tutorial information with the capabilities of a computer algebra system the
system will allow the inclusion of example generators, interactive exploration
for studying multiple instances of a problem, and graphics and equation
manipulation for illustration and enhanced understanding. Finally, ways to make
smart phones, wireless PDAs and other convergence devices useful for mathematics
communication are investigated. The extent to which various devices can support
mathematical communication will be determined and ways of optimizing this
support will be sought.

The MathForum is a highly visible and successful web-based service for the
mathematics education community, receiving approximately 1.7 million visits per
month. A key portion of this service is "Ask Dr. Math", which receives and
answers thousands of questions a month via email. The answers are provided by a
volunteer team of "math doctors", and become part of an archive of over 450,000
Q&A items. The nature of mathematical communication within the context of "Ask
Dr. Math" will be investigated tools built in support of such communication.

The mathematical communication tools developed for the MathForum community will
have more general applicability to the large community of technical educators,
and to anyone engaged in learning or training activities involving mathematics.
Another important class of users would be the distributed communities of
researchers using the Internet to support their collaboration. We regard
software supporting such functionality as being an important component of the
national cyberinfrastructure for scientific/engineering research and education.

