* 0325939
* ITR: Materials Computation Center
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2012
* Duane Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 09/30/2012
* USD 3,985,000.00

This award was made on a 'medium' category proposal submitted in response to the
ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. The Division of Materials Research, the Advanced
Computational Infrastructure and Research Division, and the Chemistry Division
contribute funds to this award. It supports interdisciplinary computational and
theoretical research and education at the Materials Computation Center (MCC).
The MCC will foster a stimulating intellectual and interactive environment in a
facility for students, teachers and researchers focused on research, software
development, and education in computational materials research. The MCC has
three major Thrusts: (1) collaborations/networking, (2) education and knowledge-
transfer, and (3) materials research, computational tools and algorithms. Key
projects are currently in the themes of quantum simulations, complex systems and
phase transformations, and computer science and scaleable parallel methods for
materials modeling. Through these projects, advances will be made in important
areas and advanced codes/algorithms and tools, based on modern software
engineering, will be provided for the computational materials science community.
Research activities include genetic algorithms and programs applied to multiple
time scale simulations for materials dynamics and to reaction chemistry;
MatSimViz simulation/visualization tools; block, parallel iterative methods for
parallel electronic structure algorithms; Quantum Monte Carlo workbench; and a
PlayStation2 parallel supercomputer for quantum chemistry. The MCC will engage
research problems and algorithm development at the forefront of scientific
computing and aims to develop new approaches for understanding complex materials
using advanced computational methods. The MCC will expand and maintain updated
libraries of codes in a Software Archive (http://www.mcc.uiuc.edu) and it will
actively collaborate with similar efforts in Europe (broad collaborations such
as III, PSI-k and CECAM), with National laboratories, and other Centers. The MCC
will expand its previous efforts on Summer School and Workshop activities and
graduate training. As a center activity, graduate-level training modules will be
developed on various topics in computational materials research and will be
distributes through the Software Archive and the web. Apart from education and
outreach activities outlined above, MCC contributes to the broad advance of
Computational Materials Research which has impact on the advance of fundamental
science and the potential impact on a wide range of technologies. Its activities
contribute to education of future computational materials scientists, knowledge-
transfer activities associated with active research, networking of researchers
and students with the world-wide community, creation and distribution of useful
tools for research and applications to challenging problems in materials
research. %%% This award was made on a 'medium' category proposal submitted in
response to the ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. The Division of Materials
Research, the Advanced Computational Infrastructure and Research Division, and
the Chemistry Division contribute funds to this award. It supports
interdisciplinary computational and theoretical research and education at the
Materials Computation Center (MCC). The MCC will foster a stimulating
intellectual and interactive environment in a facility for students, teachers
and researchers focused on research, software development, and education in
computational materials research. The MCC has three major Thrusts: (1)
collaborations/networking, (2) education and knowledge-transfer, and (3)
materials research, computational tools and algorithms. Key projects are
currently in the themes of quantum simulations, complex systems and phase
transformations, and computer science and scaleable parallel methods for
materials modeling. Through these projects, advances will be made in important
areas and advanced codes/algorithms and tools, based on modern software
engineering, will be provided for the computational materials science community.
Research activities include genetic algorithms and programs applied to multiple
time scale simulations for materials dynamics and to reaction chemistry;
MatSimViz simulation/visualization tools; block, parallel iterative methods for
parallel electronic structure algorithms; Quantum Monte Carlo workbench; and a
PlayStation2 parallel supercomputer for quantum chemistry. The MCC will engage
research problems and algorithm development at the forefront of scientific
computing and aims to develop new approaches for understanding complex materials
using advanced computational methods. The MCC will expand and maintain updated
libraries of codes in a Software Archive (http://www.mcc.uiuc.edu) and it will
actively collaborate with similar efforts in Europe (broad collaborations such
as III, PSI-k and CECAM), with National laboratories, and other Centers. The MCC
will expand its previous efforts on Summer School and Workshop activities and
graduate training. As a center activity, graduate-level training modules will be
developed on various topics in computational materials research and will be
distributes through the Software Archive and the web. Apart from education and
outreach activities outlined above, MCC contributes to the broad advance of
Computational Materials Research which has impact on the advance of fundamental
science and the potential impact on a wide range of technologies. Its activities
contribute to education of future computational materials scientists, knowledge-
transfer activities associated with active research, networking of researchers
and students with the world-wide community, creation and distribution of useful
tools for research and applications to challenging problems in materials
research. ***

















