* 0325948
* Mini-symposium on Mathematical and Computational Modeling of Biological Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Padmanabhan Seshaiyer, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2004
* USD 20,000.00

Seshaiyer&lt;br/&gt; The investigator organizes a symposium on mathematical
and&lt;br/&gt;computational modeling of biological systems at Texas
Tech&lt;br/&gt;University from November 6-8, 2003. The conference consists of
a&lt;br/&gt;series of lectures given by outstanding scholars who
have&lt;br/&gt;contributed extensively to the central theme. The talks cover
a&lt;br/&gt;broad range of topics, including the mathematics of
cardiac&lt;br/&gt;arrhythmias, past successes and future challenges in
continuum&lt;br/&gt;mechanics of soft biological tissues, a 20 year
retrospective of&lt;br/&gt;the Chay-Keizer model, tumor mechanics, computational
biofluid&lt;br/&gt;dynamics, and computational models of cardiovascular
surgery&lt;br/&gt;planning. The main objectives of the meeting are to:
(a)&lt;br/&gt;disseminate the most recent advances in mathematical
and&lt;br/&gt;computational approaches in understanding biological systems,
(b)&lt;br/&gt;increase the level of awareness in nurturing mathematical
and&lt;br/&gt;computational research in biological systems, (c) to train
senior&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate, graduate, post-doctoral students and early
career&lt;br/&gt;scientists in interdisciplinary aspects of problem solving,
and&lt;br/&gt;(d) initiate and promote new collaborations between
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;and all areas of science, engineering and science
education.&lt;br/&gt; The theme of the meeting is the opportunity to
use&lt;br/&gt;mathematical and computational tools to understand
biological&lt;br/&gt;systems. The meeting includes experts giving lectures on
diverse&lt;br/&gt;topics in the underlying theme, with the expectation to
provide&lt;br/&gt;members of the mathematical and engineering community
an&lt;br/&gt;opportunity to learn about new research venues.
Participants&lt;br/&gt;include undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral&lt;br/&gt;researchers. The meeting provides a forum for the
exposure and&lt;br/&gt;exchange of ideas, methods, and results in the underlying
theme&lt;br/&gt;of the conference. The conference provides an
excellent&lt;br/&gt;opportunity to assess the current developments and
future&lt;br/&gt;directions in this area. Special efforts are made to
encourage&lt;br/&gt;women and underrepresented minorities to pursue careers
in&lt;br/&gt;science, especially in interdisciplinary areas that bridge
the&lt;br/&gt;biological, mathematical, and computational
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;