* 0325781
* ITR Collaborative Research: Achieving the Rate-Diversity Tradeoff in Space-Time Codes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* A. Roger Hammons, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2008
* USD 420,000.00

ABSTRACT 0325781 Hammons A. Roger Johns Hopkins U

The term fading is used to describe the unpredictable and often rapid
fluctuation in received signal strength encountered in a wireless communication
environment. Dropped calls in cellular communication are often attributable to
fading. A very effective and recent technique used to combat fading is to use
multiple antennas at both input (transmitter end) and output (receiver end). The
term space-time communication channel is used to describe the fading, wireless
communication channel in the presence of multiple input and output antennas.
Multiple input and output can be used to either increase the reliability of a
wireless communication channel or else increase the rate at which information
can be transmitted by a factor potentially equal to the number of transmit
antennas. When used to both increase reliability and rate of information
transfer, there is a tradeoff between the increase in information rate and the
corresponding reliability of the communication link. This tradeoff is referred
to as the rate-diversity tradeoff. A principal goal in the present project is
the design of signal sets that will allow the user to pick an operating point
along the rate diversity tradeoff curve. Other goals include helping define and
achieve the limits of the space-time communication channel. More specific
objectives include the design of signal sets that achieve the rate-diversity
tradeoff and that are easy to decode, the study of alternative relevant notions
of channel capacity such as delay-limited channel capacity, the study of other
relevant channel models including those incorporating channel memory and
correlated path gains, the study of the space-time channel in the presence of
feedback as well as in the presence of sources having a multi-resolution
capability.