* 0325536
* ITR/NGS:     Toward Autonomous Computing Platforms:      System-Wide Hardware/Software Performance Monitoring and Adaptation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Anthony Reeves, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 09/30/2009
* USD 832,000.00

The proposed research will develop a flexible and unifying framework for non-
intrusive hardware monitoring of virtually any system component, to enable
methods and tools to build systems that can be autonomous, self-aware, self-
adapting, and self-healing. Building such systems requires the existence of
flexible, introspective data acquisition mechanisms to determine the state of
the system, to detect alfunctions or inefficiencies, and to provide the basis
for appropriate adaptation (to steer system configuration and optimization).
Whereas current systems provide only limited access to specific events
(prohibiting system-wide event correlation and global state evaluation), we will
provide: o System-wide, unified introspection as a building block for autonomic
systems; o Data preprocessing on the actual monitoring probes (by leveraging
reconfigurability); o Standardized access to performance information using high-
level queries; o Integration of hardware and system software probes in a common
framework; o Correlation of performance information from several sources to
assemble global system state for requested metrics; o Autonomic optimization of
system components, including the Operating System (OS), runtime, and compiler; o
Ability to optimize for performance, power savings, heat dissipation, security,
and reliability, all within a single framework;

The intellectual merit of the proposed work includes a) laying the architectural
and system software foundations for introspective systems, b) developing and
testing a design for non-intrusive, flexible hardware monitoring of system
behavior, and c) demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach and design in
three main ways. We will dynamically optimize interconnect performance for a DSM
cluster; deploy plug-and-play monitoring modules for the K42 multiprocessor OS,
and perform dynamic system reconfiguration based on the information gathered by
these modules; and demonstrate via simulation the opportunities for dynamic
adaptation within the processor core and memory hierarchy. The broader impact of
this work includes distribution of our tools and infrastructure to the research
community.

