* 0325656
* Regulation and Assembly of Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complexes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Jan Miernyk, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2007
* USD 450,000.00

Respiration is the use of energy by living cells to do work. Both growth and
reproduction are affected by respiration and it must be carefully controlled to
avoid decreased growth and, in the case of plants, reduced agricultural
productivity. Despite considerable research, details of how respiration is
controlled in plant cells remain a puzzle.&lt;br/&gt; Pyruvate dehydrogenase is
a multi-component enzyme complex located within a specific sub-cellular
compartment of plant cells. It occupies a cross-roads position where there is
interaction among multiple components of respiration. This complex is ideally
situated to play a major role in the overall control of respiration.
Furthermore, the multi-component architecture of the complex allows input from
several different mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt; One element of the regulatory scheme
may be an intrinsic component of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. Detailed
biochemical and molecular analyses of this component will provide critical
insight into the putative mechanism of control. In addition, a genetic strategy
that uses whole plants will be employed. A small model plant, mouse-eared cress,
will be used. Molecular genetic experiments will allow the complete elimination
of the proposed control component of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. If the
control hypothesis is correct, uncontrolled respiration will result in small,
less-productive plants. These plants will be rescued by replacing the control
component. Both the native control component and versions that have been
modified in the laboratory will be used. This will allow specific understanding
of the mechanism of control.&lt;br/&gt; In contrast to microbes or animals,
plant cells contain several different versions of another component of the
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. Preliminary studies have shown that the
situation is not so simple as having different versions functioning at different
times or in different places. Again, the mouse-eared cress plant will be
manipulated so as to eliminate two of the three versions of this component.
These experiments will be iterative and combinatorial. This means that plants
will be generated that contain only component 1, only 2, only 3, 1 and 2, 1 and
3, and 2 and 3. These manipulations will allow a better understanding of the
contribution that each component makes to the whole complex.&lt;br/&gt; A third
component of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex has been an enigma. There is
considerable evidence for its existence, but it has thus far not been isolated.
Attempts to isolate this component by molecular genetics have not been
successful. The return to a more classical biochemical isolation strategy will
be undertaken. However it will be a more specific strategy based upon results
from other plant and animal experimental systems. Isolation of this third
component will allow subsequent isolation of the gene. Once this is
accomplished, then the biochemical and molecular strategies described above will
be applied.&lt;br/&gt; The information gained from these experiments will
improve basic understanding of plant growth and development. Furthermore, there
is the potential that the results will allow researchers to increase
agricultural productivity by altering the control of plant cell respiration.
Finally, the results will inform the design of more efficient crop plants
through classical breeding or biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;