* 0325383
* ITR: Collaborative Research: Using Humanoids to Understand Humans
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Christopher Atkeson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 09/30/2009
* USD 1,484,667.00

Research in neuroscience and motor psychology has made tremendous progress in
generating better understanding of how the human brain generates motor
behaviors. At the same time robotics and computer graphics have created
increasingly impressive examples of theories and implementations of a variety of
movement behaviors, as seen in humanoid robotics and interactive animations and
games. Despite this progress, however, a major shortcoming in all these
disciplines remains an understanding of how complex movements that we make every
day can be created and combined flexibly, robustly, and autonomously. The goal
of this project is to develop and evaluate comprehensive information processing
models of human motor behavior, to overcome these shortcomings.&lt;br/&gt; The
PIs will investigate the algorithms and representations (such as what is stored
in long term memory) that enable the skilled behavior we see every day, using
brain imaging, studies of behavior, and evaluations of our ideas on humanoid
robots and in simulation. It brings together a set of researchers who have
individually or in small collaborations addressed fragments of this challenge.
The PIs have been successful in investigating individual and highly specialized
motor tasks, but have not yet integrated a significant number of behaviors such
that a robot or simulation could autonomously and robustly interact with a
dynamic environment. Members of this team have built biologically inspired
locomoting and&lt;br/&gt;humanoid robots that balance; walk and run on both flat
terrain, inclines, and stairs at a wide range of speeds; accurately place their
feet while walking and running; jump and leap; jump through hoops; perform
flips; recover from slips, trips, and stumbles; compliantly interact with
humans; throw, catch, hit, and juggle balls; devilstick; and play air hockey.
They have received equipment funding to develop a next generation humanoid in
collaboration with Sarcos, from the NSF CISE Collaborative Research Resources
(Research Infrastructure) Program. This humanoid experimental testbed will allow
them to develop and evaluate their proposals as to how behavior is generated
much more effectively. &lt;br/&gt;In the past, this group and others have
focused on modeling single tasks. This project focuses on developing and testing
approaches to coordinate many behaviors, and handle behavior selection, multiple
tasks, behavioral transitions, and error compensation, making the crucial step
from highly specialized investigations to a more general theory of information
processing in human motor control.&lt;br/&gt;