* 0325743
* Rayleigh-Taylor Instability, Non-Newtonian Rheology, and Chain Of Bubbles in Polymer Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Igor Kliakhandler, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Judy A. Raper
* 04/30/2006
* USD 70,000.00

Abstract CTS-0325743 I. Kliakhandler, Michigan Technological University

Rayleigh-Tayler Instability, Non-Newtonian Rheology, and Chain of Bubbles in
Polymer Solutions

The motion of bubbles in a liquid is one of the major fields in hydrodynamics.
It was studied already by Leonardo da Vinci, who noticed sinuous movement of
rising bubbles, which is relatively easy to observe in long columns. The
available body of knowledge and even its language connotation consider bubbles
only as a discrete, detached from each other, units. The continuous jet of air
in Newtonian liquids produces usual bubbling through Rayleigh-Taylor instability
of the jet.

In the recent work by PI it was found that in concentrated polymer solutions
bubbles may form a qualitatively new structures. The development of Rayleigh-
Taylor instability may be arrested by elastic properties of the polymer
solutions. As a result, instead of individual bubbles, a long chain of bubbles
is formed. The bubbles in the chain are very stable, slowly rising, connected by
thin necks; the whole structure is similar to beads, or bubble "sausage"; see
figures 1, 2 on the next pages. The rheological properties of polymeric
solutions where it is possible to create the chain of bubble are quite
interesting and call for their careful study.

So far, even the general understanding of this unusual and interesting
phenomenon is incomplete. Many basic questions about the chain of bubbles arise;
no modeling of the phenomenon has yet been done.

The proposed research will be devoted to the study and modeling of chain of
bubbles dynamics, and will concentrate on the few main issues; rheology of
polymers used in the formation of the chain, experimental elucidation of
conditions necessary for the creation of chain of bubbles, analysis of stability
of the air jet for various conditions, and strongly nonlinear modeling of the
phenomenon.

