* 0325273
* ITR: Collaborative Research: Dependable End-User Software
* CSE,CCF
* 10/15/2003,12/31/2009
* Margaret Burnett, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 12/31/2009
* USD 2,163,999.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0325273&lt;br/&gt;Margaret Burnett&lt;br/&gt;Oregon State
U&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been considerable work in empowering end users
to be able to write their own programs, and as a&lt;br/&gt;result, users are
indeed doing so. In fact, the number of end-user programmers in the United
States is expected to reach 55 million by 2005, as compared to only 2.75 million
professional programmers. The programming systems used by these end users
include spreadsheet systems, web authoring tools, and graphical languages for
demonstrating the desired behavior of educational simulations. Using such
systems, end users create software, in forms such as educational simulations,
spreadsheets, and dynamic e-business web applications. Unfortunately, however,
errors are pervasive in end-user software, and the resulting impact is sometimes
enormous. When the software end users create is not dependable, there can be
serious consequences for the people whose retirement funds, credit histories,
e-business revenues, and even health and safety rely on decisions made based on
that software.&lt;br/&gt;To address this problem, we propose a fundamental
paradigm shift to a new way of thinking about the way&lt;br/&gt;end users create
software. Our intent is to address the following research question:&lt;br/&gt;Is
it possible to bring the bene.ts of rigorous software engineering methodologies
to end users?&lt;br/&gt;We do not propose to transform end users into engineers.
Rather, our plan is to enable systems to create&lt;br/&gt;software to
collaborate with those users, in a software development paradigm that combines
traditionally separate functions blending speci.cation, design, implementation,
component integration, debugging, testing, and maintenance into tightly
integrated, highly interactive environments. These environments will employ new,
incremental, feedback devices supported by analysis and inferential reasoning to
help the user reason about the dependability of their software as they work with
it, in a manner that respects the user's problem-solving directions to an extent
unprecedented in existing software development environments.