* 0325534
* Collaborative Research:    ITR/NGS:    Deja Vu:    Transparent Checkpointing and Migration of Parallel Codes Over Grid Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2004,09/30/2009
* Dennis Kafura, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 09/30/2009
* USD 715,000.00

A daunting challenge is the evolution from today's computational Grid to a true
cyberinfrastructure that &lt;br/&gt;seamlessly integrates resources ranging from
small clusters in academic laboratories to the largest &lt;br/&gt;national
supercomputing centers and provides ubiquitous access to high performance
computing, &lt;br/&gt;research instrumentation, data warehouses and
visualization. Realization of this future requires &lt;br/&gt;fundamental
advances in transparent fault recovery mechanisms to mask component failures
endemic &lt;br/&gt;to any large-scale computational resource. While previous
generations of supercomputers engineered &lt;br/&gt;reliability into systems
hardware, today's high performance computing (HPC) environments are based
&lt;br/&gt;on clusters of COTS components, with no systemic solution for the
reliability of the resource as a &lt;br/&gt;whole. Engendering stability in ever
growing networked collections of cluster systems needs a &lt;br/&gt;software
solution that provides reliable access to computing resources through
transparent, efficient, &lt;br/&gt;and automatic checkpointing and recovery
(CPR) mechanisms. This propoject aims to bring about this future through
radically new approaches to longstanding problems in CPR and process migration
by building an integrated system called Daja vu. Daja vu provides (a) a
transparent parallel checkpointing and recovery mechanism that recovers from any
combination of systems failures without any modification to parallel
applications. (b) a novel post-compiler analysis system that transparently
captures application state, (c) a systems architecture that seamlessly
integrates user-initiated and system-initiated checkpoints in a single framework
enabling the effective use of a wide variety of domain specific knowledge, (d)
novel runtime mechanisms for transparent incremental checkpointing, to
efficiently capture the least amount of state required to maintain global
consistency, (e) a novel communications architecture that enables transparent
migration of existing MPI/PVM codes without source-code modifications to either
the application or the MPI/PVM libraries, (f) recoverable IO subsystems that can
be tailored to specific storage environments, and (g) interfaces to and
augmentation of the Globus Toolkit to effectively use the CPR and migration
capabilities provided by this research. The core CPR and migration facilities of
Deja vu will be surrounded by management, security, and scheduling facilities
that (a) integrate with local scheduling systems (e.g., OpenPBS) and accounting
systems for site-specific accounting and refunding of lost compute cycles and
(b) extend the Globus security architecture with fine grain rights and
dynamically created user accounts that allow the fluid resource control
available under the Deja vu system to be fully exploited. &lt;br/&gt;The design
goal of this project is not just to implement "point" solutions, but an
integrated system that will constitute a fundamental component of both large-
scale computing facilities and Grid infrastructures. Our &lt;br/&gt;research
team (VT, PSC, ISR) has considerable experience in the design, development,
deployment &lt;br/&gt;and support of complete solutions. &lt;br/&gt;