* 0325197
* ITR:  Collaborative Research:  Spatiotemporal Protocols and Analysis for Sensor Nets
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Tarek Abdelzaher, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal: CCR-0325529 (Lead)&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lu, Chenyang &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Washington University - St. Louis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: CCR-0325197
&lt;br/&gt;PI: Stankovic, John &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Virginia
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: ITR: Collaborative Research: Spatiotemporal
Protocols and Analyses for Wireless Sensor
Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale wireless sensor networks
can change the way humans interact with physical environments through a broad
range of applications including highway traffic coordination and security
surveillance. Future sensor-based applications will have to meet new kinds of
spatiotemporal specifications under severe resource limitations. Our fundamental
hypothesis is that communication protocols and their analysis must incorporate
the notions of space, time, and mobility in a unified framework, something not
addressed directly by earlier research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, a
collaboration between Washington University and the University of Virginia. An
overarching goal of the project is to establish a spatiotemporal communication
framework for wireless sensor networks the integration of real-time systems and
mobile computing research. The project develops a new communication protocol
stack optimized for sensor networks by incorporating timing and space properties
in scheduling and routing algorithms, thereby enabling analytic guarantees for
the spatiotemporal specifications of sensor network services in mobile
environments. Our protocol stack finds instantiation in a sensor network
middleware that is readily reusable by a broad range of applications. Developing
a rigorous spatiotemporal analysis that draws upon theories on real-time
schedulable utilization bound, network geometry, and decentralized feedback
control forms a key element of this project. The end results will be a
methodology for designing dependable sensor networks able to support mission
critical applications in which performance predictability is a paramount
concern. The team is also committed to integrating cutting-edge research with
teaching and outreach programs, leveraging off strong existing programs at
Washington University and the University of Virginia. A special relation with
the St. Louis Science Center will further expand our outreach efforts to
students and the public at larger through exhibits placed in the information
technology exhibit area. .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;