* 0325788
* Collaborative Research:    ITR/NGS:    Fast Wireless Network Simulation Using Spatio-Temporal Dilations
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Theodore Rappaport, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 01/31/2008
* USD 612,467.00

The design and development of future wireless networks and services will
require&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated simulation and emulation tools that captures the
scale, complexity, and&lt;br/&gt;abstraction of both the protocols that
constitute the multi-layered network stack, as well&lt;br/&gt;as the
heterogeneous nature of the wireless and wired Internet - tools that currently
do&lt;br/&gt;not exist. Future simulation strategies must capture the
heterogeneity of evolving&lt;br/&gt;protocols while simultaneously supporting
high-fidelity wireless modeling environment.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will build
a comprehensive Integrated Protocol Development Environment&lt;br/&gt;(IPDE) to
support design and development of wireless network protocols. This work will
enable&lt;br/&gt;researchers to design and develop end-to-end network
applications in a unified public-domain simulation and emulation
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two key innovations in this proposal that will
empower real time test and emulation of&lt;br/&gt;future wireless applications
include (i) the notion of relativistic time, that integrates the controllability
of virtual-time with the natural selfsynchronizing property of real-time, and
(ii) spatial scaling, where&lt;br/&gt;various components of the system will
operate at different spatial scales - ranging from&lt;br/&gt;continuous fluid
flow models for the Internet backbone, to discrete packet data flows
in&lt;br/&gt;actual routers - with overall spatial coordination occuring in a
decentralized manner.&lt;br/&gt;Validation of such an IPDE framework will be in
the form of the design and deployment&lt;br/&gt;of multiparametric adaptive
algorithms for wireless network scheduling and control.&lt;br/&gt;By providing
an integrated framework for simulation, hardware emulation, and
direct&lt;br/&gt;code execution of network protocols, the IPDE will enable
researchers to setup large&lt;br/&gt;scale virtual test-beds, validate their
modeling, and design middleware algorithms.