* 0326228
* IERI: Collaborative Research: Automating Early Assessment of Academic Standards for Very Young Native and Non-Native Speakers of American English
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Shrikanth Narayanan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2009
* USD 600,000.00

To help meet the increasing demand for high quality, efficient and accurate
diagnostic assessments of children's academic skills, a new paradigm for
automatic assessments is proposed. The project aims to advance the state of the
art in speech processing, wireless communications, data mining, and human-
computer interface (HCI) design so that effective child-friendly conversational
interfaces can be designed and developed. These technologies will be researched
in the framework of early learning and integrated with a progressive
understanding of the components of academic performance to develop a literacy
assessment system and explore the use of analogous assessment in math. The
impact of the proposed approach will be studied with native speakers of American
English (AE) and non-native AE speakers of Mexican-Spanish background in a
longitudinal fashion starting from pre-K, and in partnership with the Los
Angeles and Long Beach Unified School Districts, and UCLA's University
Elementary School. These schools have a highly diverse economic and ethnic
student body with more than half of the population being Hispanic. The project
will analyze children's speech as they grow; develop speech recognition (ASR)
algorithms for automating assessments that measure essential emerging literacy
and some math skills; create a query-based, longitudinal database for each
student; derive instructional guidance from the analysis of an ongoing
professional development program for teachers of native and non-native speakers;
and develop a nomadic interface among different computers and a central
database. No feedback or tutoring will occur. Instead, teachers will use the
results to make more timely and appropriate decisions about curriculum and
instructional interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Impact: The project
will address several fundamental research issues: (a) acoustic modeling:
documenting and accounting for inter- and intra-speaker variability cross-
sectionally and longitudinally; (b) pronunciation modeling and speaker
adaptation techniques that are scalable to children who are 4-8 years old and
who are native and non-native English speakers; (c) child-specific language
modeling: syntax, non-lexical events, and discourse phenomena; limited-domain
natural-language processing (comprehension); (d) novel noise-robust and
distributed ASR algorithms; (e) HCI: age-appropriate ways of displaying
information and eliciting responses; (f) data mining: mining sequential patterns
to discover trends over time, and user-specified associations; and (g) pedagogic
issues: investigate early emerging literacy measures for native and non-native
speakers, and discover reliable predictors of short- and long-term literacy
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative aspects of the proposed approach
include: a focus on literacy assessment that considers not only word
recognition, but also phonetic and phonological awareness, comprehension and
fluency; an exploratory study of automating math assessment tasks; a
longitudinal and cross-sectional acoustic modeling study of very young native
and non-native English speakers; extensive and longitudinal validation of the
system, children's performance, and teachers' practices; correlating literacy
measures to later reading performance; and pioneering research efforts involving
system deployment in wired and wireless
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational Impact: The project will foster
interdisciplinary activities at: the U. of California, Los Angeles (Electrical
Engineering [EE], Computer Science, and &lt;br/&gt;Education), U. of Southern
California (EE, Linguistics, and Neuroscience), and U. of California, Berkeley
(Education), in partnership with local elementary schools. Several renowned
experts, including international experts from Mexico and Sweden, from academia
and industry will act as advisory board members and consultants. Team members
have a track record of working together, and the project will serve as a vehicle
to train students, postdocs, and school teachers in novel cross-disciplinary
research areas of technological and educational significance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed project will have a profound
impact on relieving much of the burden of testing from teachers (allowing them
to focus more on what they do best), automated testing for very young children
(allowing a greater leverage point for potential intervention), and inclusion of
an increasingly diverse population (enabling unbiased assessment and furthering
the goal of universal access). National educational priorities are emphasizing
testing to a greater extent than ever before, but increased testing leads to
less time for teaching. The proposed system can reduce the test burden and
increase the frequency of high-quality, intuitively consumable information about
students so that individuals, programs, and schools can evolve more quickly by
understanding which methods are working best for which children. Educational
policy is also pushing downward to earlier ages to begin formal literacy
instruction. This system will provide a useful aid to learn how to help young
children succeed and to monitor their progress. The rapid expansion of student
groups, reflecting diverse, non-native speakers of English, presents a challenge
for fair assessment. The system helps ensure unbiased assessment of competence
in a timely and useful way. It is expected that the project will have a profound
impact on improving assessment and instructional material in the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;