* 0326154
* The Impacts of Invasive Non-Native Plants: A Normative and Conceptual Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Mark Sagoff, University of Maryland, College Park
* Fixed Amount Award
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/2005
* USD 40,096.00

The project examines the normative and conceptual framework in which plant
breeders, nursery professionals, plant ecologists, government officials, and
others may understand and assess the possibility that plant breeding, crop
domestication, and the introduction of plants for ornamental purposes may lead
to the release of invasive species that cause unwanted effects to natural
systems, to biological diversity, and to the environment. The research seeks to
understand which impacts on natural systems are undesirable, which desirable,
and why. It will try to clarify the concept of an invasive plant and related
concepts of damage to native biodiversity and to ecological systems. The project
will result in analytical papers that probe distinctions between the native and
the exotic, between the natural and the managed, between colonization and
invasion, and between changes in and harms to ecosystems. In particular, the
project will explore the problems and prospects of attempts to predict and to
assess the threats and opportunities invasive plants may pose to the intrinsic
and to the instrumental value of natural systems. The Principal Investigator
will address such questions as 1) the role and reliability of economic estimates
of the damage invasive plants cause to natural systems; 2) the ability of
ecological science to guide social decision making by predicting the ecological
impacts of non-native plant species; and 3) the character, cogency, and
importance of normative arguments for protecting unique natural areas against
the homogenizing effects of global commerce in varieties of plants. The proposed
research will contribute to an emerging philosophical literature on the concept
of ecological invasion and on related concepts of environmental harm. The
anticipated analytical papers will inform debate over invasive species policy
and can influence policy itself by clarifying the claims, assumptions,
distinctions, and beliefs that characterize current concerns about the economic
and ecological harms or benefits associated with the growing presence of non-
native species in the natural environment. Public policy for -- and courses
taught about -- ecological invasions need philosophical analyses that question
and clarify the underlying assumptions and distinctions.