* 0326309
* ITR:  An Infrastructure for Designing and Conducting Remote Laboratories
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2011
* James Corter, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,905,708.00

EIA 0326309 Sven Esche Institution: Stevens Institute of Technology Title: An
Infrastructure for Designing and Conducting Remote Laboratories This ITR medium
award provides support for integrating a variety of resources for remote
laboratories so that users can run experiments involving multiple devices in
different labs in different locations. Users can perform collaborative
experiments with multiple participants or combine experiments and simulations in
an integrated lab experience. While developing an interface to support both
physical and simulated laboratory activities various cognitive and instructional
design issues are explored. As part of the research, the investigators will
create alternative interfaces and evaluate them for pedagogical
efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies with
the extensive prior research on which the project is based. Developing remote
laboratories and including them in the curriculum as well as ascertaining their
pedagogical efficacy are important pursuits for science, technology and
engineering education. The project includes staff and students from multiple
institutions thus giving it access to many vantage points for the research. The
project is co-funded by the Engineering and Computer and Information Science and
Engineering Directorates. It is an extension of prior work that is to be tested
extensively in engineering classrooms and is complaint with the ABET
accreditation standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For broader impact, the education
and research communities will be able to share laboratory facilities, enabling
wider and faster access to laboratories than at the present time. This in itself
could have a large positive impact on engineering and science education. The
project involves significant percentages of ethnic minority and female students
and has the potential to lead to the widespread adoption of remote laboratories
as a means for improving student learning of difficult engineering concepts.
Furthermore, the technology challenges of creating a framework for remote
laboratories are simpler than, but analogous to other scientific and industrial
problems. Success in this particular domain may suggest techniques that can be
applied for sharing other sensor and actuator networks in a wide range of
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;