* 0326702
* Simulation of Magnetorheological Fluids:  Microdevices and Self-Assembled Structures
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Martin Maxey, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 12/31/2007
* USD 307,968.00

Abstract CTS-0326702 M. Maxey, Brown University

Controlled manipulation of super-paramagnetic beads can lead to formation of
self-assembled structures suitable for use as micro-optical filters, in DNA
separation, or for exploring new concepts in micro- and nanofabrication,
especially in three-dimensions. The evidence to date has come from experiments
where magneto-rheological (MR) fluids with micron-size beads subject to external
magnetic fields form columnar chains that have a regular distribution and
spacing. The process is fully reversible and has been found to avoid the
difficulties associated with electro-rheological fluids. Recent advances have
been made, through laboratory demonstrations, of how particles can be
manipulated in microchannels for cell sorting, cell removal or to fabricate new
pumps, valves and mixers.

While the experiments have demonstrated some of the intriguing properties of MR
fluids, their full potential remains to be developed. In this proposal, we aim
to simulate and study the fundamental properties of MR fluids and resulted self-
assembled structures, and to also investigate new designs and optimum
performance of prototype colloidal microdevices. In a broader context we propose
new ways of fabricating microdevices without the use of lithography. We will
consider two different classes of problems, the first involving tens of
paramagnetic microspheres whereas the second involving thousands.

To this end, we will employ a hierarchical simulation methodology that performs
best in a certain range of parameters in terms of both accuracy and
computational complexity. It will include new stochastic techniques to represent
Brownian noise; geometric roughness or other uncertainties associated with the
boundary conditions, particle size and interaction forces. Specifically, we will
employ direct numerical simulations based on high-order discretizations and
three different formulations: (1) the arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian (ALE), (2)
the distributed Lagrangian multiplier method (DLM), and (3) the force-coupling
method (FCM). The stochastic contributions will be modeled spectrally using the
recently developed generalized polynomial chaos method.

The first primary goal of the project is to develop and evaluate the proposed
simulation methodology for colloidal microdevices. We will then apply it to
design micropumps, microvalves and other microdevices such as mixers and
sorters, and optimize their performance. We will also investigate new concepts
in fabricating three-dimensional microdevices. The second goal is to study the
formation of self-assembled structures such as chains, or arrays of chains, from
a suspension of micron-scale and sub-micron paramagnetic beads. Brownian motion
plays a significant role for smaller particles, and the relative strength of the
magnetic field is an underlying parameter, together with void fraction, channel
geometry and any imposed fluid flow. The dynamic characteristics for time-
varying magnetic fields or a nonuniform patterning of the field will be
considered.

The broader research impact of this work is great as it addresses for the first
time simulation of magneto-rheological fluids in many different configurations.
The possibility to target and precisely control the electro-optical as well as
the mechanical properties of microstructures in a dynamic way using external
fields will open new horizons in microfluidics research and will suggest new
protocols in micro- and nanofabrication. Self-assembled magnetic matrices can
find a large range of applications for the separation of DNA and other
intermediate-size objects. Self-assembly of colloids can be used in a bottom-up
approach to the fabrication of nanosystems and three-dimensional microsystems.

The broader education impact is also great in that the proposed work will
contribute to fundamental understanding of properties of MR fluids, self-
assembly processes, and new nanotechnology applications. Self-assembly processes
occur at all scales from molecular (crystals) to the planetary scale (weather
system), and this universality will attract the curiosity of young minds. We
expect to attract undergraduate and graduate students with diverse scientific
backgrounds to be involved in this project. We also plan to inform the broader
community through demonstrations and visualizations, and we will enhance Brown's
ARTEMIS program in educating and inspiring young women on issues of
nanotechnology and computational science. The previous NSF grant of the lead PI
supported two African-American female PhD students.