* 0326101
* ITR:  The Effect of the Internet on Society:  Incorporating Central Asia into the Global Perspective
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,09/30/2010
* Eric McGlinchey, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2010
* USD 1,236,041.00

This project explores how the Internet influences cultures and societies by
examining how information technology affects life in Central Asia. Researching
Central Asia allows the project to examine novice users' adoption patterns. In
addition, the strength of personal information networks in Central Asia provides
insight into how diverse communities adapt IT for their needs. The project
advances understanding of how context affects the manner in which IT influences
society. The project is a cross-domain longitudinal study with two primary
components: (1) a five-year, cross-domain panel survey of users and nonusers
that examines how the Internet is affecting existing cultural and social
patterns; and (2) a qualitative longitudinal study that investigates how
professionals in the education and health domains react to the growing presence
of IT. The project asks such questions as: To what extent does the availability
of Internet resources replace community-based information sources? How do people
from different economic and geographic strata gain access to the Internet? Do
potential users avoid getting online, or do users circumscribe their online
activities because of government regulations or cultural prohibitions? This
research will also allow diverse US communities to understand and overcome
impediments to IT implementation. &lt;br/&gt;