* 0326942
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Developing Mysore: Modernizing Elite and the Politics of Translating Institutions
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Jeffery Paige, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 07/31/2006
* USD 9,480.00

My research explores the endeavors of the Indian state of Mysore to "develop"
its agrarian society into a "modern" industrial one during 1881-1947. Marxist,
Weberian, rational-choice and world polity perspectives on state formation have
emphasized, respectively, the importance of the logic of economic development,
the processes of rationalization, the self-interest maximizing motives of state
actors and the dynamic of institutional emulation. Drawing on Bruno Latour's
work in the sociology of technology, I argue that state formation is an
inherently contingent process since the stability of the state's technologies is
interlinked with a diverse array of social forces. Using early modern Mysore as
my case, I will illustrate the multiple levels of translation involved in
Mysore's experiments with development and modernization. Different models of
development are translated in the political imagination of the state elite.
Translation of another order becomes evident when we examine the development
projects' influence on social practices. My choice of research data is
necessarily eclectic. It includes the writings and speeches of major statesmen
and the proceedings of the Mysore Representative Assembly. Autobiographies and
biographies of prominent public figures, newspapers and journals of that period
also constitute important data. The broader impacts of this study lie in its
contribution to the academic scholarship on state formation, alternate
modernities and development studies, its theoretical value of the methodology of
technology studies in interpreting state formation, its contribution to the
growing scholarship on alternate modernities that focuses on the engagement of
nonwestern countries with modernity in order to undo the Eurocentric bias of
social scientific scholarship on modernity.