* 0326975
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Investigation of Individual and Group Attitudes Toward Water Resources in Portland, Oregon
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Mary Santelmann, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2005
* USD 8,246.00

Evidence from recent surveys suggests that although urban residents support
water resource protection as a general principle, significant opposition exists
to specific water resource protection measures. Such disconnects between general
and specific attitudes, including those expressed through behavior, are common
and often are explained by poor measurement techniques or overly simplistic
theories, such as utilitarianism and the politics of self-interest. Alternative
theories allow for multiple rationalities and view the attitude-behavior split
as evidence of complex cognitive and decision-making processes. The attitudinal
and decision-making literature developed by geographers, social psychologists,
sociologists, anthropologists, economists, political scientists, and other
scholars provides the theoretical context for this doctoral dissertation
research project, which will be conducted in the Portland, Oregon, metropolitan
area. The project will investigate the degree of attitudinal divergence among
urban residents, and it will aim to provide explanations for varying
environmental attitudes. The attitudes of residents who do and do not
participate in place-based groups like watershed councils and neighborhood
associations will be examined, because the frequent involvement of such groups
in environmental decision-making raises questions about the extent to which the
views of participants represent those of the general public. The project will
address two primary sets of research questions: (1) To what extent is there a
divergence between urban residents' abstract (general) and concrete (specific)
support for water resource protection? If so, what factors explain this
divergence? (2) To what degree do the views of watershed- and neighborhood-based
organizations correspond with those of the people they are thought to represent?
If the views held by place-based group participants differ from those of non-
participants, what factors contribute to attitudinal differences? To address
these questions, semi-structured interviews are being conducted and a scientific
survey will be implemented using the Dillman survey method in order to
systematically collect information on residents' water-related attitudes and
behavior as well as information about socio-demographic and other explanatory
factors.

The results of this research will inform natural resource planning and
management in the Portland area and elsewhere through improved understanding of
urban residents' attitudes toward water resource protection. The project also
will provide new insights regarding the degree to which the attitudes of place-
based groups are representative of the individuals they are thought to serve.
Knowledge of environmental attitudes and behavior is critical to developing and
implementing effective natural resource policies that are responsive to public
values and concerns, an important objective in a democratic society. This
research will advance scientific and practical understanding of the complex
factors that underlie environmental attitudes and behavior as well as public
involvement strategies that rely on established, geographically defined groups.
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
research career.

