* 0326876
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Happy Cows or Sweatshop Bovines: Constructing the Organic Dairy Commodity Chain
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Thomas Rudel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2005
* USD 9,123.00

Commodity chains link the individuals and institutions that produce and consume
particular goods. Analyzing commodity chains in their vertical dimensions, from
raw material production through distribution and marketing to final consumption,
is very helpful for understanding why an industry is structured the way it is.
It also provides insights regarding how the costs and benefits are
differentially borne by actors and environments at different points in the
chain. Organic milk represents a particularly interesting commodity chain in so
far as this "alternative" commodity chain in many ways is more industrialized
than its conventional counterpart, with wider distribution chains and higher
levels of processing to extend shelf life. This doctoral dissertation research
project will use semi-structured interviews with farmers, consumers, firms and
key informants to investigate how the production, distribution, marketing, and
consumption of organic milk are integrated within the spatial and socioeconomic
networks of commodity chains. In addition, the economic forces and social
concerns driving the chain's emergence will be examined in a historical context.
Finally, the implications for social and ecological sustainability of this new
commodity chain will be discussed in light of findings concerning how the chain
is structured and what is driving it. Key issues to be explored include the
potential of organic milk to help small family dairy farmers stay in business,
the contradictions between marketing rhetoric and production and distribution
practices, and the relationship between organic standards and geographic
dispersion of distribution. The theoretical aim of the project is to develop a
new socio-ecological theory explaining the emergence and significance of
alternative or nontraditional commodity chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research should suggest how organic production has begun to change the dairy
sector in the United States, one of the largest agricultural sectors in terms of
production value. Will the implementation of federal organic standards make
dairy production more sustainable? Alternately, will increased organic milk
production lead to a dilution of tough organic standards as more producers enter
the field, leading to further efforts to differentiate in the marketplace and
add value as organic becomes less distinct? Organic dairying therefore may be
simultaneously raising the bar at the bottom and lowering the bar at the top.
These trends are important in terms of assessing the capacity of alternative
food systems such as organic dairying to stabilize small farms against hostile
economic forces. The same trends should indicate the degree to which the new
regulatory structures surrounding organic production can make agricultural
production more environmentally benign and contribute to the development of new
forms of consumption. This study should benefit consumers, both by making
available more information upon which they can make informed consumption
decisions, and by encouraging debate about what organic should imply or require,
vis a vis the environment and the economy. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;