* 0326157
* ITR:  Nanoarchitecture: Balancing Regularity, Complexity, and Defect Tolerance using DNA for Nanoelectronic Integration
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* John Reif, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,200,000.00

Miniaturization in electronics by conventional top-down manufacturing is
expected to reach its limit during the next one to two decades. Furthermore, the
cost of building fabrication facilities for conventional CMOS may become
prohibitive. These issues caused the&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor Industry
Association to identify as one of its grand challenges the implementation of
non-CMOS solutions that could significantly influence production of future
integrated circuits and microprocessors. To meet this challenge, this
interdisciplinary project takes a vertically integrated approach that uses a
bottom-up process to self-assemble well-defined nanoscale building blocks into
functional nanoelectronic structures. This project seeks to overcome existing
problems in nanoelectronic integration by using DNA self-assemblies to produce
patterned nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal is to
construct a computing device through DNA self-assembly of nanoelectronic
devices. This goal will be achieved through a series of more modest steps,
beginning with the experimental demonstration of DNA assembled nanoelectronic
components (e.g., fragmented carbon nanotubes) and then DNA assembly of a very
small number of these components into a small circuit. To help guide these
efforts, this project will simultaneously explore the impact of this new
technology on computer architecture. In particular, the PIs seek&lt;br/&gt;to
develop architectures that strike a balance between 1) the regularity of large-
scale DNA self-assembly patterning capabilities, 2) the complexity required for
sophisticated system designs and 3)&lt;br/&gt;tolerance to the inevitable
defects present in nanoscale systems. The trade-offs between these three
architectural properties permeate all aspects of this project and provide the
framework for closed-loop feedback among the team members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;