* 0326606
* ITR:  TADE - Timeliness-Assured Design Environment for Distributed Object-Based Embedded Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Kane Kim, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2008
* USD 375,900.00

&lt;br/&gt;Distributed real-time embedded computing applications have entered an
explosive growth pattern in both, variety and production volume. This growth is
evident even in safety-critical applications. An extremely challenging part of
the reliability assurance process is timeliness assurance. The goals of this
research project are: (1) to strengthen technical foundations that enable system
engineers to produce guarantees for timely service capabilities of various
subsystems of distributed real-time embedded computing systems, especially on
the basis of the recently established distributed real-time object-oriented
programming methods and tools; and (2) to develop an integrated tool-set, the
Timeliness-Assured Design Environment (TADE), for enabling major reduction in
system engineering effort required to produce systems with service time
guarantees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research foci of this research project
are: (1) a new general and high-level style of RT object-oriented distributed
programming called the TMO (Time-triggered Message-triggered Object) programming
that can be easily learned by programmers through natural application program
interface extensions of C++ or Java; (2) middleware supporting real time program
objects (TMO support middleware); (3) real-time fault-tolerant communication
protocols and infrastructure; (4) operating system and middleware support for
fault-tolerant real-time distributed computing; (5) a testbed using an advanced
transportation model and prototype, ZEVNET, that enables shared use of small
electric-engine cars and shuttles. With this framework, the team is developing
and evaluating new design methods and supporting technologies for a practical
development environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant broader impact is
sought through specific attention to both, increased dependability and reduced
engineering effort entailed to certify acceptable quality of the embedded system
design and implementation. Research results are being used enable modernization
of the curricula in distributed real time embedded software, systems theory, and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;