* 0326957
* RUI: An Experimental Examination of the Role of Dispersal for the Spatial Population Dynamics of the Butterfly Parnassius smintheus
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/2002,08/31/2008
* Stephen Matter, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 08/31/2008
* USD 211,803.00

0212776 Matter

This research examines the effects of dispersal on the population dynamics of
the alpine butterfly, Parnassius smintheus. Within a network of 17 populations
of the butterfly, two populations were removed. Based on previous data,
populations near the removals are predicted to receive fewer immigrants (a 2% to
56% reduction in immigration), while more distant populations should be
unaffected. If immigration is an important component of population size and
persistence, populations near the removals should have reduced population sizes
and an increased risk of extinction in comparison to more distant populations.
Mark-recapture methods will be used to examine dispersal and population size.
Experimental methods will lead to unambiguous conclusions regarding the role of
dispersal for the population dynamics of this species.

Due to anthropogenic habitat fragmentation and natural heterogeneity, many
species exist as networks of small, potentially extinction-prone populations. In
such situations dispersal can be particularly important. Immigrants arriving to
populations may bolster population size, preventing extinction. In cases where
extinction has occurred, immigrants may act as colonists. Understanding the
effects of dispersal is crucial for the management of these threatened species.
This research will address the role of dispersal for one species that can serve
as a model for threatened species. This RUI research project will train and
support many undergraduate students.