* 0326301
* Support for U.S. Participation in International Ocean Research Projects and Working Groups
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Edward Urban, Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR)
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 05/31/2007
* USD 1,080,000.00

Continuing support is provided for the international oceanographic activities of
the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR) that are relevant to U.S.
interests in marine sciences and the Division of Ocean Sciences. There are
currently thirty-eight countries represented in SCOR. The Ocean Studies Board of
the National Academy of Sciences serves as the U.S. national committee.
Individual ocean scientists participate in SCOR activities through subsidiary
bodies such as working groups and scientific steering committees. Funding will
support two major SCOR activities: 1) U.S. sponsorship of focused SCOR Working
Groups. Presently, there are twelve such Working Groups covering diverse ocean-
science related topics. Working Groups are comprised of experts from different
countries who meet on a regular basis to discuss and assess the scientific
status of their topic area and produce a report that advises and provides
recommendations for further research efforts. 2) Science Steering Committee
activities of the Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) - a study of the ocean's
role in the global carbon cycle and its response to global change; Global Ocean
Ecosystem Dynamics (GLOBEC) - an effort to understand the relationships between
physical variability in the ocean and the structure and functioning of marine
ecosystems and how they may be impacted by global change; and Global Ecology and
Oceanography of Harmful Algal Blooms (GEOHAB) - a program to improve our
understanding of the processes involved in the development of algal blooms which
have enormous consequences for marine resources, the economies which depend upon
them and, in some cases, human health. SCOR will also be involved in developing
plans for a new program (Surface Ocean-Lower Atmosphere Study, SOLAS) to look at
the interactions between the upper ocean and the lower part of the atmosphere
where many important exchanges take place, in particular of carbon dioxide and
other "greenhouse gases"; SCOR and IGBP are developing the Ocean Biogeochemistry
and Ecosystem Analysis ( OCEANS) project. The goal of OCEANS is to understand
the sensitivity of the ocean to global change within the context of the broader
Earth System. These major programs have origins in U.S. and have turned to SCOR
to provide a forum for international planning and coordination. SCOR's impact
has and will continue to be evident in the standardization of measurement
protocols, sharing of data, coordination of ship time, and the enlargement of
field studies which would be impossible without international coordination.