* 0326372
* ITR: Architectures and Design Methodologies for Secure Low-Power Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Ruby Lee, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2007
* USD 525,000.00

&lt;br/&gt; Embedded systems, for example in information appliances and
networked&lt;br/&gt;sensors, face some of the most demanding security concerns -
they are resource&lt;br/&gt;constrained while frequently needing to handle
sensitive information in&lt;br/&gt;physically insecure environments. Security
processing can easily overwhelm the&lt;br/&gt;limited computation and memory
resources of embedded processors, especially with&lt;br/&gt;the escalation in
the amount of data to be processed and the data rates of&lt;br/&gt;high-speed
networks. This "performance gap" is compounded by the "battery
gap",&lt;br/&gt;which is the disparity between energy requirements and slow
improvements in&lt;br/&gt;battery technology, for secure low-power embedded
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project is an inter-disciplinary study of
several core technologies&lt;br/&gt;that will enable the design of secure, low-
power embedded systems. It spans the&lt;br/&gt;fields of security, cryptographic
algorithms, embedded processor architecture,&lt;br/&gt;computer arithmetic, low
power design, and enabling design methodologies and&lt;br/&gt;tools. It
addresses the performance, energy and security requirements, and&lt;br/&gt;their
tradeoffs, in embedded processors and systems. The research goals
include&lt;br/&gt;a comprehensive analysis of the performance requirements and
power consumption&lt;br/&gt;for security in embedded systems. The project is
developing efficient architectures&lt;br/&gt;for security processing in low-
power embedded systems, including configurable&lt;br/&gt;security modules for
system-on-chip designs, and architectural guidelines for&lt;br/&gt;tiny
cryptographic processors for embedded systems. The performance, power
and&lt;br/&gt;security tradeoffs based on customizations at the protocol,
cryptographic&lt;br/&gt;algorithm, and hardware and software implementation
levels are studied. Design&lt;br/&gt;methodology and tools include processor
design tools to facilitate the design of&lt;br/&gt;new security processing
architectures based on open frameworks such as the PLX&lt;br/&gt;(hosted at
Princeton) and SimpleScalar toolkits. The project explores&lt;br/&gt;domain-
specific design methodologies that jointly co-design security
protocols&lt;br/&gt;and processing architectures to meet the required security,
performance and&lt;br/&gt;power priorities and constraints.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research enables the design of embedded systems with
higher levels of&lt;br/&gt;security, while achieving an order of magnitude or
more in performance and&lt;br/&gt;battery life, compared to conventional
approaches. Broad security impacts are expected for embedded system design, in
addition to impact for future research and education. Results are disseminated
to industry through the Princeton Architecture Lab for Multimedia and Security
(PALMS) and the NJCST Center for Embedded System-on-a-Chip Design. The research
results are being woven into graduate and undergraduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;