* 0326631
* The Alaska Lake Ice and Snow Observatory Network (ALISON):  A Statewide K-12 and University Science Education  and Research Partnership
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Ron Reihl, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2009
* USD 241,630.00

This proposal is to fund a project to develop the Alaska Lake Ice and Snow
Observatory Network (ALISON), a science education and scientific research
partnership between the University of Alaska Fairbanks and K-12 education
community in Alaska. The PI has proposed a project that is a well conceived
blending of science and science education in rural and urban classrooms
throughout Alaska. Utilizing a planning grant from NSF, Dr. Jeffries created a
network of classroom observatories in seven Alaska communities, four in rural
regions serving primarily Alaska Native students. The results of the pilot
network can be reviewed at the very comprehensive ALISON web site
http://www.gi.alaska.edu/alison/. This proposal continues and expands the very
innovative concept of research scientists partnering with science and math
teachers and their students by facilitating the students themselves collect,
analyze and interpret data that is used in the PI's continuing research project
on ice, snow and water to determine variability and change of these variables
over the course of one winter and multiple winters. In this way students and
their teachers learn about the nature of scientific inquiry involving questions,
simple investigation, data gathering, data analysis, explanation, and
communication of investigations and explanations.