* 0326205
* Collaborative Research: AMS Ion Source Development at University of California, Irvine, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, University of Arizona and National Electrostatics Corp
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2006
* John Southon, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2006
* USD 73,770.00

EAR-0326205&lt;br/&gt;Southon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratories at University of
California at Irvine, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, and University of
Arizona use accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) to measure cosmogenic isotopes,
primarily 14C, supporting research at the parent institutions plus numerous
external researchers. The demand for these analyses comes from many scientific
fields, including: geology, archaeology, physics, geography, oceanography,
atmospheric sciences, hydrology, biology, art history, forensic sciences and
engineering. A reliable and stable ion source for converting samples of interest
into intense beams of negative ions is absolutely critical to the overall
performance of an AMS spectrometer. The three AMS laboratories collaborating in
this proposal currently use four versions of the MC-SNICS Cs sputter ion source,
built by National Electrostatics Corp (NEC) of Middleton, WI. We will
collaborate with NEC in a 2-year program to modify the ion source for increased
output, better reliability, and improved serviceability. Low source output, poor
reliability, and time required for source maintenance are currently the largest
causes of delay and poor measurement quality for users of AMS laboratories
worldwide. Work at UC Irvine will concentrate on changes to the Cs feed and to
the Cs and negative ion geometries aimed at increasing output and improving
reliability. Woods Hole will investigate active pumping of the source and other
vacuum improvements for increased output, and will redesign the ion source
extraction region for improved reliability. Arizona will implement improved
internal mounting arrangements for the Cs ionizer assembly and focusing
electrodes, plus changes to sample alignment procedures leading to reduced
servicing down time. A full suite of the modifications initially developed at
each laboratory will then be evaluated, and an optimal set will be incorporated
in the sources at the three institutions and in new sources produced by NEC. The
results will be passed on to the AMS community at large, to allow the many
disciplines using AMS to reap the scientific benefits resulting from improved
measurement quality due to better source
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;