* 0327391
* Equipment Enhancement for Femtosecond Pump-Probe Apparatus
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Pamela Norris, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 07/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This award is for additional instrumentation to expand the utility of the
existing femtosecond pump-probe experimental setup in the Microscale Heat
Transfer Laboratory. The current experiment utilizes the ultra-short (~190 fs)
pulses from a passively mode locked Ti:Sapphire laser. This laser produces
pulses with ~16 nJ/pulse at a repetition rate of 76 MHz. This facility has
successfully been used over the past seven years in transient thermoreflectance
experiments to make measurements of thermal transport in thin metallic films. It
has also been used in transient thermotransmission experiments to study the fast
carrier dynamics in thin film samples of hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H)
and similar alloys used in photovoltaic cells. More recently it has been used to
attain sub-picosecond resolution of the transient reflectance of indium
phosphide (InP) based films during hot carrier relaxation. These experiments
have provided a better understanding of the thermophysical as well as optical
and electronic properties of these thin film materials.&lt;br/&gt;The addition
of the regenerative amplifier system to the current setup will produce
ultrashort pulses of similar temporal and spectral characteristics, but with an
increased pulse energy of more than two orders of magnitude and with a tunable
repetition rate from single shot to ~300 kHz. This system, with the ability to
provide high pulse energy (enabling studies of melting and of highly non-
equilibrium systems) and a significantly reduced repetition rate (enabling
studies on low thermal conductivity materials), will improve and enhance
existing experiments while enabling new areas of research to be pursued.
Advancements in the micro- and opto-electronics industries depend greatly on the
development of thin film technology. This field has progressed rapidly with
continued improvements in film growth and deposition techniques. While thin film
technology has grown at a prodigious rate, our fundamental understanding of the
dynamics of energy carriers in micro- and nanostructures has not kept pace. An
improved understanding of excited carrier dynamics through these studies should
prove beneficial for the optoelectronic, microelectronic, and photovoltaic
industries, to name just a few.&lt;br/&gt;