* 0327387
* Collaborative Research:  CMG: Wavelet-Based Unified Approach for Physical Feature Extraction, Large-Scale Visualization, and Modeling of Multiscale Geological Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2007
* David Yuen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 02/28/2007
* USD 193,796.00

&lt;br/&gt;This three-year proposal is a collaboration between three researchers
whose talents span geophysics,&lt;br/&gt;applied mathematics,computational .uid
dynamics,and computer science.The main objective of this&lt;br/&gt;proposal is
to develop a uni .ed framework for multiscale analysis,physical and statistical
feature extraction,&lt;br/&gt;construction of multi-component phase diagram
maps,large-scale visualization and modeling of geological&lt;br/&gt;processes
using wavelets.We plan to apply this uni .ed approach to the analysis and
simulation of the&lt;br/&gt;following geological problems:&lt;br/&gt;1.High
Rayleigh number thermal and thermo-chemical convection in Earth
mantle,&lt;br/&gt;2.Strong .eld geodynamo (both numerical simulations and
geodetical satellite data),&lt;br/&gt;3.Other kinds of simulations or
geophysical observations.&lt;br/&gt;Second generation wavelets will be used to
investigate new algorithms aimed at coherent-incoherent
structure&lt;br/&gt;extraction (i.e.,plumes and background thermal
.uctuations)from large-scale numerical simulations,to&lt;br/&gt;develop new
model equations that describe their space-time evolution,taking into account the
e .ect of the&lt;br/&gt;incoherent .eld via statistical modeling,and to develop
new wavelet-based visualization tools for both feature&lt;br/&gt;extraction and
construction of multi-component phase diagram maps.&lt;br/&gt;In the area of
modeling and simulation second generation wavelets will be used to separate the
wide range&lt;br/&gt;of scales of high-Rayleigh number geophysical .elds into
their incoherent and coherent components.Modern&lt;br/&gt;statistical
tools,specialized to non-homogeneous processes,will be applied to the stochastic
modeling of the&lt;br/&gt;e .ect of incoherent .elds on the evolution of
coherent .elds.The governing equations will be solved using
a&lt;br/&gt;dynamically adaptive wavelet collocation algorithm.An adaptive grid
will enable the coherent structures to&lt;br/&gt;be resolved and their evolution
followed e .ciently.&lt;br/&gt;Wavelet-based tools will be developed to rapidly
extract and visualize the relevant features in geophysical&lt;br/&gt;data
sets.Coherent structures will be extracted at multiple scales.These wavelets
will be visualized using&lt;br/&gt;point rendering techniques for fast visual
displays without the need for data decompression.These tools will&lt;br/&gt;be
applied to the analysis of the aforementioned geophysical
problems.&lt;br/&gt;Finally,a general purpose tool will be developed to e
.ciently capture,represent and visualize the phase&lt;br/&gt;boundaries of n
-dimensional phase diagram maps.These boundaries represent ow-dimensional
features,and&lt;br/&gt;pose a formidable challenge to the
geoscientist.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.The algorithms developed herein speci
.cally address problems of deterministic&lt;br/&gt;and/or stochastic modeling of
dynamically active scales that are not explicitly resolvable,when
classical&lt;br/&gt;methods have failed to yield progress in predictive
modeling.These techniques have application to transport&lt;br/&gt;equations in
other .elds of science and engineering confronted with a wide range of spatial
scales.Nove&lt;br/&gt;methods proposed in this research will provide new
insights on the internal dynamics of geosystems,will&lt;br/&gt;enable
researchers to analyze large data sets and extract lower-dimensional
features.Nove fully automated&lt;br/&gt;robust strategy of compact delineation
and visualization of complicated realistic phase diagrams and
related&lt;br/&gt;in situ physical properties of multicomponent systems are
envisioned to be used in a variety of geophysical&lt;br/&gt;.elds such as
geochemistry and petrology.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact.This project will drive and
promote progress in computation,geophysical .uid dynam-&lt;br/&gt;ics,nonlinear
physics and in the general application of wavelets to geoscientists.This
opportunity will allow&lt;br/&gt;students from statistics,applied
mathematics,computer science and geophysics to work collaboratively
on&lt;br/&gt;these technologically and mathematically cutting-edge areas with
applied emphasis in the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;