* 0327380
* SGER:  Gait Selection and Power Output in Bird Flight as Revealed Using Digital Particle Image Velocimetry, DPIV
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Bret Tobalske, University of Portland
* Standard Grant
* Thomas L. Vandergon
* 02/28/2005
* USD 99,478.00

Current understanding of gait selection and mechanical power output in
vertebrate flight largely rests on untested assumptions regarding the flow
characteristics around flapping wings, and, to some extent, the animal's body
and tail. Tobalske will use new technology, Digital Particle Image Velocimetry
(DPIV) to test these assumptions, and seek to reconcile unsteady aerodynamic
theory through direct measures of power output in the major flight muscle of
birds and kinematic estimates of gait selection. DPIV uses powerful lasers to
illuminate small reflective particles suspended in the air. Digital video images
are captured to computer, and particle movement observed in the video images is
used to calculate the energy in the flow field. Using DPIV and a new, variable-
speed wind tunnel, Tobalske will describe flow dynamics over bird species that
differ in wing and body shape: zebra finch Taeniopygia guttata and budgerigar
Melopsittacus undulatus. Wake geometry and energy will be described for whole
wingbeats, during non-flapping phases of intermittent flight, and over a full
range of speeds. This will test the effects of wing shape on flight gait,
whether birds change gait during flight in a manner analogous to gait change in
terrestrial locomotion, and the relative contribution of the wings, body, and
tail as sources of lift and drag. Sonomicrometry, which measures muscle length
during locomotion, will be used to compare contractile behavior in the
pectoralis muscle of zebra finch and budgerigar with mechanical power output as
measured in the wake. &lt;br/&gt;In recent years, DPIV has been vital to
advancing the study of insect flight and fish locomotion. It has furnished new
discoveries of lift-producing mechanisms and clarified the mechanisms animals
use to accomplish locomotion at different speeds and during maneuvering. Over
fifteen years ago, researchers used manual digitizing and stereoscopic cameras
to measure energy in the wake as birds flew at a single speed; unfortunately,
their results did not support the ready observation that birds are able to
support their weight during slow flight. Also, as this previous work focused on
free flight, gait transitions across speed remain untested for birds. DPIV will
significantly advance this effort because it will automate the tracking of
particle velocity, thus eliminating a tedious constraint on previous work.
Furthermore, it will permit measurement of flow as the birds fly in a wind
tunnel so that the effects of flight speed may be tested
directly.&lt;br/&gt;Tobalske's research will test long-standing predictions
based purely on kinematic study. It will also develop a new method for measuring
mechanical power output in flying birds. Power output during bird flight is
predicted to be enormous, yet birds share the same basic muscular structure with
mammals, including humans. Thus, this research will advance our understanding of
high-performance muscle physiology. Broader impacts of the proposed activity
include a new understanding of the significance of unsteady and quasi-steady
aerodynamics and gait selection in animal locomotion. It will also provide
engineers with a useful model for the development of autonomous, micro air
vehicles. Ultimately, the DPIV equipment used in this study will be made
available to researchers in other departments at the home institution, which
will enhance ties between biology and physics. Undergraduate students will
assist with all aspects of experiments and will pursue theses projects under
close supervision. Student collaboration using this leading technology will
provide strong evidence that it is feasible to conduct world-class research at
an undergraduate
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;