* 0327400
* US-South Africa Cooperative Research: International Research Experience  for US Students in Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Daniel Bradburd, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 07/31/2005
* USD 77,560.00

This project will support four undergraduate students and one graduate student
to spend a summer conducting research in South Africa at the University of Cape
Town's world-class power-engineering laboratory. The objectives of the activity
include 1) teaching students the process of conducting sound research and the
importance of research in the broad area of energy efficiency and renewable
energy; 2) exposing students to real-world power generation and utilization
equipment and their applicability to the areas of renewable energy and energy
efficiency; 3) exposing students to the importance of graduate study; and 4)
enabling students to gain first-hand international experience in a distinctly
different cultural setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual
merit lies in providing first-rate research opportunities in energy efficiency
and renewable energy that the students would be unlikely to get in the US. The
students will also encounter a broader range of technical challenges that face a
developing country, rather than a developed country. This project has great
potential to provide a culturally-rich international experience for students;
the impact of this experience on student attitudes and knowledge will be
monitored during the project. The students will also fulfill a current and
future need in the US for engineers with expertise in the areas of energy
efficiency and renewable energy. &lt;br/&gt;