* 0327763
* Submersible Autonomous Sensors for Oceanic Inorganic Carbon Characterization
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Andrew Dickson, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2007
* USD 508,359.00

&lt;br/&gt;P.I. De Grandpre (University of Montana) Proposal #:
0327763&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to
develop autonomous sensors for total hydrogen ion concentration (pHT) and total
alkalinity (TA). These measurements can be used together or in combination with
other CO2 parameters to quantify oceanic total dissolved inorganic carbon and
the partial pressure of CO2. The proposed research will develop autonomous
sensors for pHT and TA that will be deployable on autonomous platforms such as
moorings, Lagrangian drifters, and Volunteer Observing Ships. The PIs will
attempt to achieve a level of precision and accuracy comparable to shipboard
measurements. Furthermore, the PIs propose to commercialize the sensors and make
them available to the oceanographic community as they have done with SAMI-CO2.
Both TCO2 and pCO2 are critical components of ocean carbon cycle models and
therefore, improved measurement systems are important for understanding the
oceans' role in regulating atmospheric CO2 and climate warming. The proposed
designs derive from the Submersible Autonomous Moored Sensor technology used for
measurement of seawater pCO2 (SAMI-CO2). Like SAMI-CO2, the "SAMI-pH" and "SAMI-
alk" sensors are based on spectrophotometric pH measurements. All three sensors
utilize the same optical design, electronics boards, and plumbing components.
The commercial availability of these components through Sunburst Sensors will
greatly facilitate development of the sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;