* 0327489
* Transport Processes Driven by Electrochemically-Generated Gradients in Concentration of Electro-Active Surfactants
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Nicholas Abbott, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2006
* USD 190,000.00

Nicholas L. Abbott&lt;br/&gt;U of Wisconsin - Madison&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;"Transport Processes Driven by Electrochemically-Generated Gradients
in Concentration of Electro-Active Surfactants."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project involves a combined experimental and theoretical study of transport
processes in the bulk of solutions that are driven by externally controlled
gradients in concentration of surfactant. The experimental approach revolves
around the use of redox-active surfactants and electrochemical methods to
generate gradients in surfactant concentration within microfluidic channels. The
amphiphilic properties of the redox-active nano-scale surfactants can be
substantially and reversibly changed by electrochemically-controlled oxidation
and reduction of the surfactant. By lining the&lt;br/&gt;microfluidic channels
with two electrodes - one at which the surfactant is "turned on" and the other
at which the surfactant is "turned off", the research will demonstrate general
and facile methods that generate transient and steady-state gradients in
surfactant concentration across the bulk of a solution contained within a
channel. Spatial concentration gradients of micelles are also investigated.
Using micrometer-sized droplets of oil as a model system and concentrations of
surfactant below the critical micelle concentration, the influence of the
gradients in concentration of the redox-active surfactants on the transport of
the droplets is investigated. Marangoni-stresses at the surfaces of the droplets
induced by the externally controlled gradient in surfactant concentration will
drive the motion of the droplets across the gradient. The collective motion of
ensembles of droplets driven by externally controlled gradients in surfactant
concentration are also investigated. A complementary analytical and numerical
study (finite elements and boundary element methods) of the motion of droplets
in the presence of gradients in concentration of surfactant is performed.
Because the kinetics of adsorption and desorption of the surfactants is expected
to have a strong influence on the migration of the droplet and because they are
a required input for the simulation, parameters characterizing the kinetics of
adsorption of the redox-active surfactants at oil-aqueous interfaces are
experimentally determined. In addition to aiding interpretation of the
experiments, the simulations will provide a venue to explore key parameters that
underlie the phenomenon (such as the role of the kinetics of adsorption) and
guide the design of subsequent experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: First, this research contributes to society's knowledge of interfacial
phenomena and nanotechnology which underlies a range of commodity products
(e.g., foods, pharmaceuticals) and processes (e.g., emulsion polymerization, oil
processing). Second, the development of methods that permit control of transport
processes in electrochemically-controlled gradients in concentration of
surfactant have the potential to form the basis of technologies for performing
separations of molecular species (such as drugs), for directing the meso-scale
assembly of particles, and for sorting of emulsion droplets or driving emulsion
droplets into arrays (meso-scale materials synthesis). While the research
proposed is fundamental in nature, the principles that will emerge from it have
technological promise. For example, the potential for specialized micro-drug
delivery systems is also possible. Third, the blend of discovery-oriented
experimentation and detailed fundamental analysis provides an unusual
environment for the education of graduate students in both experimental and
theoretical methods in interfacial science. Fourth, by incorporating
undergraduate researchers into the project (as the PI and co-PI have done in the
past, including female and minority undergraduate participants), the proposed
research will stimulate undergraduates to consider the opportunities that follow
from higher education in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;