* 0327936
* CMG: Development of Spatio-Temporal and Multi-Resolution Methods for Detecting the Impact of Volcanic and Solar Forcings in Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Philippe Naveau, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2007
* USD 298,898.00

This investigation is aimed at developing mathematical methods to identify
evidence of volcanic eruptions and variations in the intensity of solar
radiation in high resolution proxy climate data of the past thousand years. This
is a challenging problem because the records are incomplete and nonstationary,
and the climatic response to solar variability and volcanic activity is unknown
and probably highly nonlinear. Questions motivating the work are: (1) What has
been the influence of explosive volcanism on climate? (2) Has there been a
climatic effect of variations in solar irradiance, and if so what modes of
climate variability are affected? (3) How much uncertainty in climate proxies,
reconstructions, and predictions can be explained by solar and volcanic forcing?
The approach is to focus first on the temporal aspects of solar and volcanic
signals, then to develop extraction methods for analyzing spatial features on
the globe with irregularly spaced data, and finally to combine these in a
spatio-temporal model. Techniques to be employed include using 2-D wavelets to
characterize spatial features and extending concepts of Kalman filter estimation
to non-Gaussian signals. The methods will be tested through statistical
simulations using the NCAR Community Climate Model. This research will help to
separate the climatic changes caused by human activity from the background of
natural variability. It is supported jointly by the Division of Atmospheric
Sciences and the Division of Mathematical Sciences through the NSF program,
Collaborations in Mathematical Geosciences (CMG).