* 0327043
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Late Bronze Age Power Dynamics in the Armenian Highlands: A Community Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Stuart Smith, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2004
* USD 12,000.00

The process by which sociopolitical inequality becomes institutionalized in
prehistoric societies has been a topic of great research interest to
archaeologists during the past decade. The aim of this dissertation research
project is to work in concert with Armenian archaeologists to explore the
prehistoric political economy of the Tsaghkahovit plain of northwestern Armenia
during a time of dramatic social transformations between the Middle and Late
Bronze Age periods culminating in the emergence of the region's first political
institutions. This project will focus specifically on the excavation and
analysis of a Late Bronze Age settlement located at the base of the Tsaghkahovit
fortress to explore how the power strategies of elites are reflected in the
settlements of those living in the shadow of the fortress. Archaeology has a
long tradition of focusing on the more glamorous temples and tombs of elites,
but more recently excavations of non-elite community contexts are being seen as
increasingly important to establishing a more holist picture of social and
economic organization of cultural systems.

The beginning of the Late Bronze Age (1500-1150 B.C.) in the southern Caucasus
was marked by a reformulation of the social and political landscape as the
socially stratified, nomadic, pastoral societies of the Middle Bronze Age
(2200-1500 B.C.) transformed the outward projection of authority from richly
adorned burial mounds (kurgans) to the construction of imposing fortresses
overlooking the fertile agricultural plains and valleys. Accompanying these
shifts in the aesthetics of power in the region were far-reaching changes in
mortuary practices, settlement and subsistence patterns, advances in metallurgy
and horsemanship, and a marked increase in population. The development of
lasting political institutions can be hindered by the decentralizing effect of
the mobility inherent in a nomadic pastoral economy which occurred during the
Middle Bronze Age, raising a number of interesting questions relating to the
region's political economy and the emergence of institutionalized authority:
What advantages did the bounded landscape of the Tsaghkahovit plain offer elites
for encouraging the permanent settlement of populations during the Late Bronze
Age? How did elites finance the construction of the imposing fortresses
circumventing the fertile agricultural plain? Why did the manifestation of
institutional authority between the two periods shift from sacred to secular
(i.e. from richly furnished monumental burials to hilltop fortresses)?

This project, including fieldwork and analysis, will be conducted under the
mentorship of the leaders of Project ArAGATS (Archaeology and Geography of
Ancient Transcaucasian States), a collaborative international expedition co-
directed by Dr. Adam T. Smith of the University of Chicago and Dr. Ruben
BadalyanError! Bookmark not defined. of the Armenian Institute of Archaeology
and Ethnography. Despite the rich prehistoric traditions in Armenia, this is the
only American archaeological expedition currently operating in the country

The broad themes that play out in the study of Bronze Age Caucasia - issues of
economic and political turmoil, territoriality, and sovereignty over strategic
resources and trade routes - resonate throughout the history of the region. The
proposed research offers a framework for exploring the earliest manifestations
of complex political and economic dynamics in the Caucasus, a topic that as
taken on increased relevance given the rise of essentialist nationalism in the
region since the disintegration of the USSR. Publications stemming from the
proposed research will also serve to reintroduce southern Caucasian prehistory
to the consciousness of Western scholarship and scientific inquiry where it has
long been neglected, and engage the southern Caucasian Late Bronze Age in cross-
cultural studies on the dynamics of elite authority in non-state complex
societies.

