* 0327294
* Development of a Pump Array for the Two Dimensional Mapping of Chemical Constituents in the Upper Water Column
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Timothy Shaw, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 08/31/2006
* USD 195,780.00

.I. Shaw, Timothy (Univ. S. Carolina) Proposal #:
0327294&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Development of a Pump Array for the
Two Dimensional Mapping of Chemical Constituents in the Upper Water
Column&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to develop
a towed pumping system, based on his successful prototype, for the collection of
analytes from large volume samples at multiple depths in the upper water column.
The system will be comprised of a series of pumps that will be deployed on a
hydro wire and powered by a current driven propeller. Critical components
include the power unit (pump), sampling stack, and control module (data logger,
sample valve control). The data logger will record flow rate, integrated volume,
as well as data from an external CTD. A propeller will power the pump as it is
towed through the water column. The pump will pressurize the sampling stack to
create flow through the selected filter/cartridge column to the flow meter in
the data logger. The system will allow sequential sampling for up to ten
intervals per unit during a single deployment while the ship is underway. The
multi-sample capacity of each unit will mean that a single deployment will
produce a two dimensional map of the analytes of interest. The individual pumps
are designed to be inexpensive, and easily deployed from a hydro wire, making
the system appropriate for large scale mapping of analytes of interest as well
as local high-density sampling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;