* 0327626
* Integrated Geophysical and Geologic Investigation of the Crustal Structure of Western Canada Basin, Chukchi Borderland and Mendeleev Ridge, Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Lawrence Lawver, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 12/31/2008
* USD 904,071.00

Intellectual merit: The Principal Investigators will undertake an integrated
geophysical and geological study of the western section of the Amerasian Basin
of the Arctic Ocean to include: determining the crustal structure of the
deep&lt;br/&gt;Canada Basin, Northwind Ridge, Chukchi Borderland, Chukchi Basin,
and Mendeleev Ridge; collecting&lt;br/&gt;seismic reflection data to determine
depositional history and locate potential drill sites; and taking
piston&lt;br/&gt;cores to define the sedimentary history of the region. Regional
geologic studies, seismic reflection&lt;br/&gt;profiling from conventional
geophysical vessels along the periphery of the Arctic Basin and
from&lt;br/&gt;icebreakers within the polar ice pack, aerogeophysics, and
satellite altimetry data have led many&lt;br/&gt;researchers to support the idea
that the Amerasia Basin of the Arctic Ocean opened about a pivot point
near&lt;br/&gt;the Mackenzie Delta. Simple reconstruction of the Amerasia Basin
is precluded, however, by the presence&lt;br/&gt;of the Chukchi Borderland, an
extensive cluster of submarine plateaus in the Amerasia Basin north of
the&lt;br/&gt;Chukchi shelf, and by Mendeleev Ridge. If both the Borderland and
the Alpha/Mendeleev Ridge are&lt;br/&gt;constructed of igneous rocks that
postdate opening of the Amerasia Basin, simple closure is not a
problem.&lt;br/&gt;However, Grantz and others have cored Phanerozoic sediments,
including Cambrian and&lt;br/&gt;Ordovician shallow-water marine carbonates from
Northwind Ridge that are similar to the basement rocks&lt;br/&gt;found beneath
the Sverdrup basin of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. If Chukchi Borderland
consists of&lt;br/&gt;continental crust, complicated tectonic scenarios must be
devised to explain its presence. The crustal&lt;br/&gt;character of the
Borderland is therefore critical to understanding the origin and kinematics of
the Amerasia&lt;br/&gt;Basin's opening. Northwind Ridge, the easternmost plateau
of the Chukchi Borderland, faces the Early&lt;br/&gt;Cretaceous Canada Basin
(the largest and deepest part of the Amerasia Basin) at Northwind
Escarpment.&lt;br/&gt;The escarpment is a distinctive feature invoked in many
tectonic models for the opening of the Amerasia&lt;br/&gt;Basin. Because
Northwind Ridge is a high-standing plateau that adjoins the tectonically
enigmatic&lt;br/&gt;Northwind Escarpment, understanding the crustal character of
the Chukchi Borderland and the contrast&lt;br/&gt;between it and that of the
deep Canada Basin is very important. Virtually nothing is known of the
crustal&lt;br/&gt;structure and seismic stratigraphy of Mendeleev Ridge. They
will conduct a seismic reflection and&lt;br/&gt;refraction experiment to resolve
fundamental questions concerning the tectonic evolution of the
Amerasia&lt;br/&gt;Basin. Cross tracks from the deeper Canada Basin across the
Northwind Ridge should determine whether&lt;br/&gt;it has operated as a
transform margin, convergent margin or neither. Understanding the evolution of
the&lt;br/&gt;Canada Basin and its development as a deep-water basin is
fundamental to such basic concerns as sea level&lt;br/&gt;fluctuations and
paleoclimate in the Mesozoic. The experiment will require building 25 sea-ice
seismometers [SIS] that will be deployed on the ice using the U.S. Coast Guard
(USCG) helicopters. The hydrophone of the SIS will be deployed through a hole
augered through the ice. Radio transmitters will allow monitoring of the arrival
data on board so that the SISs can&lt;br/&gt;be retrieved as soon as the
refracted arrivals are observed. A global positioning system (GPS) unit in the
SIS will provide continuous location. A basic arrival time versus offset
analysis of real-time data will provide key information required&lt;br/&gt;for a
fast interpretation of the crustal structure of the Chukchi Borderland and the
Mendeleev Ridge. The&lt;br/&gt;data will also be used in iterative travel-time
tomographic inversions to delineate details of the velocity structure. The
velocity structure will be used in conjunction with existing seismic reflection
and geologic data to produce complete crustal sections of Chukchi Borderland,
Chukchi Basin and Mendeleev Ridge. The resulting crustal sections will be used
to calibrate existing ship, satellite, submarine and aerogravity data, to
construct realistic models, and to address such questions as the tectonic origin
and degree of extension in the Chukchi Borderland, the origin of Mendeleev
Ridge, and to&lt;br/&gt;determine whether there has been convergence between
Northwind Ridge and Canada Basin.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Principal
Investigators will include at least four crossed lines suitable for siting
future drilling&lt;br/&gt;operations in the region. The IODP drill sites will be
used to study the climate history of the Arctic region,&lt;br/&gt;ocean
circulation patterns, and impact of ice-covered versus ice-free conditions on
the biotic evolution of&lt;br/&gt;the Arctic. Determination of the crustal
structure of both Chukchi Borderland and Mendeleev Ridge has&lt;br/&gt;important
implications for Law of the Sea considerations. Three graduate students and a
minimum number of two undergraduates will be recruited to participate in this
cruise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;