* 0327590
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: "Crafting" Hongshan Communities: Household Archeology in the Chifeng Region of Inner Mongolia, NE China.
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2004
* USD 11,995.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert D. Drennan, Mr. Christian E. Peterson will
test for socioeconomic dif-ferences between households that may have helped
shape intracommunity relations and underwritten the emergence of social
hierarchy during the Hongshan period (ca. 4500-3000 BCE) in northeastern China.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Peterson will carry out a 20 km2 micro-regional survey
of a Hongshan period civic-ceremonial cen-tral-place community in the Chifeng
region of Inner Mongolia, and intensively study a sample of 20 to 30 of its
constituent households. Artifacts will be recovered from each of these
households through surface collection and the excavation of subsurface shovel
probes. Differences in the kind and quality of artifacts associated with
different households will make it possible to reconstruct patterns of status and
wealth variation within the community. Degrees of productive specialization (in
utilitarian or prestige goods) will be indicated by the extent to which
artifacts used in different productive activities are concentrated in dif-ferent
households. Variability in family size will reflect differing strategies of
labor pool enlargement pursued by different households. And differences in the
amount of farmland cultivated by each household will suggest patterns of control
over basic resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A community-centered approach -
focused between household-level studies and broader regional-scale modes of
analysis - will contribute to the comparative cross-cultural study of early
social hierarchies. Ar-chaeologists have long sought to understand the origins
of social hierarchy and the nature of its earliest manifestations because it is
such a pervasive organizing principle of recent human societies. This was not,
however, always the case; hierarchical societies developed separately in many
different parts of the world beginning only some 7,000 years ago. The Hongshan
society studied by Mr. Peterson thus represents one of the world's earliest
social hierarchies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Apart from its contribution to the
study of early social hierarchies, this dissertation project will have a broader
impact on the infrastructure of archeological science by providing Mr. Peterson
with training in the design, direction, and realization of professional field
research, by providing fundamental field ex-perience to a number of graduate and
undergraduate archaeology students who will assist in carrying out the project,
and by building international collaborative partnerships among individual and
institutional participants, including Jilin University and the Inner Mongolian
Institute of Cultural Relics and Archeol-ogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;