* 0327896
* CMG:     Multiphase Porous Medium Dynamics:     Pore to Field Scale
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* M Forest, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2008
* USD 662,000.00

Multiphase porous medium systems occur routinely in natural and engineered
systems. A motivating example class of problems for this work are porous medium
systems comprised of natural materials, such as soils or aquifer materials that
are occupied by multiple fluid phases. Models currently used to describe such
systems do not follow naturally from pore scale representations, but rather are
closed by empirical, ad hoc hysteretic relations that are intended to describe
the interdependence among fluid pressures, saturations, and permeabilies. In
this work, we will advance and evaluate a novel set of models based in rigorous
multi-scale analysis. We will use multi-scale theory, simulation, and experiment
to model phenomena associated with surface physics and chemistry that are buried
in pressure-saturation relations or phenomenological aspects of current
multiphase models. We will generalize standard models by the addition of
interfacial contacts between solid, gas, and liquid phases. This generalization
falls naturally into the class of models derived by Gray and Hassanizadeh.
Closure relations represent a central piece of this work and will combine pore-
scale numerical simulations, multi-scale averaging methods and analysis of
scaling properties of coefficients and their consequences for macroscale model
behavior, and experiments. The advanced models will be: solved with new
numerical methods that generalize existing approaches, in particular new fast
linear solvers with high-order accurate time-stepping algorithms; and analyzed
mathematically for well-posedness with physically conceived initial-boundary
conditions. Finally, we will benchmark the new models using experimental
laboratory data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiphase subsurface flow problems
present critical technological challenges to society. Current flow and transport
models of porous medium systems have served vital roles in addressing the
challenges, including remediation of contaminants, as well as recovery and
protection of water resources. Nonetheless, advances in the fundamental models
for flow and transport are needed, along with recognition and resolution of new
numerical challenges associated with model developments. This work will advance
the rigorous scientific and mathematical bases of such models and result in more
realistic simulators for modeling transport phenomena in porous medium systems.
We expect this work to lead to improved simulation of contaminant transport and
recovery from groundwater systems.