* 0327582
* Collaborative Research:      CMG:      Anisotropic Atmospheric Dynamics Across a Wide Range of Scales
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Chris Snyder, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2007
* USD 78,327.00

Our focus is on the extratropical atmosphere, with special emphasis on the
dynamics in highly anisotropic backgrounds, such as is the case near the
tropopause. Theoretically, the wave dynamics for a highly-anisotropic background
atmosphere has been much less studied than for the homogeneous and isotropic
case. Yet it is intrinsic in the atmospheric mixing process that nearly-stepwise
environments form in the atmosphere. Furthermore, when the anisotropy is in
potential vorticity (PV), the impact on large-scale wave dynamics occurs at
leading order, since Rossby wave propagation depends on the presence of PV
gradients. The proposed work focuses on the dynamical impact of background
anisotropy on cyclone organization, frontogenesis, gravity wave emission and the
overall atmospheric energy spectrum. The unifying theme is that it is crucial to
study the whole spectrum of scales simultaneously, from energy injection at
synoptic scales down to dissipation at frontal scales, because nonlinear
interactions affect all scales in between. Hence, the low-frequency variability
and predictability of the planetary scales depend significantly, through
nonlinear cascades, on the dissipative process at the meso- and frontal scales.
A new class of dynamical models take specific advantage of jumps in potential
vorticity at a tropopause discontinuity. Exact- and high-resolution solutions
provide a testbed to assess the adequacy of current operational models in
resolving the dynamical anisotropies. Recognition of the highly-anisotropic
nature of tropospheric dynamics redirects previous mathematical efforts on
isotropic and homogeneous turbulence to atmospherically more relevant
anisotropic problems.

The weather over North America is greatly influenced by the pattern of winds
near the tropopause, a level of sharp change in the atmospheric conditions found
at an altitude of roughly 10 km. Because operational weather models often do not
have sufficient resolution to accurately describe the atmospheric motions at
these heights, our ability to understand, and thus forecast, the weather and
climate throughout the atmosphere is diminished. An example of one of the many
issues which will be investigated is why many of the current climate models show
a biased error of colder temperatures near the tropopause. The scope of this
work seeks to unify the dynamics of the atmosphere from the largest continental-
scale (low pressure) cells, through their subsequent collapse to intermediate-
scale storm fronts, and the generation of yet smaller-scale (gravity wave)
turbulence. The primary focus of new theoretical progress is to account for the
important contributions of the tropopause in the evolution of weather patterns.
The proposed research lies at the intersection between mathematics and
atmospheric science, which is now possible through the synthesis of the
investigators' recent advances in tropopause modeling and new results in the
numerical computation of the statistics of atmospheric turbulence. The
anticipated impact of further understanding of how energy in the lower
atmosphere evolves over the full range of thousands down to tens of kilometers
would be the elucidation of currently under-resolved features of weather
prediction and climate models.