* 0327371
* SGER:    Creating a  Music Information Retrieval (MIR) Development and Testing Environment
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* John Downie, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Griffin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 99,881.00

Abstract

Proposal : IIS-0327371 Institution: University of Illinois PI: John Downie
Title: SGER: Creating a Music Information Retrieval (MIR) Development and
Testing Environment

Music Information Retrieval (MIR) is a rapidly emerging research area requiring
new expertise and approaches. The amount of digital music information being
created and often avaialble via the internet has been increasing at exponential
rates and has prompted new approaches within the field of information retrieival
to deal with this unique content. This project will construct the world's first,
experimental, internationally-accessible testing and development database
environment, for music information. The PI has worked closely with rights-
holders in the recording industry to incorportate a rich set of content into the
testing environment. The corpus of material will exceed, potentially multi-
terabytes of mixed-media content ensuring that the testing environment reflects
"real-world" situations. The principal work involves research exploring
important issues related to systems design and development to support unique
functionalities required in building, searching and preserving music
infomration, while simultaneously ensuring the unique requirements of rights-
holders.















Abstract

Proposal : IIS-0340597 Institution: University of Illinois PI: John Downie
Title: Workshop on the Evaluation of Music Information Retrieval

This proposal is to convene a workshop as part of the 26th Annual International
ACM SIGIR Conference to be held in Toronto this summer. Music Information
Retrieval (MIR) is a rapidly emerging research area requiring new expertise and
approaches. The amount of digital music information being created and often
available via the internet has been increasing at exponential rates and has
prompted new approaches within the field of information retrieival to deal with
this unique content. The SIGIR Conference is a major meeting on information
retrieval and affords many the opportunity to participate in the workshop who
might otherwise not be able to attend. Two earlier meetings in July 2002 (JCDL)
and October 2002 (ISMIR) have provided valuable background for this workshop and
demonstrated the intense and growing interest in imusic information retrieval.