* 0327705
* Collaborative Research:  CMG: Mathematical and Experimental Analysis of Transport Phenomena in Highly Heterogeneous Porous Media
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Edward Waymire, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2007
* USD 474,000.00

Collaborative Research: Mathematical and Experimental Analysis of Transport
Phenomena in Highly Heterogeneous Porous Media&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is focused on the description of solute spreading in highly heterogeneous porous
media. Conventional models often capture the net movement and spreading of
solutes, but they do not typically capture the 'tails' of solute plumes as they
move through the subsurface. Usually, tailing arises because of the interaction
between two or more kinds of geologic material that have distinctly different
physical properties. Such media are often represented by physicists and
hydrologists as containing two or more types of discrete
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will integrate theory and experiment
for understanding solute transport through highly heterogeneous porous media,
with a particular focus on tailing phenomena. Often the development of theory
and subsequent experimental validation is conducted by entirely separate groups
of researchers. In contrast, this research team consists of members who have a
proven record of integrating new mathematical theory and carefully-controlled
laboratory experiments. This work also provides an opportunity to increase the
sparse database of well-characterized solute transport experiments available to
the hydrology and mathematics communities for the purposes of testing and
validating descriptive theories of solute transport in heterogeneous subsurface
systems. The broad objective of the research is to develop an improved
understanding of tailing phenomena in highly heterogeneous porous media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems to be addressed in this project are truly
interdisciplinary, and require new and substantive basic research to be
conducted at the intersection of mathematics and geosciences. The
interdisciplinary research team (involving members representing mathematics,
geosciences, statistics, and engineering) brings a balanced perspective on
modern data collection technology; subsurface hydrology; upscaling methods;
statistics; stochastic processes; numerical methods; and the partial
differential equations of mass, momentum, and energy transport. The results from
our research are intended to provide substantial contributions to both
mathematics and to geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
have the following broader impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benefits to society.
Subsurface contamination is a serious problem that poses threats to public
health and to our continuing access to fresh water for drinking, agriculture,
and industry. This research seeks to improve our basic scientific understanding
of transport processes relevant to the effective design of subsurface
remediation schemes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Promoting training and learning.
Understanding and managing subsurface heterogeneity is one of the most
challenging concepts for students and practitioners to master in groundwater
hydrology. The proposed research provides multiple opportunities to improve both
undergraduate and graduate learning in an exciting and focused interdisciplinary
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhancing networks and partnerships. This
proposal expands on existing collaborations and focuses an interdisciplinary
group of geoscientists and mathematicians with a wide variety of expertise.
Support of the proposed research will provide the unique opportunity for the
PI's to collaborate across disciplinary lines on problems of mutual
interest.&lt;br/&gt;