* 0327295
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Searching for Working Class Politics:  Labor, Community, and Urban Power in Silicon Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2005
* Richard Walker, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2005
* USD 11,225.00

Since the late 1970s, neoliberal urban restructuring characterized by
devolution, fiscal crises, and increased interurban competition for investment
has caused cities to prioritize development policies at the expense of social
welfare expenditures in a move dubbed "urban entrepreneurialism." Scholarship on
urban politics has tended assume the negation of social welfare as a salient
agenda in local politics. At the same time, class categories, particularly the
"working class," has increasingly been seen as an irrelevant category in urban
politics. The purpose of this doctoral dissertation research project is to
understand the development of a labor- and community-based movement for living
wage, affordable housing, and health-care reforms in Silicon Valley since the
early 1980s in relation to local political context and neoliberal urban
restructuring. The project asks the following questions: (1) Why has there been
a growing politics of redistribution centered on the local state despite
neoliberal urban restructuring? (2) How have activists' demands and strategies
been shaped by urban entrepreneurialism? (3) How have the political axes of
class, race and community been implicated in these struggles? (4) How has local
political structure influenced the outcome of reform efforts? Mapping of basic
socioeconomic indicators will locate reform demands in the context of growing
socioeconomic polarization and the formation of low-wage, predominantly
immigrant working-class communities in Silicon Valley. Focusing on the city of
San Jose and Santa Clara County, in-depth interviews with leaders of key
organizations, community activists, and local policymakers will be triangulated
with a review of archives, public records, and the local press to reconstruct
reform strategies, their interaction with political-economic context, and
outcomes of different activities. The student expects to demonstrate that social
welfare has been firmly placed on local policy agendas by union- and community-
based activism in Silicon Valley and that this activism constitutes a nascent
regional working-class politics. Also under investigation is whether the new
politics have been shaped by fiscal restructuring and local political structure
in ambiguous, contradictory ways.

This study fills a gap in urban studies on the social and political geography of
Silicon Valley, a region celebrated for its technological and economic dynamism.
It does so in a manner that reveals the problem of inadequate wages and access
to housing, health care, and other necessities faced by low wage workers in high
tech regions. While economic and political trends have severely hampered social
welfare and redistribution at all levels of government in the U.S., rising
economic inequality over the last quarter of a century has generated serious
discontents on the part of low wage workers. This study investigates how these
discontents have been politically expressed, not only in terms of strategies and
demands, but also in terms of mobilization based on certain group identities.
This research is expected to bring to the study of urban geography a renewed
exploration of the linkage between workplace and residence in informing class
interest. This research has potential implications for policymakers interested
in the problem of growing socioeconomic inequality. This research also has
potential implications for social movements by identifying the forces that
constrain and enable political activism. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.