* 0327504
* Folding Mechanisms of Dihydrofolate Reductase and the Response Regulators
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* C Robert Matthews, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2006
* USD 545,672.00

The overall goal of this project is to understand the mechanism by which the
amino acid sequence of a protein directs its rapid and efficient folding to a
native, functional form. The target of these studies will be several
representatives of the alpha/beta/alpha class of protein structures, one of the
most common motifs found in biology. Prior work from this laboratory on two
members of this class, dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) and H-ras p21, has
revealed complex kinetic processes that begin in the sub-millisecond time range
and proceed through transient intermediates in parallel pathways. Future studies
will focus on DHFR and several representatives of the flavodoxin fold, including
the response regulators CheY, NtrC, and SpoOF. Conventional small angle x-ray
scattering instrumentation and a novel time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy
technique developed over the previous grant period will be used to detect non-
random structure in unfolded states and monitor folding reactions in the
microsecond time range for DHFR, CheY, NtrC, and SpoOF. Genetic engineering
methods will be used to create mutant proteins suitable for labeling with
fluorophores required for distance measurements using Forster resonance energy
transfer techniques. Mutations will also be employed to test the involvement of
specific beta strands and alpha helices in non-random structure in the unfolded
protein and in guiding the early stages of folding. The information obtained on
transient intermediates and the barriers separating them from stable
thermodynamics states will enhance the understanding of the folding mechanism of
the alpha/beta/alpha fold and provide parameters useful to theorists who
simulate folding reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
effort is multi-fold. First, support of this research project will enhance the
development of a graduate program in Chemical Biology at the University of
Massachusetts Medical School. The concepts and methods employed to design
experiments, analyze the data, and interpret the results have motivated the
creation of a course in Molecular Biophysics which will be taught to first and
second year students in the Graduate School for Biomedical Sciences. This course
is also available to undergraduates in the Worcester area, including those at
Clark University and Worcester Polytechnic Institute. Second, undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows will receive training in molecular
biophysics which will serve to advance important research goals and to prepare
them for professional careers in industry, academia, and government. Third,
novel technology developed during the previous grant period will be refined and
applied to the protein folding problem, one of the most significant impediments
to realizing the full benefit of the genomic sequencing efforts. A patent
disclosure has been filed to encourage the application of this micro-fluidics
mixing technology to other areas of biology or chemistry where microsecond
reactions occur. &lt;br/&gt;