* 0327555
* Operation of the CLIVAR &amp; Carbon Hydrographic Data Office at UCSD/SIO
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2009
* James Swift, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 10/31/2009
* USD 1,743,596.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0327555&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Hydrographic, nutrient and tracer data used in large scale ocean
circulation studies will be brought together, verified, corrected for content
and format errors, assembled with relevant documentation, and carefully prepared
for dissemination and archive at the CLIVAR (CLImate VARiability and
Predictability Program) &amp; Carbon Hydrographic Data Office (CCHDO). In
addition the CCHDO works to promote appropriate methodology, applicable
community standards, communications, and data
compatibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data of the type dealt with by the CCHDO are
created by &gt;100 data originators worldwide, sometimes 5 or more contributing
to one file. All data users must cope with the temporal-, content-, and format-
related file diversity these different originators engender. It is the enormous
advantage of bringing data sets together to a common content and readability
standard that remains the strongest argument for continuing support for the
present data office, with a strong additional advantage that the documentation
associated with the data are collected, reorganized to a common standard (where
possible), and preserved with the data. Although the data office disseminates
data via the internet, on CD-ROMs and data DVDs, it provides its total public
holdings, including documentation, to the designated national archive and
further distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: With the merging,
verification, content and format correction, and documentation carried out by
the proposed data office, present-day and future US and international users of
reference-quality CTD, routine hydrography, and tracer ocean profile data can
literally use any of the data files written in commonly used exchange formats
once they can easily read one such file. This both hugely reduces the personnel
costs to data users to import and use data and also makes these data available
to a much wider audience who do not employ data specialists. Moreover, the
careful assembly of documentation with the data helps to assure a service
lifetime for the data far into the future, contributing to a broad range of
studies of long-term ocean variability. The clean-up of the data and rewriting
into netCDF formats also make the data much more straightforward to import into
computer models.&lt;br/&gt;