* 0327348
* Gordon Research Conference:  2003 Thin Film &amp; Crystal Mechanisms; South Hadley, MA; June, 2003
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* David Cahill, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2004
* USD 6,250.00

A Gordon Research Conference on Thin Film and Crystal Growth Mechanisms will be
held at Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts, June 22-27, 2003.
The conference will cover liquid-phase crystal growth, vapor-phase crystal
growth, thin film deposition, materials chemistry, and surface physics research.
The conference aims to promote strong interactions between these disciplines and
emphasizes understanding of fundamental chemical and physical processes involved
in novel methods for the growth of nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;The program is
organized around invited speakers, discussion leaders, a chair, and vice-chair;
both contributed papers and posters are scheduled. Special efforts have been
made to recruit a diverse group of participants, including foreign and American
scientists, younger and older researchers, and industrial, national laboratory
and academic researchers. Objectives are to stimulate communications among the
broad community of researchers addressing crystal growth from a variety of
disciplinary backgrounds--chemistry, physics, engineering and materials science,
and to assess critical research necessary to further basic understanding.
&lt;br/&gt;The conference is expected to provide an effective forum for
discussion of critical scientific issues in crystal growth. Topics include:
Heteroepitaxy and Quantum Dots, Control of Nucleation and Morphology,
Macromolecular Crystallization, Molecular-level Dynamics of Crystal Surfaces,
Thin Films, and Surface Nanostructures. The conference provides opportunity to
assess the field and future directions, and to establish new ties between
universities, research institutions, and industry.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;An
evaluation of the progress and status of crystal growth research issues at the
macro through the nanoscale level along with current assessments of important
developments will be of significant value to the understanding and enhanced
utilization of electronic materials in computing, data processing, and
communications. The requested NSF funds will be used to facilitate participation
in the meeting by young faculty, postdoctoral research associates and graduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;