* 0327178
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Citizenship, Immigration, and the Shadow State in the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Lynn Staeheli, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2006
* USD 11,925.00

Social services are critical to immigrants' membership and incorporation into
American society, particularly for those groups of immigrants with low
socioeconomic status or those marked as marginal by their racial and cultural
characteristics. Delivery of social services in American cities has changed,
however, as recent decentralization of public authority have led central and
regional governments to contract out the delivery of social services to
organizations in the non-profit sector. Governments often maintain influence on
how public funds may be used in such organizations. This element of government
oversight has the potential to make state-funded non-profit organizations into
instruments of state policy or a "shadow state." This doctoral dissertation
research project explores the relationship between government funding policies
and social service delivery in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area in
order to understand the effect that the shadow state has on the incorporation of
immigrants. The project focuses on non-profit organizations that provide social
services to immigrant groups as important actors that mediate government funding
stipulations, organizational goals, and immigrants' goals for the incorporation
process. The project asks the following questions: (1) How do government funding
stipulations become integrated into social services that are delivered to
immigrants? (2) How do social service organizations' goals and agendas affect
the incorporation process? (3) How do organizations respond to immigrant
communities' incorporation interests? An initial survey and subsequent in-depth
interviews with leaders of social service organizations and with leaders of
immigrant communities will provide data regarding how organizations shape the
institutional opportunity structure for immigrants in the incorporation process.
This project will address the immigrant incorporation process through the
concept of citizenship. The findings are expected to demonstrate the conditions
under which some organizations promote formal, legal aspects of citizenship as
well as substantive, community-belonging aspects in the delivery of social
services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance of this project is its
evaluation of how citizenship is conceptualized and represented to immigrants
through social service organizations. At a time when public-private partnerships
in social service delivery are gaining currency, this project will analyze the
impact these delivery systems on the kinds of citizenship that are created and
circulated through new strategies of social service delivery. As immigrants have
come to constitute a larger portion of the population in American cities, the
ways in which they become incorporated are important issues of public policy. A
primary contribution of this project is knowledge about the role and relative
importance that the shadow state has for immigrant incorporation and for the on-
going construction of citizenship in American society. This research will also
shed light on the various means by which social planning agencies affect
immigrant incorporation in many urban regions. The research will also be
relevant for evaluation of social service policies and for the organizations and
agencies that are responsible for providing social service to immigrants. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;