* 0327244
* The Fate of Microbial Life Encased in Sea Ice:  Tracking Organisms and Survival Strategies Through the Arctic Winter
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Jody Deming, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 06/30/2007
* USD 489,275.00

Abstract of Deming Proposal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Every fall, open coastal waters
of the high Arctic begin to close again as atmospheric temperature drops and sea
ice forms. Organisms trapped in fluid inclusions of the ice are then held
captive to increasingly severe temperature and salt concentration (typically to
.20degrees C and ~20% salt) as winter progresses. The few microbial studies of
winter sea ice have shown that cold-adapted (psychrophilic) heterotrophic
bacteria are readily cultured from it, that metabolically active cells are
associated with particulate matter in the brines, and that exopolymeric
substances (EPS) may serve as cryoprotectants and a stable matrix for embedded
bacteria. The fate of specific microorganisms, populations or communities during
the long dark winter of the high Arctic, however, is unknown; their strategies
for acquiring adequate nutrition under extreme conditions, the subject only of
speculation. This project proposes to track microbial succession, at regular
intervals and in vertical profile within the ice sheet, through the winter
season at an established, interdisciplinary study site. Fluorescent probes will
be used in quantitative, in situ hybridization analyses of ice sections, melted
in isothermal-isohaline solutions. Diversity in selected samples will be further
evaluated by 16S rRNA-based environmental cloning. The domain Archaea and
division Cytophaga-Flavobacteria-Bacteriodes will be probed as endmember
populations (expected to be low and high, respectively) and members of the
psychrophilic genus, Colwellia, as representatives of culturable inhabitants.
The latter are also selected due to completion of the whole-genome sequence of
C. psychrerythraea strain 34H, the first psychrophilic organism to be sequenced.
Available knowledge leads to the hypothesis that extracellular proteolytic
enzyme activity in brine inclusions is stabilized by EPS, enabling a supply of
nitrogen-rich organic compounds to heterotrophic bacteria as fuel for the
winter. This concept and related ideas will be tested via in situ incubations in
the ice sheet, using strain 34H and preparations of its extracellular proteases
and exopolymers as amendments to sea-ice brines. The research platform will be
the Canadian icebreaker, John Franklin, newly renovated for science operations
in winter. The Franklin will be frozen into Franklin Bay (at the western
entrance of the Northwest Passage, Canadian Archipelago) during winter 2003.2004
as part of a remarkable yearlong expedition in the region for the international
Canadian Arctic Shelf Exchange Study (CASES). Results from this project will be
interpreted within a strong interdisciplinary framework, given the CASES
platform. Better understanding of microbial succession during winter and links
to organic compounds in the ice will clarify spring conditions for carbon flux,
from ice to ocean below, which can be significant regionally and globally.
Environmental data on Colwellia will set the stage for sophisticated genome-
based research in future. Results of in situ tests of winter survival hypotheses
will provide basic knowledge applicable to more practical issues of societal
interest concerning use of organisms, enzymes and other sensitive organic
compounds under freezing conditions in the biomedical, aquaculture and food
industries. The CASES overwintering expedition provides a unique educational and
training opportunity for all involved. Participants from many countries, local
Inuit villages and K-12 classrooms will be aboard the Franklin for joint field,
laboratory, interdisciplinary and cross-cultural research and training. Results
will be published in the peer-reviewed literature, incorporated into teaching
efforts, and disseminated in venues designed to reach much broader audiences,
including news and information releases from sea and video documentation of
field and shipboard experiences for public viewing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;