* 0327345
* Seismological Investigation of Columbia Glacier Calving Mechanics
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Daniel McNamara, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 02/29/2008
* USD 407,056.00

Mountain glaciers and small ice caps collectively constitute a significant
fraction of global land ice (Alaska and adjacent Canadian glaciers comprise 13%
of the world's glacier area, exclusive of Antarctica and Greenland). Despite
poorly resolved mass balances, recent evidence shows that Alaskan glaciers, by
virtue of their large collective area, rapid response characteristics, and high
mass fluxes, contribute to modern sea level rise at a rate approximately seven
times greater than previously thought. Much of the mass loss from Alaskan
glaciers comes from tidewater glaciers, which advance and retreat episodically,
with long periods of advance and stability punctuated by rapid, apparently
irreversible retreat. During retreat, tidewater glacier mass balance is
dominated by the poorly understood process of iceberg calving, rather than
direct climate forcing, and the magnitude of ice flux into the ocean can be very
large. Columbia Glacier is presently discharging icebergs into the ocean at a
rate of approximately 22 km3 yr-1. Thus, tidewater calving is an important, but
poorly understood element of modern glacier change and sea level rise. The
Principal Investigators present work plan at Columbia Glacier with two points of
focus, each dedicated to an increased understanding the role of calving in
tidewater glacier retreat. First, they will continue their program of aerial
photography as the glacier terminus retreats through a major channel
constriction. Second, they will conduct a passive seismological investigation of
calving processes. This work is motivated by the importance of small glaciers
(especially Alaskan tidewater glaciers) to modern global glacier mass balance
and sea level change and by the need to better understand the role of calving in
tidewater glacier dynamics. Additionally, Columbia Glacier is the last of the
Alaskan tidewater glaciers to retreat, and is partly through its retreat phase
and at a critical location in its channel geometry. This opportunity to study
tidewater calving will be gone in a few decades, so it is important to take
advantage of it now. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tidewater calving is an important
part of glacier dynamics and ice/ocean interaction, but is still poorly
understood. Progress toward a better understanding of calving is handicapped by
a lack of relevant observations and lack of knowledge of what the relevant
observations should be. This research will provide a continuation of a highly
successful observational program of aerial photography that has yielded the
longest and most detailed observational record of tidewater glacier kinematics
ever assembled, and has formed the basis of much of what is presently known
about tidewater dynamics. The Principal Investigators will start a new series of
seismic observations on Columbia Glacier in an attempt to discover in detail the
timing, location, and geometry of fracture events leading to calving. Limited
seismic investigations have been previously made on tidewater glaciers,
including on Columbia Glacier, but modern advances in data acquisition and
processing will allow them to use seismology much more effectively and to look
at fracture and calving in much greater detail. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader
impacts resulting from the proposed activity: In addition to its role in modern
sea level change, tidewater calving played a critical role in global ice sheet
and climate dynamic in the past. Ample evidence from the North Atlantic Ocean
suggests that passive episodic calving was essential in the rapid breakup of the
Laurentide Ice Sheet (LIS), but current LIS reconstructions do not attempt to
incorporate calving processes due to the lack of a mathematical calving
relationship. However, ice sheet modelers are eager for input concerning calving
processes to incorporate in LIS models. Additionally, an understanding of
tidewater calving provides useful crossover knowledge for Antarctic and
Greenland marine-ending ice masses where calving occurs much less frequently.
&lt;br/&gt;