* 0327644
* Collaborative:Field and Modeling Studies of the Magnitude and Variability of 234Th-Based Estimates of Particulate Organic Carbon Export Flux and Remineralization in the Upper Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2008
* George Jackson, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 11/30/2008
* USD 112,824.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0327721 / OCE-327644 /
OCE-0327693&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The magnitude of the flux of biogenic
particulate organic carbon (POC) exported from the surface waters of the world
ocean and remineralized at depth is critical to constraining models of the
global carbon cycle, yet remains controversial. Over the past decade, 234Th has
been increasingly used as a tracer to estimate POC export from the euphotic zone
by multiplying the depth-integrated 234Th flux by the POC/234Th ratio of sinking
particles. The accuracy of this technique is highly dependent on the natural
variability in the POC/234Th ratio and 234Th flux, yet the significance of this
variability to estimates of POC export remains uncertain. The global
distribution of 234Th-derived POC export fluxes can vary by 2-10 times or more
due solely to variability in the POC/234Th ratio and procedures used to estimate
the 234Th flux. Thus, despite over a decade of research, our understanding of
the magnitude and variability of 234Th-derived POC export fluxes, and the
dominant controlling mechanisms, is not well
constrained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project field, researchers at the
University of Rhode Island, Texas A &amp; M University, and University of
Georgia will conduct field and modeling studies to address the following major
question: How accurate are 234Th-based estimates of POC export flux from the
euphotic to the mesopelagic zone, what are the dominant mechanisms controlling
234Th scavenging and export, and how can this tracer technique be improved? They
have two working hypotheses designed to address this central question.
Hypothesis 1: Regional variability in the magnitude of 234Th-derived POC export
is determined by differences in particle source/organic chemical composition and
food web structure. Hypothesis 2: Particle-particle interactions and
differential biogeochemical recycling of organic C and 234Th controls POC/234Th
ratios and hence the magnitude of 234Th-derived POC export and remineralization.
The research strategy is to combine new and existing measurements of sediment
trap and particle size-fractionated 234Th, POC and specific organic compounds in
the upper ocean (~0-500 m) with newly developed particle coagulation models to
validate, test and further develop the proposed working hypotheses. Samples will
be collected from three study sites characterized by distinct differences in
food-web structure and particle export (Mediterranean, Arctic, NW Atlantic) and
designed to provide maximum information on the mechanisms controlling POC/234Th
ratios and POC export and remineralization. Model development and testing is a
key aspect of the project and serves to guide and validate the field
observations and provide information on mechanisms of 234Th estimates upper
ocean POC export and remineralization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the proposed research bears on a number of national and international
carbon cycle research programs (JGOFS, VERTIGO, DYFAMED, CARBOCEAN).
Specifically, this proposal has broad intellectual implications for previous and
currently NSF funded projects that use (or have used) 234Th to measure POC
export fluxes from the upper ocean. For example, POC fluxes obtained during the
JGOFS program may need to be revised, and future investigations of the
mesopelagic, which will depend on accurate determination of the particle flux
entering this region of the ocean, may need to take the results of this work
into account. The results could also have implications for the SCOR/IGBP OCEANS
initiative of improved understanding of the global ocean carbon
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;