* 0327211
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Political Geography of Civil Abatement and Gang Injunction Strategies in Los Angeles County
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Jennifer Wolch, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2005
* USD 10,878.00

Civil gang injunctions (CGI) are spatially based crime abatement strategies
designed to curtail and reduce the activities of selected gangs in specific
places through the use of restraining orders against named gangs and gang
members. Since 1987, CGI efforts have been heralded as successful methods to
combat criminal activity and to wrest away the control that gangs have had over
communities, but very little research has been conducted on CGIs. Debates
surrounding CGIs have focused on civil liberties and on how restricting non-
criminal activities may infringe on constitutional rights, but other pertinent
questions regarding CGIs have been overshadowed. This doctoral dissertation
research project will develop a conceptual model of CGI spatial targeting
decisions and model the crime displacement effects created by this suppression
tactic. Using Los Angeles County, California, as the empirical setting for
analysis, the project will examine how certain gangs are selected for a CGI and
how particular geographic locations are singled out for a CGI implementation
effort. About 1,000 gangs operate in Los Angeles County, but only a fraction of
these gangs have been targeted for a CGI. Although it might be expected that
places most severely impacted by gang-related crime would be targeted,
preliminary analysis of Los Angeles CGIs suggests that this is not the case and
that other factors influence the CGI decision process. Through an analysis of
archival materials on CGI court cases in Los Angeles and a geographic
information system-based spatial analysis of the urban context of CGI-targeted
gang territories, the student will test the hypothesis that privileged adjacency
(the spatial juxtaposition of more affluent middle-class communities and gang
territories) plays an important role in explaining CGI targeting decisions. The
second objective of this project is to determine the extent of crime
displacement associated with CGIs. Criminological literature on aggressive
police actions addresses crime displacement, but this issue has received minimal
treatment as it relates to CGIs. Using detailed multivariate analysis of gang-
related crime patterns over time, the dissertation tests the hypothesis that
CGIs are associated with crime displacement phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will provide a comprehensive
understanding of a high-profile policing strategy for the suppression of urban
gangs by focusing on socio-spatial dynamics of gang neighborhood targeting. Such
a geographic perspective has rarely been considered in the academic literature,
in public policy discussions, or in debates on CGIs. The research will increase
understanding about the ways that policies of city government, business
interests, middle-class communities, and politics can influence the injunction
process. Findings also will contribute to theories of urban racial formation by
testing the hypothesis that gangs not slated for a CGI are located in more
racially homogeneous, lower-income communities with little access or geographic
proximity to more privileged areas. From a policy perspective, the research will
reveal the extent to which the implementation of CGIs leads to uneven law
enforcement practices, thereby leaving those communities not targeted for
suppression efforts vulnerable to continued gang violence, which in turn leads
to further racialization, higher and more persistent crime, and deepening
political and economic marginalization. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;