* 0327564
* Making Industry Sustainable: Green Chemistry in the United States and the European Union
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Gene Rochlin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2005
* USD 22,597.00

This postdoctoral fellowship sets out to investigate the claim that the recent
emergence of green chemistry constitutes a transition to sustainable industry,
in (re)designing chemical production for environmental purposes in the United
States and the European Union. It aims to explore the ways in which green and
sustainable chemistry has taken form since the early 1990s, and is generating
scientific knowledge and material technologies that chemists, governments,
industry, and citizens recognize as credible and legitimate for use in chemical
manufacturing, policy-making, and consumer decision-making. The project aims to
compare developments in green/sustainable chemistry in the US and the EU to
determine whether concepts of sustainability, production design, and material
technologies vary between societies and cultures. These may be configured
differently across (and within) the US and the EU because of the political
demands, ecological values, regulatory and institutional settings, and technical
conditions in the two regions. The project also analyzes how governments,
environmentalists, consumers, and industry itself can know or prove that the
transition to sustainability is underway. It aims to illuminate how actors can
gauge the performance of industry in the apparently technically arcane and
relatively inaccessible area of chemical manufacturing, hidden inside plants and
laboratories. The intellectual merits of the project include the elaboration of
a theoretical framework to observe changes in a chemical production system
through knowledge, material technologies, chemicals, institutions for policy-
making, and the work of actors in demanding, interpreting and using scientific
and technical information. Theoretically, the study draws on three threads of
science and technology investigations. These are: (a) the concept of socially
robust knowledge (Nowotny, Scott, and Gibbons); (b) the ideas of Bijker
regarding the social shaping of material technologies; and (c) the work by
Jasanoff on regulatory science, political culture, and civic epistemology. The
project expands and synthesizes these theoretical strands into a framework with
four elements that jointly shape sustainable chemical production: actors, civic
epistemologies, channels of influence/power, and regulatory/institutional
settings. After studying the emergence of green/sustainable chemistry, the
project evaluates whether and how green chemistry is being translated into
production systems in the US and the EU through three facets and with regard to
designer catalysts, safer polymers and phthalate substitution: How is
sustainability constituted? How is sustainability designed into production? How
is sustainability enforced on production and evaluated? The project uses an
interpretive social scientific methodology. It draws on a combination of semi-
structured interviews with actors in the green chemistry arena; government
documents; industry, scientific, and technical literature; technology analysis;
regulatory databases; and environmental news. It combines a historical
perspective with contemporary developments. Field research will be undertaken in
the US and Europe. The fellowship has significant broader impacts for society.
It will strengthen the integration of research and education at UC Berkeley, by
helping to create new networks of researchers across campus. It will build the
environmental/STS community on campus by providing mentor help to graduate
students. I am non-hearing. Most important, the project will benefit the US and
the EU. By studying how transparency, performance measures, and accountability
can be developed, green chemistry may be made more robust as a source of
knowledge for regulation and sustainable industry in the early 21st Century.

