* 0327067
* Glacier Changes in Western North America: Effects on Sea Level and Climatic Implications
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Keith Echelmeyer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 07/31/2007
* USD 449,164.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Echelemeyer&lt;br/&gt;OPP-
0327067&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past decade the elevation
profiles of about 100 glaciers in northwestern North America have been measured,
many of them more than once. Used along with old maps, these permit changes in
surface elevation and volume to be calculated for different time intervals. This
is a twoyear follow-up study to complete data processing and archiving, and to
perform several interpretative tasks. The first of these tasks will be to
improve techniques for extrapolating the changes on measured glaciers to obtain
the volume changes of unmeasured ones. This will require the compilation of a
regional map of late summer snowlines to help define climate regions. The second
interpretative task involves removing the effects of glacier flow from the data,
so that the changes can be related to climate alone. The final task is to
interpret these corrected changes in&lt;br/&gt;terms of local and regional
climate, and to predict what will happen to the glaciers in the future under
specified climate scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research
will be carried out from a scientific perspective, but there are several
applications. The most obvious is the refined determination of how much the
glaciers of Alaska have contributed to the rise in sea level, and what future
contributions are likely to be under various climate scenarios. The recent
contribution has been much larger than originally predicted, and may exceed that
from the major ice sheets. A recent paper describing these results attracted
worldwide press attention. The other application relates to engineering: the
effect of glaciers and glacier thinning on water supply. One example in Alaska
recently re-surfaced when a congressman&lt;br/&gt;urged the revival of a
proposal for a huge hydro-power development project in the Susitna basin of the
Alaska Range.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;