* 0327440
* Will climate change affect hyporheic processes in arctic streams?  An assessment of interactions among geomorphology, hydrology, and biogeochemistry in Arctic stream networks
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* William Bowden, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 07/31/2007
* USD 608,708.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Bowden&lt;br/&gt;OPP-032740&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This is a
collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators at the University of Vermont,
Boise State University and Utah State University. The goal of this project is to
assess how geomorphology and seasonal changes in the thawed region of soil and
sediment around the open channel (i.e.; the thaw bulb) control hydraulic and
biogeochemical dynamics in the hyporheic zone of Arctic streams. The premise is
that: a) stream geomorphology sets a physical template that controls the
seasonal development of the sub-stream active layer (or thaw bulb) around Arctic
streams; b) the thaw bulb extent controls the potential for development of the
hyporheic zone, and c) the hyporheic zone substantially contributes to carbon
(C), nitrogen (N) and phosphorous (P) processing in streams. The Principal
Investigators anticipate that climate change in the Arctic has the potential to
significantly alter the thaw bulb and hyporheic dynamics through its influences
directly on precipitation, runoff, average annual temperature, and thaw season
duration, and indirectly on stream geomorphology. To address this central
hypothesis, they propose four objectives: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1. Select and
characterize stream reaches that represent the range of geomorphologic
conditions in rivers of the North Slope. &lt;br/&gt;2. Monitor the sub-stream
thaw bulb size through the thaw season using ground penetrating radar and
subsurface temperature measurement in several stream cross-sections within each
reach. &lt;br/&gt;3. Conduct repeated hyporheic exchange studies (stream solute
addition experiments) through the thaw season in each reach to determine
hyporheic hydraulic characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;4. Conduct repeated measures of
nutrient (N and P) concentrations and turnover time in the hyporheic zone
through the thaw season in each reach to determine biogeochemical
characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;These objectives will be addressed through a
combination of field monitoring (thermistor arrays, hyporheic sampling), field
experiments (solute additions), and modeling (groundwater transport and
transient storage) efforts. This research is important because there is no
reported literature on the structure and functions of the hyporheic zone in
Arctic systems. Considerable research in temperate regions suggests that
hyporheic zones are critical components of stream ecosystems. A significant
portion of the primary production in streams may be supported by nutrients
regenerated from hyporheic processes. This regeneration is dependent on organic
matter inputs (both autochthonous and allochthonous). Thus, hyporheic processing
is also important in understanding how streams modify carbon, nitrogen, and
phosphorous transport across landscapes. Research which quantifies these
important functions in Arctic streams is non-
existent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Research on this subject is
important as a direct input to our understanding of the ecological functions of
Arctic streams. Given that rivers are the conduits that link land to the ocean,
then processes within streams that modify material transport must be important
to understanding how runoff from land affects oceans. Furthermore, if climate
change affects the rate or extent of in-stream processing, then there may be
important impacts on the transport of materials from land to the ocean, which
this research would begin to address. Therefore, these studies are essential to
provide data and knowledge that will be of use to other scientists, policy
makers, resources managers, and ultimately to community stakeholders.
&lt;br/&gt;