* 0328326
* PEET: Bacterial Taxonomy: Classical and Molecular-Based Monographic Research on the Aquificales
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2009
* Anna-Louise Reysenbach, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 10/31/2009
* USD 750,000.00

Research and training in bacterial taxonomy will be supported through the
Partnerships for Enhancing Expertise in Taxonomy activity, under the supervision
of Prof. Reysenbach at Portland State University and her colleagues in the U.S.
and abroad. Training in classical and molecular genome-based approaches will
focus on bacteria of the order Aquificales, known from hydrothermal environments
around the world, including marine vents and terrestrial hotsprings. These
bacteria support their growth through novel oxidative and reductive reactions
utilizing minerals, usually in very hot environments, and are hence known as
chemolithoautotrophs. The laboratory culturing of these organisms, for detailed
metabolic studies, is difficult and time consuming, and Prof. Reysenbach is one
of the few experts in the world knowledgeable and successful in this enterprise.
Cultures and collections from all over the world have been assembled for her use
and that of her students, and will be augmented with additional materials from
colleagues exploring marine and hotspring localities in Yellowstone and in
Russia, New Zealand, the Azores, and elsewhere. &lt;br/&gt; Whole-genome
sequencing of bacteria is producing a wealth of DNA sequence and gene data,
including members of the Aquificales, and the comparative analysis of these data
enables reconstruction of phylogenetic relationships among the genes and the
organisms and determination of the peculiar metabolic activities that permit
them to live and diversify in extreme environments. Students will learn a full
range of technologies for comparative phylogenomics and for modern bacterial
systematics, as well as novel culturing procedures. As well, short courses
targeted to school teachers and the public under the "Yellowstone Microbes"
program will contribute to ongoing education in modern microbial taxonomy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;