* 0328433
* Professional Development Fellowship for Citizen-Scientist Collaboration
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Toddi Steelman, North Carolina State University
* Fellowship Award
* Linda Layne
* 08/31/2004
* USD 68,000.00

This Professional Development Fellowship allows a plant molecular biologist, to
study citizen-scientist collaboration under the direction of a social scientist
at North Carolina State University as well as several other mentors. The
objective of the proposed fellowship research is to evaluate effects of citizen-
scientist collaboration on participants' perceptions; the case to be studied is
the North Carolina Wood Chip Production Study (NCWCPS), a comprehensive study of
impacts associated with chip mills in rural North Carolina. Mandated in response
to public outcry against increased chip mill operations and associated forest
clear cutting. the NCWCPS incorporated various citizen-science collaborative
efforts, including a citizen advisory committee. Citizens and scientists worked
together to refine and reframe the problem definition and study questions
through extensive analysis and deliberation. The guiding hypothesis for this
work is that the citizen-scientist collaboration resulted in a significant
improvement of participants' perception of each other and the study itself, and
the scientists' self-perception. Archival documents and in- person interviews of
the NCWCPS participants will be used to examine the initial and evolving problem
definitions and study questions and changes in participants' perceptions. The
fellowship training will include graduate-level courses on relevant social
science research methods, direct observation of ongoing cases of collaborative
dispute resolution in natural resources issues around North Carolina,
coordination of a Research Ethics Seminar Series with the Director of Research
Ethics at NCSU, literature reviews, and in-depth discussions with the host
specialists, who also include the director and the associate director of the
Natural Resources Leadership Institute that organized and facilitated the NCWCPS
public participation component. They will provide all available records and
assistance in reaching the advisory committee members, government
representatives and the scientists. After the completion of the fellowship, the
findings will be presented to academic scientists and graduate students through
the Research Ethics Seminar Series, to undergraduate students in a science,
technology and society course, to the local community through Natural Resources
Leadership Institute workshops and written reports, and in national meetings and
through publications for academic audiences and practitioners of collaborative
dispute resolution.