* 0328718
* Chemical Mechanisms of Nucleation and Growth of Secondary Organic Aerosol from the Oxidation of Biogenic Compounds
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Paul Ziemann, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2007
* USD 297,401.00

The overall objective of this project is to use a suite of analytical techniques
to elucidate the detailed chemical and physical mechanisms involved in the
nucleation and subsequent growth of secondary organic aerosol (SOA) from the
oxidation of selected volatile organic compounds (VOCs) via gas phase and
heterogeneous reactions. Work on this project will begin with the development of
a new technique for analyzing the chemical composition of organic aerosol
particles. This will involve coupling an ion trap mass spectrometer (ITMS) to a
thermal desorption particle beam mass spectrometer (TDPBMS) that has been
developed for real-time particle chemical analysis. These TDPBMS techniques will
then be used with others to investigate the chemistry of SOA formation from
reactions of selected monoterpenes and model compounds with ozone, hydroxyl
radicals, and nitrate radicals in a large-volume environmental chamber. The
chemistry of particle nucleation in these reactions will be studied by using a
laminar flow tube reactor to control particle size distributions through the
nucleation and growth stages. The chemistry of SOA formation from acid-catalyzed
heterogeneous reactions of selected primary biogenic VOCs and their oxidation
products with ozone will also be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will help to determine the importance of monoterpene oxidation in
atmospheric SOA formation and the chemical mechanisms by which this occurs
(including nucleation, growth, and heterogeneous reactions). On a global scale,
SOA formation is thought to be dominated by the products of reactions of
biogenic organic compounds. These fine SOA particles have the potential to
impact global climate, atmospheric visibility, heterogeneous chemistry, and
human health. This project will also make it possible to educate a number of
graduate and undergraduate students in the area of atmospheric chemistry as well
as more general environmental issues.