* 0328187
* Functional and Structural Analysis of Algal Hydrogenase Combinatorial Mutants (TSE03-D)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Matthew Posewitz, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 08/31/2006
* USD 246,020.00

Molecular hydrogen is a promising energy source due to its clean combustion and
potential for sustainability. Among hydrogen producing technologies,
photosynthetic mechanisms are particularly interesting because of their
potentially low energy requirements, as exemplified by the Fe hydrogenase system
in the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. However, hydrogen production in C.
reinhardtii is inhibited both transcriptionally and post-translationally by
molecular oxygen. These features pose a significant challenge to the development
of commercial algal hydrogen generation, which is estimated to require a 70 to
720-fold improvement in oxygen tolerance of the hydrogenase enzyme itself. This
project is intended to yield such an enzyme, using the approach of combinatorial
mutagenesis (DNA shuffling) to generate mutants that cannot be produced by other
methods. Additional objectives are to develop a novel colorimetric assay for
hydrogen production into an automated, high-throughput screen to evaluate mutant
libraries for optimal diversity before undertaking in-depth analyses and to
investigate a promising new method known as Random Chimeragenesis on Transient
Templates (RACHITT) that may generate even more useful libraries. Most-improved
genes will be recovered and re-shuffled as necessary, and functional and
structural modeling studies will be conducted on the best mutants to reveal
mechanisms of improvement. The intended product is an oxygen-tolerant Fe
hydrogenase that will ultimately facilitate commercial algal hydrogen
production.