* 0328486
* Presidential Award for Excellence in Science, Math and Engineering Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2006
* Denice Denton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David L. Temple Jr.
* 05/31/2006
* USD 10,000.00

HRD 03-28486&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Denton, currently Dean of Engineering at the
University of Washington, has a long history and a strong, national reputation
in traditional and peer mentoring of students, and in the development of long-
term mentoring programs, including special courses and workshops. Denton's
mentoring efforts have involved students at all levels -- from K-12 to
undergraduate and graduate students. She also works with her peers -- women and
minority junior faculty, senior faculty and administrators. She has been very
effective in helping them advance in their careers and in encouraging them to
also become mentors. Her diverse methods also have been effective.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to developing programs and being a hands-on
mentor, she has utilized her research, publications and presentations to reach
and inspire other mentors and potential mentors on a national level. Dr. Denton
has extensive experience and deep commitment to groups that are underrepresented
in science and engineering at age levels at which the need for support is the
greatest. She has created science and engineering projects for K-12 students and
has worked with them on those projects; she has mentored college students of
color as well as students with disabilities, although with slightly less impact,
quantitatively, than for women. &lt;br/&gt;