* 0328455
* FIBR : The Evolution of Biological Social Systems
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Joan Strassmann, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 08/31/2009
* USD 5,000,000.00

Over the past 40 years, evolutionary theories of social conflict and cooperation
have radically changed our view of life. It has become clear that social
evolution lies at the heart of some of the most significant transitions in
evolution: the emergence of chromosomes, cells, eukaryotes, and multicellular
organisms. In each, formerly separate entities overcome conflicts and merge into
a greater whole. Understanding social evolution is therefore central to
understanding the very structure of life. Though theories of social evolution
are inherently genetic, the field has been largely removed from the advances of
modern molecular genetics and large-scale genomics. The problem is that there
has been no model organism with the right combination of sociality, short
lifespan, and well-developed genetic and genomic tools. This project will use
the social amoeba, Dictyostelium discoideum, which possesses these three
characteristics, to put a molecular and mechanistic face on the processes of
social evolution. The project has four goals. First, it will uncover the genes
and molecular pathways underlying sociality. Second, it will probe the
evolutionary history of these genes. For example, the research will test whether
social forces create significant evolutionary pressures, and it will demonstrate
the social function of ancestral genes by recreating them and testing them in
vivo. Third, the project will generate experimental evidence for how
opportunistic, non-altruistic behavior is controlled, a process that was
essential in the major evolutionary transitions noted above. Finally, the
knowledge gained in the lab will be used to understand how social evolution
works in the wild. This research will bring together expertise on genomics and
on social evolution to provide the most thorough understanding yet of the
genetic basis and evolutionary history of complex social behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;The project will promote education in numerous ways. Undergraduates,
graduate students, and post-docs will engage in active research, present at
meetings, publish, and mentor. Underrepresented minorities will be recruited,
including through a partnership with the high-minority University of Houston-
Downtown. Other educational projects include a well-linked educational website,
and the implementation of a hands-on social amoeba laboratory at local high-
minority-enrollment school. &lt;br/&gt;