* 0328912
* U.S.-Argentina Planning VIsit:  Stream Responses to Bioclimatic Change in Grasslands of the Americas
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Elmer Bettis III, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 06/30/2004
* USD 4,425.00

03028912&lt;br/&gt;Bettis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Argentina award will
support Dr. E. Arthur Bettis of the University of Iowa, for a planning visit to
meet with Dr. A. Prieto, Laboratorio de Paleoecologia y Palinologia, Universidad
Nacional de Mar del Plata, to collect data and finalize plans for an
international collaboration on the study of landscape response to bioclimatic
change in temperate grasslands of North and South America. The object of this
research is to integrate the Argentine Pampas' existing stratigraphic and
palynological data and to collect new plant-macrofossil and stable isotope data
to develop a detailed history of Holocene environmental change and the response
of stream systems to that change. The long-term goal is to use the record of
past environments preserved in valley sediments of the Argentine Pampas and the
North American Midcontinent to investigate the response of stream systems in
temperate grasslands to past bioclimatic change. Understanding the consequences
of climate change on vegetation and on the behavior of streams in these areas is
essential for maintaining and protecting nationally and internationally
significant soil resources, agricultural production systems, and infrastructure.
These are critical to the long-term economic and social well-being of countries
in which grasslands are located.&lt;br/&gt;