* 0328185
* Catalytic Oxidations in Dense Carbon Dioxide-Based Reaction Media (TSE03-A)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Daryle Busch, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 01/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Dr. Daryle H. Busch and Dr. Bala Subramaniam at the
University of Kansas to develop new homogeneous catalyic oxidation systems for
industrially important chemical reactions as olefin epoxidation, functional
group oxidation, and bleach enhancers. The research will seek a complete
understanding of homogeneous catalytic oxidation chemistry in dense phases of
carbon dioxide through developing new reaction media with supercritical carbon
dioxide, new catalysts, and a cross-disciplinary collaboration between chemistry
and chemical engineering in academe and industry. Carbon dioxide-expanded liquid
solvents (or CXLs) will be used in which dense carbon dioxide replaces up to 80%
of traditional solvent, such that the retained solvent maintains the catalyst
solubility, and other advantages of the traditional solvent (e.g., rate
enhancement due to polarity). Oxygen solubility is also increased in CXLs,
thereby combining the environmentally benign nature of supercritical carbon
dioxide and the advantages of traditional solvents. The studies will focus on a
small number of relatively green oxidants, including oxygen, hydrogen peroxide,
alkyl peroxides and alkali metal hypochlorites. The voluntary presence of peroxy
carbonate in base-buffered carbon dioxide media provides a readily available
peracid in these media. Through use of ternary phase relationships, homogeneous
oxidations will be accomplished in CXLs. Catalyst categories and structural
types will be matched to terminal oxidants and substrates on the basis of
mechanistic and other chemical considerations. Because of the novel nature of
the media, new catalysts will be designed and synthesized in the course of
optimizing specific catalytic systems. Investigations will involve phase
behavior studies with supercritical carbon dioxide and with CXLs. Batch
reactions in which products are identified and quantified, will provde
conversion and selectivity data, and detailed kinetic studies by monitoring the
catalyst state with uv/vis spectrophotometry and substrate and product
concentrations. Mechanistic issues will be confronted with additional
measurements (e.g., mass spectrometry, isotope
labeling).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of the proposed research
will lead to a better fundamental understanding of the physicochemical processes
underlying catalytic oxidations in a new type of environmentally friendly
industrial solvent. Because of their high environmental cost, the replacement of
toxic solvents with benign and less expensive carbon dioxide promises profoundly
beneficial environmental impacts and lower cost to industry. The synergistic
interaction between faculty, students and industrial researchers in a cross-
disciplinary setting is expected to produce uniquely trained students who would
be able to integrate industrial ecology into corporate cultures.&lt;br/&gt;