* 0328698
* FIBR: Do Species Matter in Microbial Communities?
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2011
* Devaki Bhaya, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 08/31/2011
* USD 5,042,830.00

Species are considered fundamental units in plant and animal communities. The
major biological question in this project is whether species are also
fundamental units of communities of microorganisms. This question is hotly
debated. Although microorganisms reproduce asexually they have several
mechanisms for exchanging genetic material. If this "horizontal gene transfer"
among microorganisms is rampant and promiscuous, it might be necessary to
conceptualize microbial species quite differently from species of plants and
animals. The question will be addressed by evaluating the hypothesis, based on
evolutionary theory, that genetically distinct individuals are grouped into
ecologically distinct populations that exhibit properties of species -- they
express unique sets of genes, occupy unique niches and are irreversibly separate
in their evolution. A well-studied hot spring microbial mat community in
Yellowstone National Park and its predominating cyanobacterial populations are
the targets of investigation. Genomic sequencing methods will be used to
investigate genetic variation among mat cyanobacteria. Population genetics and
evolutionary simulation methods will be used to evaluate whether these variants
can be grouped into putative ecologically specialized populations with the
properties of species. Microarray methods will be used to examine which genes in
cyanobacterial genomes are highly expressed in the mat. The distribution of
allelic variants of highly expressed genes should correlate with the
distribution of putative ecological populations if the theory is correct. The
discovery of genetically separable ecological microbial populations will broadly
impact thinking in microbial evolution, systematics, ecology and physiology and
will unify evolutionary principles across the breadth of size and complexity
among organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team is a balance of young and
established, male and female investigators from geographically and
demographically diverse institutions. The research integrates principles from
evolutionary biology with techniques derived from the fields of microbial
ecology, microbial physiology and genomics, providing a cross-training
opportunity that will help fill the chasms separating these fields. Participants
will share their disciplinary perspectives with each other and the scientific
community through a workshop series that will lead to web-based learning
modules. Since the microbial community under investigation is in Yellowstone
Park, there will be numerous opportunities for interaction with the park's
trained informal educators. Preparation of new educational resources (e.g.,
resource manual for educating seasonal rangers and park managers, signage, trail
guides, websites and exhibits for a new Visitor Education Center) will help
millions of annual visitors, young and old, change the way they think about
microorganisms. A central project website
(http://landresources.montana.edu/FIBR) will (i) describe the project, (ii) link
to other websites that will present genomic and microarray data, research tools
and educational products, and (iii) interpret all results in the context of
project objectives.&lt;br/&gt;