* 0328134
* Clean Batch Manufacturing with Uncertainty Management (TSE03-K)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Andreas Linninger, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Judy M. Vance
* 07/31/2007
* USD 345,069.00

This NSF/EPA TSE project addresses trade-off issues between environmental and
economic impacts in the pharmaceutical industry for new drug design and
approval. Key issues facing the decision-makers in drug manufacture place
numerous demands upon the design process. For example, batch operating
procedures should be optimized at the conceptual design phase, since later
improvements require expensive, FDA re-approval. In addition, uncertainty in
properties and operations must not deteriorate the purity of the stage
intermediates, and stringent purity requirements make internal recycles to the
next batch less customary. This project is expected to make a computer-aided
batch process development methodology with two salient features, a plant-wide
problem representation aimed at unifying the corporate production targets and
the environmental objectives; and the generation of mathematical algorithms to
quantify the impact of uncertain information about the process and the
materials. Design models will make use of probabilistic methods for quantifying
the impact and cost of uncertainty. A multi-period planning framework with
optimal trade-off between economic and ecological targets is planned, to
facilitate investment decisions over a five-year planning horizon, and to create
a sustainable plant management scheme for participation in permission trading
markets. &lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to make significant improvements in
technological and ecological competency of a large group of pharmaceutical and
specialty chemical manufacturers. It is also expected that the framework
designed for pharmaceuticals will be found to be applicable to other industrial
sectors where trade-offs between economics and the environment are considered
the norm. The engineering curricula will benefit from course enhancements for
batch process design with ecological considerations and through new approaches
to process "design for the environment" under uncertainty, bringing
probabilistic methods and the fundamentals of green engineering into design
training at the undergraduate and graduate level.