* 0328098
* 16th University Conference on Glass Science; Troy, NY; August 13-15, 2003
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Minoru Tomozawa, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

The 16th University Conference on Glass Science will be held on August 13-15,
2003 at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180-3590, USA. The theme of
the Conference is glasses for high technology. Structure, processing and
properties of glasses used for various high technologies, including information
technology, biotechnology and nanotechnology, will be covered. Examples of
topics are silica and high silica glasses; glasses for liquid crystal displays,
plasma displays and memory disks; amorphous thin films; chemical and mechanical
polishing; radiation effect and densification; water in glass, diffusion, and
relaxation; glasses for biological applications; structural analysis, ionic
conduction and relaxation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glass has been important in many
different fields. In addition to traditional fields such as production of
windows and bottles, it has been playing the key role in the development of
optical fibers, liquid crystal displays and thin amorphous film dielectrics for
electronic devices. Glass science can lead to understanding and improvement of
these materials. Glasses are also used in biotechnology. For example, many
biological procedures are conducted in glass (in vitro). It is important for the
biotechnology field to clarify the role of glass surface interactions with
biological substances. In the proposed University Conference on Glass Science, a
variety of topics related to glasses used in the high technology fields will be
discussed.&lt;br/&gt;