* 0328516
* FIBR: Causes and Consequences of Recombination
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2003,09/30/2011
* Michael Lynch, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2011
* USD 5,000,627.00

Intellectual Merit. This project is focused on one of biology's deepest
mysteries - the evolutionary causes and consequences of recombination. The
investigative team consists of cell biologists, ecologists, parasitologists,
quantitative geneticists, genomicists, and mathematicians. The study organism,
the planktonic microcrustacean Daphnia pulex, provides an exceptional array of
opportunities for recombination research that is unavailable with any other
system: a wide range of recombination intensities among natural populations, the
presence of multiple sexual and asexual lineages, a powerful set of genomic
tools, well understood ecology, ease of experimental manipulation, and a
"living-fossil" record that can be resurrected from lake sediments. Specific
goals include: 1) characterization of the genetic changes associated with the
transition from meiotic to mitotic progeny production; 2) evaluation of whether
the mutation rate (including the activity of mobile-genetic elements) is
affected by meiosis; 3) a test of the hypothesis that mutation load accumulates
in the absence of recombination; 4) evaluation of the extent to which
recombination modifies the range of variation upon which natural selection acts;
and 5) a test of the hypothesis that host-parasite evolution drives the
evolution of recombination and sex. These studies will be informed by an
integrated research program involving high-throughput sequencing, microarray
analysis, and quantitative-genetic surveys. Guided by the empirical results,
mathematical models will also be developed for understanding the evolutionary
fates of genomic features of asexual organisms. Finally, the results of this
study will be integrated into an emerging evolutionary framework suggesting that
many aspects of the genomic architecture of multicellular organisms arose
passively in response to mildly deleterious mutation accumulation in populations
with small effective sizes.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The potential impacts of
this project on science, society, and education are numerous. First, an
undergraduate program will help instill an interdisciplinary philosophy while
broadening career choices for students from multiple institutions, with a
particular focus on minority recruitment. Second, the research program will be
tightly integrated with the newly founded Daphnia Genomics Consortium, an
international group of scientists from across the life sciences
(http://daphnia.cgb.indiana.edu/). This will firmly establish D. pulex as a
premier model system for studies in ecological and evolutionary genomics. Third,
the research has significant applied implications in the areas of parasite-
resistance evolution, clonal propagation, and genetic engineering. &lt;br/&gt;