* 0329631
* Sensors and Sensor Networks:  Design, Synthesis and Performance Evaluation of Nanocomposite Semiconductor Gas Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Margaret Wooldridge, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 284,550.00

The primary objective of the proposed research program is to successfully
demonstrate dramatically improved performance of nanocomposite SnO2 sensors made
using a novel synthesis approach. Staged nucleation of nanoparticles will be
used to make high-value-added SnO2 sensor materials doped with noble metal
additives using a multi-element diffusion burner. In particular, gold nano-
islands are expected to yield remarkable increases in sensor sensitivity due to
the extremely high catalytic activity of Au demonstrated in previous studies.
Therefore, the Au/SnO2 system will be the primary focus of the research effort.
The effects of particle size, Au loading and relative particle morphologies on
sensor performance will be quantitatively determined. High-resolution microscope
imaging (e.g. scanning and transmission electron microscopy coupled with
elemental analysis methods) will be used to characterize the materials
properties. Performance of the powders in gas sensor applications will be
quantified in terms of sensor time response, sensitivity, selectivity and
stability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes of the research include the potential
to create mechanically simple, rapid time response, sensitive, selective,
stable, toxic-gas sensors that can be operated over a large temperature range.
NOx sensors with these properties are a specific focus of the research program
due to applications in internal combustion engine systems. The broader impacts
therefore include more precise design of automotive exhaust gas catalysts and
corresponding materials and costs savings. &lt;br/&gt;