* 0329359
* BE:     MUSES:    Life Cycle and Economic Impacts of Bio-Based Production
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Daniel McGrath, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patrick L. Brezonik
* 08/31/2005
* USD 114,681.00

This BE: MUSES planning process is aimed at the investigation of the life cycle
environmental and economic impacts of the manufacture and development of
products manufactured from plant-based materials, referred to as bioproducts.
Key questions revolve around understanding the design, efficiency and capacity
of biorefineries, the material and energy cycles of bioproduction, and the
durability of bioproducts during the product use stage. To gain a better
understanding of these aspects of bio-based production, modeling the complex
interplay of economics and policy with other factors such as technical
innovations, scientific breakthroughs, and advances in design and product
development will be necessary. The overall goals of this planning project are to
create a foundation for a holistic approach to bio-based production and to
construct a viable framework for evaluating future advances in sustainable
bioproduction. &lt;br/&gt; The project has three parts. First, a rigorous life
cycle assessment (LCA) will be conducted for a promising biomolecule, polylactic
acid (PLA) inclusive of the agricultural, processing, and product use cycles.
Conducting an LCA at this time can help to focus on those processing steps or
components of the system that offer the greatest potential for environmental
benefit and are the most sensitive to economic and policy considerations.
Second, a workshop will be convened with experts from both technical/scientific
and economic/policy areas. This workshop is envisioned as complimentary to
previous workshops and symposia on the topic (Dartmouth 2001, AIChE 2002,
Oklahoma 2003) in that emphasis will be placed on the inclusion of economics and
policy elements and how these inform and in turn are informed by scientific and
technical findings. Third, the results of the LCA and workshop will be
incorporated into educational materials through involvement with the Chicago
Academy of Sciences' Nature Museum, a facility with extensive educational
outreach programs in the community&lt;br/&gt;