* 0329156
* Hierarchal Perceptual Organization with the Center-Surround Algorithm
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Jeffrey Siskind, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel F. DeMenthon
* 08/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

Robotics and Computer Vision
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#: 0329156&lt;br/&gt;Title: Hierarchal Perceptual Organization with the Center-
Surround Algorithm&lt;br/&gt;PI: Siskind, Jeffery&lt;br/&gt;Purdue
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop a
general analytic and algorithmic framework for multidimensional context-free
grammars (PCFG) that can be used to model the hierarchical structure of images
and other multidimensional data sets. This framework extends the notions of
PCFGs from 1D word strings to 2D image data and similarly extends the inside-
outside algorithm to support training, classification, and parsing on 2D image
data with these extended PCFGs. The extended framework is called spatial random
trees (SRTs) and the extended algorithm the center-surround algorithm. The
framework is both sound and efficient because of a novel notion of constituency
that constrains the allowable ways to partition a parent segment into child
subsegments during parsing. &lt;br/&gt;This research has great intellectual
merit because it forms a fundamental basis for:&lt;br/&gt; Inferring
semantically meaningful hierarchal structure from low-level image properties
such as edge saliency and region shape, color, texture, and relative
position.&lt;br/&gt; Discovering the common hierarchal structure shared by a
collection of natural images in an unsupervised fashion from unlabeled training
data.&lt;br/&gt; Distinguishing between different natural image-scene classes on
the basis of global hierarchal structure, rather than local low-level features.
&lt;br/&gt;This research will achieve broad impact by addressing a problem that
is shared among a wide array of applications in a variety of technical fields.
In particular, we will:&lt;br/&gt; Extend the SRT framework so that it can be
used to accurately model the geometric relations between constituents in
hierarchal structures. This will enhance the value of SRTs in high-level
modeling of images.&lt;br/&gt; Develop tools for combining SRT models and
merging SRT models with other available data models. This will provide a general
framework for both improved speed and accuracy of the methods.&lt;br/&gt;
Explore the use of SRTs as a distance metric for classifying high-dimensional
data. This opens the techniques to potential applications such as Web
clustering. &lt;br/&gt; Develop a unified approach to combined spatial and
temporal parsing of video. These new methods can support both video indexing and
surveillance tasks. &lt;br/&gt; Develop novel approaches for the parsing and
recognition of images. This can be useful in applications such as the analysis
of printed information, the monitoring of surveillance video, or the analysis of
medical imagery.&lt;br/&gt;The research team includes researchers who bring to
our project, expertise from a wide variety of different fields including
computational linguistics, machine vision, inverse problems, stochastic
processes, and natural language processing. This broad background allows the
team to collectively leverage ideas from multiple fields and have broad impact
on these fields in a way that would not be possible without such collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;