* 0329054
* PEET: Phylogenetic Systematics of Nudibranchia
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2010
* Terrence Gosliner, California Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 10/31/2010
* USD 749,243.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract - DEB 0329054&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded
to Dr. Terrence M. Gosliner of the California Academy of&lt;br/&gt;Sciences and
Angel Valdes of the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County to study the
systematics and phylogeny of nudibranch mollusks. Nudibranch mollusks are
biomedically important organisms in the study of the functioning of nervous
systems and are the focus of the development of new pharmaceutical products to
combat diseases such as cancers and HIV. They are also important indicators of
biodiversity in temperate and tropical ecosystems. As with many organisms there
is a fundamental lack of understanding of their classification and evolutionary
relationships of this group. In many parts of the world at least half of the
nudibranchs have not been classified and many more species are yet to be
discovered. Simultaneously, there is a lack of trained experts who can complete
this critical systematic work. The focus of this project is to train new workers
to become professional systematic biologists to study these organisms. These
trainees will be mentored to learn cutting edge techniques to study the
classification and evolution of nudibranchs, using both detailed anatomical
investigation and DNA sequencing. These studies will focus on nudibranchs in
need of major systematic revision and monographic study, targeted to groups that
have large numbers of undescribed species. Each student will conduct a
monographic study of a distinct group of nudibranchs and publish the results of
their investigation in leading scientific journals. Additionally, the results of
these studies will be widely disseminated to diverse audiences by means of the
world-wide web and other popular publications such as field guides. There is
already considerable amateur interest in these organisms from scuba divers,
underwater photographers and naturalists and additional popular works are much
in demand.&lt;br/&gt;