* 0329811
* SENSORS: Intelligent Micro-Sensor Array and Signal Processing for In Vivo Real-Time Study of Biological System Dynamics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Kenneth Loparo, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 08/31/2007
* USD 685,000.00

Context Statement (Sensor and Sensor Networks Panel, June 12 and 13, 2003)

Approximately 930 proposals were submitted in response to the Sensors and Sensor
Networks Solicitation (NSF 03-512) during fiscal year 2003. A total of 469 of
these proposals were considered in the Small-Team competition. All proposals
were grouped according to their relevance to one of the three general topical
areas identified in the solicitation. This proposal is one of 30 considered in a
panel on June 12-13, 2003 on the subject of Designs, Materials and Concepts for
New Biological Sensors and Sensing Systems. This panel was jointly run by
program directors from the Experimental and Integrated Activities Division of
CISE and the Bioengineering and Environmental Systems Division of ENG. The panel
included sixteen panelists, all technical experts, who were invited to NSF and
who reflect the range of expertise needed for the proposals under consideration.
The panelists had reviewed the proposals in their areas of expertise, and sent
their individual reviews via FastLane, prior to coming to the panel meeting.
Proposals were reviewed and evaluated against both merit review criteria
established by the National Science Board, namely, "What is the intellectual
merit of the proposed activity?" and "What are the broader impacts of the
proposed activity?" In addition, the proposals were assessed for relevance to
the Program Solicitation (NSF 03-512).

At least three panelists provided written evaluations for each proposal. The
written evaluations were presented to the panelists who debated the strengths
and weaknesses of the proposals, which were then assigned preliminary ratings.
The panel discussions concerning the proposals were documented by a panel
Recorder, who submitted the summary of the discussion to the panel for unanimous
approval. After all the proposals had been reviewed and rated, the panel placed
the proposals into two categories: (1) Recommended and (2) Not Recommended for
funding. The panel provided sufficient information for the Program Director to
make a recommendation.