* 0329596
* U.S.-Bulgaria Cooperative Research:  A Novel Approach to Milliprobing Mossbauer Studies of Geologic Samples :  Olivine Crystals with Fe-Bearing Precipitates
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Harry Green, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2008
* USD 56,940.00

This is a U.S.-Bulgarian cooperative research project that focuses on developing
a new Mossbauer spectrometry technique to improve signal quality for small
samples, with application to the study of exsolved phases in olivine. The
principal investigators are Larissa Dobrzhinetskaya and Harry Green from the
University of California at Riverside and Todor Ruskov from the Institute for
Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy in Bulgaria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed technique will improve our ability to measure the oxidation state of
iron on very small samples with a focus on determining the oxidation state of
mantle minerals exhumed from very deep depths. This work will help determine the
origin of these minerals and the mantle's oxygen fugacity, both of which are
poorly constrained at present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact resulting
from the proposed activity is enhanced access to facilities for measuring
Mossbauer spectra of small samples. Such a facility has numerous applications
beyond the geosciences and will foster interdisciplinary
cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in earth sciences research
fulfills the program objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S.
and Central/Eastern Europe to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis of equality,
reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.