* 0329043
* Probabilistic and link-based Methods for Exploiting Very Large Textual Repositories
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Dragomir Radev, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Griffin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 310,000.00

This research project addresses the disconnect between the way in which humans
ask questions on the Web and the existing interfaces to the state-of-the-art
search engines. Search engines require online searchers to formulate their
requests in idiosyncratic query languages whose syntax is unnatural and hard to
learn by typical users. Furthermore, existing search engines are notoriously bad
at returning documents which do not contain any of the terms given by the user
and yet which were retrieved as relevant to the user's information need. The
proposed work focuses on two areas of research: (1) probabilistic question-to-
query transformation (query modulation) for Web access and (2) models of content
transfer over web links. The approach for (1) involves designing and evaluating
algorithms and systems for automatic, rule-based conversion of natural language
queries to the language of specific search engines. Part (2) facilitates
retrieval of relevant Web documents by virtue of the links from other relevant
documents to them. The expected outcomes and impact of this project are
threefold: (1) a better understanding of the interaction between document
retrieval and question-answering in a Web environment, (2) better models
describing how document relevance is transferred over the Web hypergraph, and
(3) better algorithms for natural language access to the Web which will make it
easier for millions of web users to find information that they need in a timely,
accurate, and intuitive way. All findings and artifacts developed under this
grant will be widely disseminated and incorporate into a public-domain search
engine, and the results will be accessible via the project Web site
(http://tangra.si.umich.edu/clair).