* 0329565
* An Investigation of the Effects of Cold, Thick Lithosphere on Deformation of Slowly Slipping Mega-Transforms; The Andrew Bain Transform, SWIR
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Yuri Fialko, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 08/31/2009
* USD 244,829.00

Under this funding, a group of US scientists will join an Italian ship of
opportunity to study the Andrew Bain Transform Domain (ABTD) of the Southwest
Indian Ridge, and will collaborate in the post-cruise research. The ABTD is
broad and the active transform fault consists of a series of short relay-type
extensional basins connecting a long straight southern strand and a shorter
straight northern strand. The new geological and geophysical data (multibeam
bathymetry/sidescan, gravity, magnetics and multi-channel seismics) from the
expedition on the Italian R/V Explora , when combined with data collected by the
PIs previously, will provide a complete view of the morphotectonic fabric and
physical structure of the ABTD. These new data can be used to address the
following questions; 1. Where does the Principal Transform Displacement Zone lie
within the ABTD? 2. What forces led to the formation of the extensional relay
basins that connect the longer southern and northern transform faults within the
ABTD? 3. Can a theoretical/numerical model be developed to explain the observed
morphotectonic signature of the ABTD and other slow-slipping mega-transforms? 4.
How does the morphology and structure of the Andrew Bain Transform compare to
large continental transforms, and do the similarities provide addition
constraints on the deformation of continental mega-
transforms?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;