* 0329957
* SENSORS:  Collaborative Research:  Biochemical Sensors and Data Processing for Security Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,05/31/2007
* David Kelso, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 05/31/2007
* USD 360,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0329957&lt;br/&gt;John Ketterson&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research -- Sensors:
Biochemical Sensors and Data Processing for Security&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research addresses current concerns about possible biochemical attacks
threatening our national security. The investigators develop sensors and data
processing for detecting sources of biological agents or toxic chemicals, and
managing data-bases. This technology has further applications to environmental
monitoring, controlling pollution, detecting explosives, and other
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators develop three categories of sensors for
detecting bio-target molecules that bind to substrate-attached receptor
molecules. The first exploits the frequency shift of an optical resonator from a
change in its dielectric environment brought on by target adsorption. The second
exploits the sensitivity of optical resonators to detect Raman spectra
associated with the adsorbed targets. The third involves attaching fluorescent
labels to secondary recognition molecules and detecting their light emissions
when they bound to agents captured by substrate receptor molecules. Arrays of
probes are created to screen for multiple targets, interacting with the signal
processing. Strategies for making continuous sensing are considered. The signal
processing part analyzes data from chemical sensor array networks, subject to
resource constraints. The researchers derive physical models for substance
dispersion in subway tunnels, shopping malls, city streets, airport bag
screening, etc. Flux density sensors are included. This project analyzes the
algorithms performance for optimally designing the arrays. To increase the
functionality, the investigators consider moving sensors (robots, autonomous
vehicles) and develop motion techniques while addressing other requirements
(coverage, energy minimization.) The study involves managing high data volumes
and processing power requirements that may arise from a large
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;