* 0329629
* SENSORS:  Soft Tamper-Proofing with Program Integrity Verification in Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Kang Shin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2007
* USD 239,999.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shin abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small low-cost sensor
devices, each equipped with limited resources,&lt;br/&gt;are networked and used
for various critical applications.&lt;br/&gt;The nature of these applications
may require the underlying sensor&lt;br/&gt;network to be secure even though it
is usually deployed in&lt;br/&gt;a harsh, sometimes hostile, and unsupervised
environment,&lt;br/&gt;and hence, is subject to capture, reverse-
engineering&lt;br/&gt;and manipulation.&lt;br/&gt;Existing tamper resistance
techniques are either hardware-based or intended for&lt;br/&gt;environments with
sufficient computation and communication&lt;br/&gt;resources, but they cannot be
used for low-cost (thus resource-limited)&lt;br/&gt;sensor devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the development and evaluation
of&lt;br/&gt;a Program-Integrity Verification (PIV) protocol that intermittently
&lt;br/&gt;verifies integrity of the program code of a sensor device, e.g.,
whenever&lt;br/&gt;it joins a network or has experienced a long service
blockage.&lt;br/&gt;The PIV protocol augments sensor devices to make
them&lt;br/&gt;usable for applications that require high-level
security.&lt;br/&gt;PIV uses a randomized hash function,&lt;br/&gt;by which the
algorithm for hash computation on the program code&lt;br/&gt;can be randomly
generated whenever the code needs to be verified.&lt;br/&gt;By applying this
algorithm, the PIV protocol will offer protection&lt;br/&gt;against
manipulation/reverse-engineering/reprogramming of sensors;&lt;br/&gt;provide
software-based protection without requiring tamper-resistant
hardware;&lt;br/&gt;exploit infrequent triggering of verification, thereby
not&lt;br/&gt;stressing or interfering with normal sensor functions;
&lt;br/&gt;and assure cryptographic security. The project consists of the
following four&lt;br/&gt;closely-related tasks, Program-Integrity Verification,
Key Management, &lt;br/&gt;Adaptive Intrusion Detection, and Experimentation and
Validation.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is the
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;advancement of software-based tamper-resistance
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact is epxected in emerging&lt;br/&gt;sensor
networks that will play key roles in safety-critical&lt;br/&gt;and homeland
security applications such as surveillance&lt;br/&gt;of the physical
infrastructure, including buildings and bridges,&lt;br/&gt;transportation
systems, water supply systems, and power generation&lt;br/&gt;and distribution
systems.&lt;br/&gt;