* 0330840
* CRUI:  A Multidisciplinary Test of Mutualistic Benefits Fungal Endophytes Provide Their Host Plants
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Thomas Bultman, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2008
* USD 906,779.00

Fungi that live within grasses form a mutually beneficial association
(mutualism) in which both the fungus and the grass benefit. Yet, the benefits to
the grass may vary depending on the specific fungal species. We predict that the
strength of the mutualism will depend upon the method by which the fungi
reproduce. Fungi that reproduce by infecting seeds of their hosts are expected
to be strong mutualists. In contrast, those that reproduce through spore
production are expected to be weak mutualists or perhaps not even mutualistic
with their hosts. In this project, five investigators from 3 disciplines and 2
institutions will use a multidisciplinary approach to determine if these fungi
follow these predictions. One investigator (Bultman, at Hope College) will test
if wounding of plants induces resistance to herbivorous insects through alkaloid
production. This will be done using a variety of fungal species exhibiting
different reproductive methods. These experiments will be coupled with molecular
investigations of the regulation of alkaloid biosynthesis genes by Schardl (at
the University of Kentucky) and Bultman. In addition to protection from
herbivory, the fungi may enhance the drought tolerance of their plant hosts.
Swarthout (Hope College) will test if drought tolerance is due to differential
efficiency of enzymes utilized in photosynthesis, by comparing drought tolerance
in fungally-infected vs. uninfected plants using a variety of grass and fungal
species. Brown (Hope College) will use analytical chemistry methods to determine
alkaloid concentrations in all experimental plants and correlate these
concentrations to the observed effects. Andersen, a mathematician, and Bultman
will collaborate to determine how the fungi affect plant fitness within a
multitrophic level context through building theoretical models and empirically
testing them with field experiments. The proposed work will address gaps in our
general understanding of the ecological roles of fungi.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will have several broader impacts that go beyond the intellectual
contributions described above. It will provide cutting-edge, multidisciplinary
training in ecological research to 7-8 undergraduate students each year. Through
a partnership with a local community college, 2 minority students annually will
be involved in summer research at Hope College. Furthermore, a laboratory module
for an interdisciplinary course in Mathematical Biology will be developed from
the ecological modeling component of the proposed research. A post-doctoral
researcher will also gain undergraduate teaching opportunities each year through
financial support from Hope College.&lt;br/&gt;