* 0330567
* Renovation and Expansion of Seawater Facilities for Experimental Marine Research at Mote Marine Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* James Gelsleichter, Mote Marine Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2006
* USD 197,660.00

A grant has been awarded to the Mote Marine Laboratory, under the direction of
Dr. Robert Hueter to provide partial support to renovate and expand seawater
facilities for experimental marine research and education at Mote Marine
Laboratory (MML) in Sarasota, Florida. Improvements to be made include:
significant increases in water storage and ozone sterilization capabilities;
improved facilities for mechanical filtration of seawater; large animal holding
tanks to hold more and larger experimental animals in good health under
controlled conditions; a versatile water routing system to allow for flexibility
in modular use of the facility; and a facilities enclosure to permit
manipulation and control of environmental conditions. Among major additions will
be two new oval tanks, 16.5 m x 8.5 m x 2 m and 12.2 m x 6.1 m x 2 m, for
holding large animals such as sharks, rays, large teleosts and sea turtles for
captive study. Research applications of this renovated seawater facility will
include physiological and behavioral studies of large elasmobranchs,
instrumentation testing prior to field deployment, and studies of biotoxins and
invertebrates in culture. Education and training of undergraduate and graduate
students will also utilize the new facilities for student projects. These
alterations will significantly enhance the overall reliability, quality, and
versatility of the system, necessary improvements to provide the proper seawater
facilities to visiting scientists, students and staff conducting experimental
research on marine organisms at MML.