* 0330534
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Experimental Constraints on the Chemistry and Evolution of Earth's Core
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Yingwei Fei, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 11/30/2006
* USD 34,821.00

The chemistry of iron-rich hexagonal close packed (hcp) alloy, and its role in
the elemental and isotopic composition, convection, and evolution of the Earth's
core, will be studied. The composition of coexisting iron-rich hcp-alloys and
melt will be determined at pressures to 25 GPa. The hcp structure of the metal
will be stabilized by alloying Fe with a small amount of Os or Ru; this phase is
widely thought to be directly relevant to the Earth's core but has been
inaccessible in previous experimental studies of chemical partitioning. Data on
trace element partitioning between Fe-rich hcp alloy and melt at high pressures
will provide insight into the distribution of siderophile elements that act as
important radioisotope geochronometers, and will place needed experimental
constraints on models of Earth evolution that involve isotopic signatures to be
carried from the outer core to the surface. The partitioning of major elements
such as Ni, S, and O between Fe-rich hcp alloy and melt will be used to
constrain the compositions of the solid inner and liquid outer core, and will
improve our understanding of the driving mechanism for compositional convection
in the core.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research will be the first
application in which Fe is alloyed specifically to stabilize the hcp phase at
more amenable pressures and temperatures, and it may stimulate further
experimental investigations into the physical and chemical character of hcp-Fe.
Additionally, this work will demonstrate a combination of high-pressure
experimental and trace element analytical techniques, and should stimulate its
broader application in the geosciences. Results from the proposed study will be
disseminated primarily through publication in the scientific literature, by
participation at scientific conferences, and when warranted, through wider-
reaching news outlets.&lt;br/&gt;