* 0330650
* Renovation of laboratory instrumentation at the Kellogg Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2005
* Stephen Hamilton, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/2005
* USD 95,250.00

Renovation of laboratory instrumentation at the Kellogg Biological
Station&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Michigan State
University under the direction of Drs. G. Philip Robertson and Stephen K.
Hamilton to renovate crucial instrumentation used for environmental research at
the University's W.K. Kellogg Biological Station (KBS). The instruments will
provide an improved abililty to quantify carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and other
elements in plant, soil, and water samples from various ecosystems around the
Station. The new instruments will replace existing ones that are either worn out
or obsolete, improving both analytical sensitivity and sample throughput. Many
on-going studies, funded by both state and federal agencies at KBS, depend on
access to high-quality analytical facilities; the new instruments will fill a
major emerging gap in the Station's analytical
capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both biogeochemical and ecological research will
benefit from the acquisition. Scientific questions to be addressed with the new
instrumentation have broad environmental significance. For example, excess
nitrogen and phosphorus in the environment are known to harm ecosystems for
which they were not intended, with substantial economic impact. A recent
economic study placed the costs of these pollutants in the tens of billions of
dollars per year for water quality alone; better knowledge of how nitrogen,
phosphorus, and carbon cycle in complex landscapes should allow the development
of more effective management strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to high-
quality instrumentation is also important for graduate and undergraduate
education. KBS is an important environmental teaching facility at MSU and
students will use these instruments both in field courses and for their own
independent study projects. Additionally the instruments are used in outreach
and community education activities - the Four-Township Water Resources Council
and the Augusta Creek Watershed Association have both used data from water
samples analyzed by KBS laboratories, and the Station also partners with a group
of K-12 science teachers who have used the existing instruments in summer
science institutes. At a number of levels, then, this NSF award will have a
positive impact on environmental research, education, and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;