* 0330442
* Sedgwick Reserve Infrastructure Development
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2003,09/30/2009
* William Murdoch, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2009
* USD 225,757.00

This award provides partial support for improvements in the basic physical
infrastructure of the Sedgwick Reserve, one of the largest reserves in the
University of California's Natural Reserve System (NRS). These improvements will
expand the capacity of the Reserve for the conduct of research and education,
and permit the expansion of overnight housing of researchers and students.
Located in the San Rafael Mountains northwest of Santa Barbara, the Reserve is
available to researchers, teachers and students from any institution of higher
learning, school or scientific organization for use as a research site and
outdoor classroom. Current research include studies of factors regulating oak
regeneration, interactions among native perennial and invasive annual grasses in
California ecosystems, and investigations of the linkage among microbial
community diversity, composition, and function. Existing facilities consist of
old ranch buildings. No modern laboratory facilities are available, and there
are very limited facilities for overnight visitors. The University and Reserve
staff, with the help of faculty, researchers, students, and the local community,
have recently completed a comprehensive master plan for upgrading the Reserve's
core facilities in order to support world-class environmental research,
university-level instruction, and K-12 environmental education. The planned
improvements in facilities are dependent on the improvements in roads and other
basic infrastructure that are supported through this award.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Basic knowledge gained through research and education at
sites like Sedgwick Reserve is critical to the preservation and wise management
of natural ecosystems. Public awareness and understanding of environmental
issues are also essential for successful environmental conservation and
management. Both these important purposes will be enabled by the
award.&lt;br/&gt;