* 0330837
* Sustainable Resources, Energy, and Materials - A Challenge to Chemical Engineers, a Workshop to be held in Beijing, China, Spring 2004
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Virendra Mathur, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/2006
* USD 46,767.00

Mathur, Virendra K.&lt;br/&gt;U of New Hampshire&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Workshop
on Sustainable Resources, Energy, and Materials - A Challenge to Chemical
Engineers" to be held in Beijing, China in the Spring of 2003."
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A workshop between USA and Chinese chemical engineers will
be held on the overarching topics of sustainable resources, energy, and
materials. The phenomena of mass transfer and separations are the main focus of
the workshop approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this
workshop to be held in Beijing, China, in the of Spring 2004, is to have an
exchange of scientific information and a dialogue between the American and
Chinese university faculty members on recent advances mainly in the area of
pollution prevention at the source. One objective is also to inculcate a close
collaboration between the faculty members of these two countries for a sustained
interaction and relationship, even after the workshop is over, towards finding a
solution to the global pollution dilemma. This joint workshop will provide a
platform to achieve these objectives of information exchange and faculty
collaboration that may have a focus on this critical problem of worldwide
pollution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following basic research concepts have been
identified:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Chemical separation and mass transport
fundamentals to provide updated and detailed understanding or novel ways/tools
to understand/describe chemical separation and mass transport; &lt;br/&gt;2)
Chemical separation process intensification and innovation to highlight the
advances in micro scale separation process and those process operated in
external field e.g., electrical field, supercritical CO2 technology, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;3) Green process for pollution prevention to address those efforts
that may be effective to cope with energy based pollution, industry based
pollution and to pollution prevention in material selection. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The above concepts cover a very wide area of chemical engineering.
The topics for this workshop will be confined to the following areas. The
subject of discussions as far as possible, but not limited to, should be in the
areas of mass transport, interfacial, thermodynamics, and separations phenomena
--related to the general over arching themes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A report of
the proceedings will be submitted to NSF and a more detailed hard copy will be
available to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;