* 0330685
* NMI:  Designing and Building a National Middleware Infrastructure (NMI-2)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Miron Livny, University of Southern California
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jennifer Schopf
* 09/30/2007
* USD 2,102,000.00

In 2001, the Grid Research, Integration, Development and Support (GRIDS) Center
was established to define, develop, deploy, and support an integrated national
middleware infrastructure. This proposal seeks to extend this work to (1)
broaden the scope and capabilities of the middleware delivered; (2) embrace and
extend emerging Open Grid Services Architecture (OGSA) standards; (3) expand the
range of communities supported; and (4) establish international consensus in
middleware. GRIDS Center 2 (GC2), like GC1, will rely heavily on open protocols,
and open source implementations, and will work closely with major U.S. projects
including the NSF Partnerships for Advanced Computational Infrastructure (PACI),
the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), the Pittsburgh
Supercomputer Center (PSC), and Internet2 to reach out to other user communities
and to address integration with campus infrastructures. The proposal details a
strategy to aggressively transition relevant technologies to
standards&lt;br/&gt;and industry, building on strong corporate
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal stresses the definition of the
NMI architecture and the integration of extant middleware solutions into this
architecture. Specific goals of this proposal are to:&lt;br/&gt;* define a
scalable robust middleware architecture leveraging the standards-based Open Grid
Services Architecture.&lt;br/&gt;* create mechanisms and infrastructure for
combining middleware components from a range of sources into integrated,
supportable middleware software releases at least twice a year.&lt;br/&gt;*
based on requirements of the NMI user communities, create integrated OGSA-based
services packages that provide focused functionality in areas such as data,
computation management, and teleinstrumentation. These packages will integrate
software from many NMI development groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regarding NSF
merit review criteria, our proposal has intellectual significance and broad
benefits for society. GRIDS leadership and staff have established reputations in
designing and deploying middleware. These R&amp;D activities have real,
immediate implications in the research, education and beyond. GRIDS impact has
already been considerable, with over a dozen companies such as IBM, Hewlett-
Packard, and Oracle committed to building products on GRIDS technology. GC2 will
see even greater emphasis on these&lt;br/&gt;outreach efforts, centering on
emergent OGSA standards that are being driven by the GRIDS
leadership.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;