* 0330640
* Modernization and Expansion of the Ecosystem Monitoring Network for Scientists, Students and Educators at the Black Rock Forest Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* William Schuster, Black Rock Forest Consortium, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2006
* USD 58,606.00

This award provides partial support for improvements in an environmental sensor
network at the Black Rock Forest field station, a 1585-hectare field station in
southeastern New York owned by a consortium of colleges and universities in New
York City area. The students, educators and researchers who participate in
activities at the station number in the thousands each year; these participants
come from more than a dozen institutions from the New York Metropolitan and
Hudson River Valley regions and beyond. The sensor network, first established in
1995, consists of two terrestrial stations, a hydrologic station, and sensors
within the Science and Education Center at the station. The meteorological,
biogeochemical, hydrologic and other data collected have been of great use in a
number of research studies, in college-level and K-12 educational experiences,
and in management of the field station. Currently, data from the sensors are
available on-site in real-time at the Science Center, and some of the data are
available over the Internet after a lag period. Recent advances in sensor
technology and telecommunications have enabled the development of networks that
can provide rapid access to multiple forms of environmental information with
high temporal resolution and accuracy from any computer that is connected to the
Internet. With funds provided through this award, the existing system will be
converted into a modern, spatially distributed sensor and telecommunications
network that will feature improved speed, reliability, and bandwidth, with
enhanced coverage that includes up to 70% of the forest, and will deliver
information rapidly to the Internet. Radios and antennae will be upgraded at the
base station and at all existing stations. Using three, already-existing towers
(one fire tower and two canopy-access towers), new sensors will be able to
provide micrometeorology and energy balance information, and new video
capabilities. The strategic location of the new sensors, in conjunction with the
existing sensors, will enable coverage of most of the station's terrain.