* 0330470
* SENSORS: Broad-Bandwidth High-Resolution MEMS Array of Inertial Sensors with Embedded Optical Detection
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Jann Yang, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 07/31/2007
* USD 320,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop a technology for robust and low
maintenance cost sensor network capable to detect accelerations below a micro-g
in a very wide frequency bandwidth (above 1,000 Hz). Sensor networks with such
performance are critical for navigation, seismology, acoustic sensing, and for
the health monitoring of civil structures including micro vibrations of high-
tech facilities. A new technology based on batch fabrication of an array of high
sensitivity accelerometers, each utilizing Fabry-Perot cavity of embedded
optical detection, will be developed. The unique feature is that no local power
source is required for each individual sensor, instead one global light source
is used, which generates a b4roadband optical signal repaginating through the
optical fiber network from sensor-to-sensor, thus carrying information through
the network and providing an input signal to each individual sensor within the
network. The global out put combined at the end point of the network and the
health condition of the network is assessed in real-time based on the arrived
"rainbow" of data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project takes advantage of the
combined cross-disciplinary expertise in design, packaging and fabrication of
MEMS, integrated optics and optical sensing), partial differential equations,
wave propagation theory, and multi-physics modeling, system identification and
damage detection for the health monitoring systems of civil engineering
structures of the three investigators involved. The proposed device will be
designed, fabricated, packaged, and tested using unique infrastructures
developed by this interdisciplinary research group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Educational goal is to assimilate micro-engineering concepts into departmental
core courses, develop a series of interdisciplinary undergraduate and graduate
courses that would integrate concepts from different disciplines, and, even more
importantly, emphasize the application of this integrated knowledge to practical
engineering design. These curriculum development efforts will be in coordination
throughout the campus-wide programs and in cooperation with local high-tech
industries.&lt;br/&gt;