* 0330481
* An Adaptive and Scalable Architecture for Dynamic Sensor Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Vassilis Tsotras, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 08/31/2007
* USD 600,000.00

An Adaptive and Scalable Architecture for Dynamic Sensor
Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vana Kalogeraki, Dimitrios Gunopulos, Srikanth
Krishnamurthy, Vassilis Tsotras&lt;br/&gt;University of California,
Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
many applications (earthquake emergencies, detection of chemical spills,
battlefield management) that require urgent evaluation of the situation,
distributed effort coordination and timely response. Distributed sensor networks
have been recently proposed for managing such environments. For example, in a
disaster recovery situation, the response team can first deploy a large number
of small sensors in the area and then a number of mobile agents can move into
the field of the sensors collecting and aggregating information. The sensors and
the mobile agents will have to then rapidly organize themselves to form a
wireless network. Distributed algorithms are needed to coordinate the movements
of the agents so that the exploration of the area can be done as quickly and as
efficiently as possible. This has to be achieved in the presence of possible
failures and given the constraints of the sensors and the established network.
Finally, the overall system should enable the response team to collect and
analyze the data in a fast and dependable way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
various key requirements that we need to address in developing such a dynamic
sensor network. For example, (1) sensor nodes must be positioned strategically
to capture events of interest, (2) high priority events must be delivered within
a deadline end-to-end even in the presence of node failures, (3) streams of data
originating from different sensors must be coordinated and examined dynamically,
and (4) feedback information must be generated and propagated in real-time in
response to the urgency of the situations. Given the dynamic nature of the
environment, the proposed system must learn and adapt dynamically to changes in
the mission or to network conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this
project is to develop a robust, adaptive and scalable infrastructure for a self-
organizing and highly dynamic sensor network. The network communication and the
operating system should be managed in an integrated manner so as to provide a
robust and adaptive infrastructure for the development of computing
applications. The inferences made by the higher layer applications and data
analysis functions will determine future trajectories of the mobile agents, and
may invoke the tuning of certain parameters that determine the extent to which
data is being collected and fused. These events would require the network to re-
organize itself. On the other hand, the network itself may impose constraints on
where the mobile agents can move, where data may be fused, and how different
entities co-ordinate in order to make operations
efficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The distinguishing characteristic of our
proposal is that we take a holistic approach that addresses multiple levels of
the sensor network (namely the network communication, the operating system and
the analysis of the data) in an integrated way. Our solutions will need to work
well in this closely coupled system, while dynamically adapting to changes in
the networking infrastructure or the system conditions. We propose to develop
the architecture, protocols and mechanisms to realize such a system. This
project requires strong collaboration and expertise between networking,
distributed systems and data mining/database researchers; the PI team covers all
these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, our work will focus on the
following tasks:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layer 1: Tunable Networking
Protocols.&lt;br/&gt;We propose to develop protocols for anycasting and
synchronization of fusion operations, and algorithms to calculate the trajectory
control of the mobile agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layer 2: Distributed
Management Protocols.&lt;br/&gt;We propose to develop replication and allocation
mechanisms for the application services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layer 3: Data
Analysis Techniques.&lt;br/&gt;We propose to develop techniques for data fusion
and query execution on online asynchronous streams. Further we will develop fast
algorithms for finding correlations in asynchronous data streams.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration. &lt;br/&gt;We propose to build an
infrastructure that integrates the above layers together. This infrastructure
will be developed as a prototype that will be deployed and tested for
performance optimizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
work lies in the development of novel techniques in each of the areas of
networking, distributed systems and data-mining/database and in the synergy of
experts from the above areas. In addition, we will tackle the important problem
of integrating these techniques in a prototype system and deploy it in a
realistic environment using our industry contacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this work will be solutions with wide applicability, from
civil applications (such as disaster recovery management) to military
applications (situation awareness in battlefield management). It will also
contribute in the development of a strong curriculum and activities that will
increase educational awareness in sensor networks.