* 0330350
* Sensors: Near Infrared Fluorescent Single Walled Carbon Nanotubes as Solution Phase Optical Sensing Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Michael Strano, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 12/31/2006
* USD 324,966.00

The goal of this project is to develop a new class of sensing materials for
solution phase detection of molecules based on the near-infrared fluorescence of
single walled carbon nanotubes. Carbon nanotubes are a part of a select class of
electronic materials that fluoresce in the infrared region. Scattering and auto-
fluorescence in a wide range of biologically relevant media prohibit accurate
fluorescent detection in the visible spectrum. Single walled carbon nanotubes
are ideal sensing materials, having diameters near 1 nm and lengths spanning
several microns. Their geometry is unique among molecular probes. They conduct
electrons under near ballistic conditions or over large distances with minimal
scattering. This provides the basis for powerful sensing technologies because
large areas of the nanotube surface are sensitive to single molecule adsorption
events. Adsorbates on the surface of a nanotube can localize valence electrons
or conversely donate electron density to the conduction band and either event is
registered as a change in the nanotube optical emission properties. This project
will address three technological hurdles towards this goal: (i) understanding
the molecule-nanotube surface interactions and their effect on optical
properties, particularly polarity induced solvatochromic shifts and charge
transfer interactions; (ii) designing adsorbed interfaces to introduce
specificity at the nanotube surface towards desired molecules; and (iii)
engineering working sensor devices for molecular detection in unconventional
media such as highly turbid solutions or biological relevant media. The project
will also develop new coursework material and will participate in program that
improves participation of students from under-represented groups. Activities in
the engagement of the public in topics of science and technology are also
planned.