* 0330634
* NMI:  An Integrative Testing Framework for Grid Middleware and Grid Environments
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Carl Kesselman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jennifer Schopf
* 03/31/2008
* USD 2,159,896.00

In 2001, the Grid Research, Integration, Development and Support (GRIDS) Center
was established to define, develop, deploy, and support an integrated national
middleware infrastructure. This proposal seeks to extend this work to (1)
broaden the scope and capabilities of the middleware delivered; (2) embrace and
extend emerging Open Grid Services Architecture (OGSA) standards; (3) expand the
range of communities supported; and (4) establish international consensus in
middleware. GRIDS Center 2 (GC2), like GC1, will rely heavily on open protocols,
and open source implementations, and will work closely with major U.S. projects
including the NSF Partnerships for Advanced Computational Infrastructure (PACI),
the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), the Pittsburgh
Supercomputer Center (PSC), and Internet2 to reach out to other user communities
and to address integration with campus infrastructures. The proposal details a
strategy to aggressively transition relevant technologies to standards and
industry, building on strong corporate relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early
deployment of the NMI software releases demonstrated the benefits of such an
integrated middleware package but also exposed the limitations of current
testing capabilities. The goal of the effort outlined by this proposal is to
develop, implement, and deploy a comprehensive testing framework and to offer
its services to the Grid community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal outlines
the design, construction, and dissemination of a transparent and transferable
testing framework to address increasing demand for timely distribution of robust
Grid middleware. The approach will be validated against the GC2 reference
distribution, and the process and tools open and easy to install so custom
middleware can achieve quality, reliability and stability. The approach should:
1) dramatically shorten the period from component update to release (speed of
integration), 2) enhance integration of test modules (quality of integration),
3) validate middleware installations (certification), and 4) determine if an
application failure is to blamed on the application, middleware, or fabric
(fault isolation). GRIDS has already improved the quality and accessibility of
an integrated Grid stack, but significant investment is needed to extend this
capability and transfer it to community-specific
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal has intellectual significance and
broad benefits for society. GRIDS leadership and staff have established
reputations in designing and deploying middleware. These R&amp;D activities have
real, immediate implications in research, education and beyond. GRIDS impact has
already been considerable, with over a dozen companies such as IBM, Hewlett-
Packard, and Oracle committed to building products on the technology. GC2 will
see even greater emphasis on these outreach efforts, centering on emergent OGSA
standards that are being driven by the GRIDS leadership.
&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;