* 0330592
* CAREER: Repair and Retrofit Systems for Civil Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Maria del Mar Lopez de Murphy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 08/31/2008
* USD 373,763.00

To successfully meet the challenges of the 21st century, engineers must be
creative and be able to adapt themselves to new ideas. Technology is changing at
a rapid pace. The increasing number of new materials and new systems available
for structural engineering applications offers a large number of possibilities
for the engineer with the knowledge and creative skills to understand them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER proposal is to promote innovative
teaching and research in civil engineering. The integrated teaching and research
plans will provide a fundamental contribution to the use of non-traditional
materials for new structures as well as for state-of-the-art repair and retrofit
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outlined teaching plan will improve the
curriculum in the areas of infrastructure and structural engineering both at the
undergraduate and graduate levels. This long-term educational plan coordinates
directly with the PI's research interest in the area of laminates for repair and
retrofit of civil structures. Two innovative courses, one in materials for
structural design, the second on repair and retrofit systems for civil
infrastructure; a set of redesigned laboratory experiences for design oriented
courses; and a new professional concentration in structural engineering will
invigorate the profession of civil engineering. Diversity in engineering will be
achieved through undergraduate summer research linked to Clarkson's Ronald E.
McNair Program. Low-income and first-generation college students, as well as
underrepresented minority students will benefit from this activity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed fundamental research will advance the
knowledge of interfacial bond behavior between epoxy bonded FRP laminates and
concrete. By characterizing the interfacial bond failure, a reliable design
procedure can be developed for structural elements strengthened by externally
bonded FRP laminates. Valuable information in the area of fracture mechanics
will be gained by evaluating the energy dissipated during the interfacial crack
growth. In particular, a new test set-up will be designed to obtain a fracture
parameter. Results from this research will directly impact the use of laminates
for repair and retrofit of civil structures. This research will help to move
laminates and other new materials into the mainstream of engineering practice by
contributing to the development of standard design equations and procedures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a central outcome of this project the PI expects to
become an academic leader committed to enhance the engineering community through
her contributions in education and research. By providing teaching and research
of the highest quality, the PI will fulfill the mission of the Department of
Civil and Environmental Engineering at Clarkson University to "educate talented
and motivated men and women to become successful professionals through quality
undergraduate and graduated programs that place high priority on student access
and interaction with faculty."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;