* 0330786
* FIBR: Developmental Modeling and Informatics
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Elliot Meyerowitz, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 08/31/2009
* USD 4,939,322.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the major unanswered
questions in biology is the mechanism of organismal development and growth. How
do molecular and cellular processes dictate and regulate development of an
organism's form and function? This project aims to study the growth of plant
shoots at the cellular level, obtaining new dynamic descriptions of patterns of
cell division and gene expression by using real-time laser scanning confocal
microscopy of plant meristems that have been marked with GFP-linked reporters.
The project will in parallel generate specialized, efficient simulation code
from mathematical models and link it to suitable bioinformatic datasets through
pattern recognition, machine learning, and regulatory circuit inference
algorithms. Superior mathematical flexibility follows from a computer algebra
representation which creates mathematical "source code" from a growing library
of mathematical models covering active transport, regulated mechanical
interactions, signal transduction, and gene regulation. Extensive visualization,
image processing, and optimization software will fit these predictive models to
the collected image data. Scientific objectives of this effort include the
development and use of such mathematical modeling software for plant
development, as well as its use to explore alternative hypotheses in silico and
to guide in vivo experiments. The long term goal is to test hypotheses of growth
and development by creating a computable plant - an accurate representation of
shoot growth in silico, that will respond to experimental changes in levels of
individual functional components just as does a living plant when gene
expression is altered. See www.computableplant.org for updates on the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outreach plan is to develop, evaluate, and
introduce a new set of techniques for high school and pre-service science
teachers to improve students' understanding of botany and developmental biology.
Caltech's Local Educators Network (LEN) will provide a corps of up to 75
participant educators from surrounding school districts (where over 80% of the
students are underrepresented in the sciences and 38-58% participate in the
National School Lunch program) who will learn about plant growth and development
in a summer institute. Outreach activities will culminate in a summer institute
in which 30 high school students will develop a public kiosk to display the
"silicon plant" model for exhibit at the Huntington Botanical Gardens, which
hosts 500,000 visitors per year.&lt;br/&gt;