* 0330082
* SENSORS: Collaborative Research:  ALOHA Mooring Sensor Network and Adaptive Sampling
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Bruce Howe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2009
* USD 2,659,977.00

The PIs propose to develop a moored deep-ocean sensor network that will first be
installed at the Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT)/ALOHA Observatory (AO) and then
at other cabled observatory sites as they are implemented. This moored sensor
network is based on a profiler that will move between near-surface and fixed
abyssal sensors under program control. The PIs feel that this project will
demonstrate the scientific potential of combining adaptive sampling methods with
a moored series of profiling sensors. The PIs will also develop optimization
software tools to maximize overall information return given the constraints of
competing scientific objectives, the continually changing environment that will
be observed, and the physical limitations of the observing sensors and network.
The power and two-way real time communications capability provided by the
recently funded cabled ALOHA Observatory is essential to the sampling
improvements and sensor network proposed here. This moored adaptive sampling
system would have direct impact on evolving ocean observing systems both
nationally and internationally. Furthermore, the ability to automatically detect
ecological events would be useful for other sensor systems. Data and results
from this study will help improve our understanding of biogeochemical processes
in the Pacific and thus will aid in our understanding of high-profile research
agendas, such as global carbon cycling and the Pacific fisheries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;