* 0331580
* Information Technology Research (ITR):  Sensitive Information in a Wired World
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2010
* Stephanie Forrest, University of New Mexico
* Cooperative Agreement
* carl landwehr
* 09/30/2010
* USD 625,000.00

Increasing use of computers and networks in business, government, recreation,
and almost all aspects of daily life has led to a proliferation of sensitive
data (i.e., data that, if used improperly, can harm data subjects or other
relevant parties), and concern about the ownership, control, privacy, and
accuracy of these data has become a top priority. Despite significant technical
accomplishments in relevant research fields (e.g., cryptology and security,
database systems, and data mining), there is no comprehensive, end-to-end
technological infrastructure for handling sensitive data over the entire course
of their lifetime, nor is there even widespread social agreement about the
rights and responsibilities of major stakeholders in our data-intensive,
networked world.

This project is a multi-institutional, multi-disciplinary, multi-modal project
that looks comprehensively at sensitive data in a networked world. There are two
main academic centers of activity (Yale and Stanford), three smaller-scale
academic participants (Stevens Institute of Technology, NYU, and the University
of New Mexico), and substantial participation by non-academic partners,
including technology companies, (IBM, HP, and Microsoft), representatives of
user communities (Citigroup, NIH, Yale Center for Medical Informatics, the
Census Bureau, and the Secret Service), and DC-based policy organizations (The
Center for Democracy and Technology and The Electronic Privacy Information
Center).

A major technical theme of the project is privacy-preserving data mining, and,
more generally, techniques for meeting the potentially conflicting goals of
respecting individual rights and allowing law enforcement and other legitimate
organizations to collect and mine massive data sets. Other technical agenda
items include (1) accessibility and reliability of distributed data (2)
operating on encrypted databases, (3) remote control of data, (4) repelling
hostile data, and (5) auditability of data-management systems. Because these
technical goals are affected by lack of agreement about the meanings of basic
terms, most notably "privacy," a major goal of the project is the development of
a conceptual framework for the study of rights, responsibilities, and public
policies focused on sensitive-data handling. This part of the project
incorporates the notion of "contextual integrity," which considers both the
context and the content of data sets in assessing sensitivity.

Projected outcomes of the project include a next generation of technology for
handling sensitive information that is qualitatively better than the current
generation's and an effective conceptual framework for policy making and
philosophical inquiry into the rights and responsibilities of data subjects,
data owners, and data users.