* 0331217
* Workshop on Neutron Detector Technology, Indiana University Cyclotron Facility; Bloomington, IN; May 29-30, 2003
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2004
* David Baxter, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 03/31/2004
* USD 6,838.00

The need for improved neutron detectors is compelling. Current detectors
saturate at about 1% of the flux that will be made available at facilities such
as the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS). Fortunately, the path to improvement
appears to be straightforward, the problems seem well understood, and the
solutions are (mostly) logical extensions of current
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project is a workshop intended to help
address the need for a new generation of neutron detectors. It will begin to
build a collaboration within the U.S. that is focused on the development of new
neutron detectors and to develop a "roadmap" for future neutron-detector
research. The workshop will include presentations by scientists from Europe and
Japan, which are currently ahead of the U.S. in this area. The workshop will
provide the participants with the information needed to prepare proposals
seeking funding for neutron-detector development. The workshop will also
establish a national coordinating committee to help measure U.S. progress in
neutron-detector technology against the "roadmap."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Neutrons allow scientists to study aspects of materials and biological
substances that are not accessible using other types of radiation, such as
X-rays. In particular, they are sensitive probes of the structure and dynamics
of atoms and molecules. For this reason, they have now become widely used, not
only in physics, chemistry, and materials science, but also in biology, earth
science, and engineering. The usefulness of neutron beams for such research
depends upon the ability to detect the neutrons after they have interacted with
a sample. Current detectors severely limit the nature and type of research that
can be carried out, so that a new generation of neutron detectors is needed.
This workshop will help to begin a process to strengthen neutron-detector
technology in the United States, bringing this nation back into the ranks of
world leaders in this area.&lt;br/&gt;