* 0331964
* U.S.-Romania Environmental Biology Research on Community Resistance and Susceptibility to Invasion Effects of Soil Microbes and Native Plant Communities on Centaurea Maculosa.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Ragan Callaway, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 71,440.00

The goal of this U.S.-Romanian research project between Ragan Callaway of the
University of Montana and Alecu Diaconu of the Biological Research Institute, in
Iasi, is to determine how some invasive weeds change from minor components of
their natural communities to overwhelming dominants in invaded communities. This
will be accomplished by studying biogeographical variations in the output and
the effects of allelopathic and antimicrobial root exudants from Centaurea
maculosa (spotted knapweed). The selected study sites in Romania have
populations that are closest in genotype to those in North America. The
researchers hope to learn why this ecologically successful North American
invader is not as successful in European native communities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The US-Romanian team will pursue answers to questions related to the
ecological effect of the allelochemicals secreted by C. maculosa on plant and
microbe interactions in the rhizoshpere. Their research plan includes sampling
seeds and soils in both countries, experiments with catechin additions to plant
rhizoshperes in the field, and quantitative comparisons. Results are expected to
explain how C. maculosa changes from a subordinate species in Europe to an
overwhelming competitive dominant in North America. Broadly, success may lead to
the formulation of a new theory on the organization of natural ecological
communities and how they are invaded by exotic species. Practically speaking,
this new knowledge may facilitate development of novel and practical weed
management practices for controlling knapweed invasions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This plant ecology project fulfills the program objective
of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and
Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research resources in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence. Broader impacts include the
introduction of U.S. students to the international plant ecology community
through work at the Romanian partner institution and direct involvement in the
project's field sampling and modeling techniques for invasive plants.