* 0331704
* Caribbean Tsunami Workshop
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Philip Liu, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Juan M. Pestana
* 05/31/2004
* USD 24,999.00

This action is to support a workshop, to be held in San Juan, Puerto Rico in
July/August 2003, to focus on the tsunami threat in the Caribbean region. The
coastal population in the Caribbean is growing rapidly, and while everyone is
fully aware of the hurricane threat and is, to a great extent, prepared to deal
with the hurricane hazard, most people living in the region are not aware of the
tsunami hazard.

Since 1498, there have been twenty-seven verified tsunamis and an additional
nine as "very likely". In the past 136 years there have been three destructive
tsunamis in the northeastern Caribbean, the last one occurring in 1946. In the
Caribbean Sea region the potential sources for tsunami generation include
earthquakes, sub-aerial and submarine landslides, and underwater volcanic
explosions. An extra-terrestrial impact is now accepted as having formed the
Chicxulub crater in the Yucatan Peninsula, and presumably generated an enormous
tsunami. One potential threat for generating tsunamis comes from the most active
volcano in the Caribbean, the Kick'em Jenny submarine volcano at the
southeastern Caribbean. The University of the West Indies Seismic Research Unit
(UWI/SRU), funded by the Caribbean Development Bank, is monitoring its
activities. Also, the potential of a catastrophic collapse of the Souffriere
volcano in Montserrat could generate a huge tsunami threatening the local area.
The main objective of this workshop is to inform the international tsunami
community of the tsunami hazard in the Caribbean Sea region and the diversity of
tsunami generating sources. At the same time, this workshop will provide a
motivation for the tsunami modeling community to address this multiple regional
tsunami threat. It is also hoped that the workshop will inform and motivate
local governments in the region to become more aware of the tsunami hazard, and
involved in planning to mitigate this threat.