* 0331387
* Relationship of Electronic States to d -&amp;gt; f Emission Efficiency of Lanthanide Activated Phosphors
* MPS,DMR
* 02/28/2003,08/31/2005
* Kevin Bray, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2005
* USD 120,617.00

This project addresses fundamental questions associated with the energy level
structure and efficiency of blue, x-ray storage and photostimulable phosphor
materials, divalent (Eu 2+ , Sm 2+ ) and trivalent (Ce 3+ ) rare earth ions in
insulating oxide and sulfide lattices. These materials are currently being used
or considered for applications that include tunable blue solid state lasers, the
blue phosphor component of electroluminescent displays, x-ray storage phosphors
for medical imaging, and optical memory based on electron trapping or spectral
holeburning. Key materials issues relevant to the performance of the proposed
materials for these applications include the dependence of 5d to ?4f
luminescence transitions on host lattice structure and bonding, the relationship
of excited 5d levels to the band structure of the host lattice, and mechanisms
of excitation and stimulation processes in co-activated materials. The first of
these issue requires the ability to predict effects of local coordination
environment, defects, crystal field strength and bonding covalency on the
energies and splittings of the 5d levels. The second issue concerns the position
of the excited 5d levels relative to the conduction bandedge and its
consequences for photoionization, thermalization, and electron transfer. The
third issue involves charge migration, interactions between co-activators, and
defect mediated phenomena. The approach is based on using high pressure to vary
lattice structure, local coordination environment, 5d energy states, defect
energy states and host lattice band structure in blue-UV emitting, x-ray storage
and photostimulable phosphor materials. Through control of underlying electronic
and structural factors responsible for determining phosphor properties, new
insight is sought into excitation, emission, storage and stimulation mechanisms.
The objectives of the proposed work include: understanding the dependence of the
energy and intensity of 4f n-1 5d to ?4f n electronic transitions in Ce 3+ -, Eu
2+ -, and Sm 2+ -activated phosphors on local coordination environment;
examining the influence of 5d electronic states on 4f to ?4f luminescence
transitions; investigating the energy of 5d electronic states relative to the
host lattice conduction band and its effect on luminescence, photoionization,
and photostimulation processes in Ce 3+ -, Eu 2+ -, and Sm 2+ -activated
phosphors; determining the relative importance of covalency and crystal field
strength in establishing the energy of the emitting 5d level in blue and UV
phosphors based on Ce 3+ and Eu 2+ ; elucidating the fundamental excitation,
storage and photostimulation processes in Eu 2+ -activated mixed halide x-ray
storage phosphors and Eu 2+ , Sm 3+ co-activated photostimulable phosphors;
examining the effect of pressure on F-center formation and aggregation in Eu 2+
-activated mixed halide storage phosphors in the presence of x-ray and UV
radiation; demonstrating the ability of high pressure studies to contribute to
predictive capability at ambient conditions through correlations of phosphor
properties with band structure, electronic states, covalency and crystal field
effects.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic research issues in
a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance. These
studies are expected to improve fundamental understanding of factors limiting
the efficiency of solid state laser materials and a variety of optical display
applications. An important feature of the program is the integration of research
and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;