* 0331554
* International Workshop on Structural Composites for Infrastructure Application
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Tarek Rizk, Lawrence Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 12/31/2004
* USD 25,945.00

The issue of repairing and upgrading the existing civil engineering
infrastructure has been one of great importance for over a decade. Deterioration
of bridge decks, beams, girders and columns, buildings, parking structures and
others may be attributed to ageing, environmentally induced degradation, poor
initial design and/or construction, lack of maintenance, and to accidental
events such as earthquakes. Recent developments related to materials, methods
and techniques for structural strengthening have been various. One of today's
state-of-the-art techniques is the use of externally bonded fiber reinforced
polymer (FRP) composites. There are also many applications in the area of using
prestressed FRP tendons and FRP bars to reinforce bridges and structures.
Structural engineers view the use of advanced composites as highly promising in
the construction industry currently. The Workshop is organized on the premise
that the exchange of existing American and foreign experience in the area of
utilizing FRP products in repairing existing structures is beneficial for both
parties. The workshop will focus on the repair of ancient structures using FRP.
Research related to composite materials has been carried out in the U.S.,
Canada, Europe, Egypt, and Japan. However, there has been little communication
between the American, Japanese, and European researchers. There is a need for an
international exchange of advanced experience to increase the research
efficiency and to insure that the United States is at the leading edge of
engineering research. Experts from the United States, Canada, Europe, Japan, and
the Middle East will identify the topics for future cooperative projects in the
area of repair, reinforcing, and rehabilitation of structures using FRP. Site
visits will be organized to historical structures in Egypt in collaboration with
the Egyptian Ministry of Culture to investigate the possibility of using FRP to
repair monuments and historical structures (several hundred years old). In order
to ensure a productive workshop, the expected participation will be about 90
specialists from universities, research centers, bridge authorities and
consulting companies from around the world. Each participant will submit a
written contribution on one of the topics. The discussions, additional
contributions and final recommendations will be included in the Workshop
Proceedings. The Proceedings will be widely distributed in the US to researchers
and code writers. The presentations will also be made available at various
professional meetings and conferences (ASCE, ACI) as well as in professional
journals. The Workshop is scheduled for December 16-17, 2003, in Cairo, Egypt.
Cairo is the capital of Egypt and is the largest city in Africa.