* 0331572
* International:     Joint U.S.-Germany Workshop on Polymers, July 20-25, 2003, Bayreuth, Germany
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2004
* Paula Hammond, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

This proposal seeks funding for a joint Workshop focusing on the synthesis and
properties of new polymeric materials, and will involve younger scientists from
the United States and Germany. The proposed participants in this symposium have
contributed to the synthesis and characterization of sophisticated polymeric
materials whose properties can be confined at micron and nanometer length
scales. The polymers have complex architectures, complex arrangements of diverse
chemical constituents, and the range of characterization methods has expanded
through the development of high throughput combinatorial techniques. The
proposed participants have many overlapping interest, including the broad use of
dendrimers, hyperbranched and cyclic polymers; the development of
polyelectrolyte multilayers; the development of responsive materials for devices
and drug delivery; the synthesis of pepties and proteins; the self-assembly of
amphiphilic molecules and block copolymers in both solution and solid-state; and
the use of organized phases for new synthetic procedures and to develop new
materials. &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Workshop is to initiate new collaborations
and interactions, and will therefore emphasize younger researchers who lack
international exposure. In order to emphasize new interactions, no one is
allowed to attend the US-Germany workshop twice, unless he or she is chosen to
co-organize the next meeting or was the previous organizer. The proposed
American participants include nine Assistant Professors, two recently-promoted
Associate Professors, and the two organizers who are both Associate Professors.
In addition to ensuring that new interactions are constantly forming, this
stipulation also discourages evolution into an "old-boys club". The proposed
workshop features active participation of women and minorities. Of the fifteen
proposed US participants (three industrial), six are women, three are African
American, one is hispanic, and three are Asian (which are minorities at the
faculty level in the US). Of the twelve proposed German participants, two are
women. The US participants represent Universities and companies from California,
Texas, the Midwest and northeastern states.