* 0331542
* Information Technology Research (ITR):  Sensitive Information in a Wired World
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2010
* Helen Nissenbaum, New York University
* Cooperative Agreement
* carl landwehr
* 09/30/2010
* USD 406,099.00

Increasing use of computers and networks in business,
government,&lt;br/&gt;recreation, and almost all aspects of daily life has led
to a&lt;br/&gt;proliferation of sensitive data (i.e., data that, if used
improperly,&lt;br/&gt;can harm data subjects or other relevant parties), and
concern about&lt;br/&gt;the ownership, control, privacy, and accuracy of these
data has become&lt;br/&gt;a top priority. Despite significant technical
accomplishments &lt;br/&gt;in relevant research fields (e.g., cryptology and
security, database&lt;br/&gt;systems, and data mining), there is no
comprehensive, end-to-end&lt;br/&gt;technological infrastructure for handling
sensitive data over &lt;br/&gt;the entire course of their lifetime, nor is there
even widespread social&lt;br/&gt;agreement about the rights and responsibilities
of major stakeholders&lt;br/&gt;in our data-intensive, networked
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a multi-institutional, multi-
disciplinary, multi-modal&lt;br/&gt;project that looks comprehensively at
sensitive data in a networked&lt;br/&gt;world. There are two main academic
centers of activity (Yale and&lt;br/&gt;Stanford), three smaller-scale academic
participants (Stevens&lt;br/&gt;Institute of Technology, NYU, and the University
of New Mexico), and&lt;br/&gt;substantial participation by non-academic
partners, including&lt;br/&gt;technology companies, (IBM, HP, and Microsoft),
representatives of&lt;br/&gt;user communities (Citigroup, NIH, Yale Center for
Medical Informatics,&lt;br/&gt;the Census Bureau, and the Secret Service), and
DC-based policy&lt;br/&gt;organizations (The Center for Democracy and Technology
and The&lt;br/&gt;Electronic Privacy Information Center).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
major technical theme of the project is privacy-preserving
data&lt;br/&gt;mining, and, more generally, techniques for meeting the
potentially&lt;br/&gt;conflicting goals of respecting individual rights and
allowing law&lt;br/&gt;enforcement and other legitimate organizations to collect
and mine&lt;br/&gt;massive data sets. Other technical agenda items include
(1)&lt;br/&gt;accessibility and reliability of distributed data (2) operating
on&lt;br/&gt;encrypted databases, (3) remote control of data, (4) repelling
hostile&lt;br/&gt;data, and (5) auditability of data-management systems. Because
these&lt;br/&gt;technical goals are affected by lack of agreement about the
meanings&lt;br/&gt;of basic terms, most notably "privacy," a major goal of the
project is&lt;br/&gt;the development of a conceptual framework for the study of
rights,&lt;br/&gt;responsibilities, and public policies focused on sensitive-
data&lt;br/&gt;handling. This part of the project incorporates the notion
of&lt;br/&gt;"contextual integrity," which considers both the context and
the&lt;br/&gt;content of data sets in assessing
sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projected outcomes of the project include a
next generation of&lt;br/&gt;technology for handling sensitive information that
is qualitatively&lt;br/&gt;better than the current generation's and an effective
conceptual&lt;br/&gt;framework for policy making and philosophical inquiry into
the rights&lt;br/&gt;and responsibilities of data subjects, data owners, and
data users.&lt;br/&gt;