* 0331984
* Behavioral Model of Pedestrian Dynamics Under Emergency and Non-Emergency Scenarios Using Cellular Automata
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Benigno Aguirre, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2007
* USD 506,239.00

Behavioral Model of Pedestrian Dynamics under Emergency Evacuation Scenarios
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a social science perspective it is useful to think of
the evacuation behavior during emergencies, commonly referred to as emergency
egress and ingress, as having three distinct analytical dimensions: the physical
environment from which to evacuate, the managerial policies and controls
deployed at evacuation, and the psychological and social organizational
characteristics impacting the persons that participate in the movement. It is
much more common in the physics and engineering literature to find direct
consideration of the first two dimensions than of the third. The social science
literature provides an extensive coverage of the impact of the latter dimension
on the emergence of consensus in collectivities, albeit not necessarily at
evacuation. This body of knowledge can be put to great use by architects,
engineers and computer scientists alike in determining the outcomes of
evacuation processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study explores the
application of cellular-automata to the micro-simulation of environmentally-
constrained and managed pedestrian motions during routine operations and
emergency evacuations. It addresses the essence and the interactions of all
three pre-cited dimensions of the pedestrian evacuation behavior through a
multidisciplinary effort. Such multi-disciplinary exchange of information can
premise the beginning of highly beneficial and enduring collaborations between
concerned disciplines. The need for a social science study of crisis evacuation
is particularly keen nowadays as terrorist threats have increased. Study results
will be interpreted in light of accumulated knowledge on the sociology of
disasters, allowing for the provision, to local and federal government agencies
as well as private organizations, of a useful blueprint to follow during crisis
evacuations. This provision of guidance is an important benefit to society, as
it improves disaster response programs at the local, state and federal levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;