* 0331686
* LSAMP:  Texas A&amp;M System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, Phase III Program:  Cultivating the Future
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2003,04/30/2010
* Kendall Harris, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 04/30/2010
* USD 5,421,413.00

The Texas A&amp;M System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Phase
III &lt;br/&gt;(TAMUS LSAMP III) program proposes to nurture the future. The
program will &lt;br/&gt;endeavor to sustain and extend hard-won academic gains
in retention and learning &lt;br/&gt;outcomes for under-represented minority
(URM) students in science, technology, &lt;br/&gt;engineering and math (STEM)
disciplines, which have been achieved in partner &lt;br/&gt;institutions during
TX LSAMP Phase I and II. However, the foremost aim of the &lt;br/&gt;proposed
program will be, to advance the preparation of under-represented minority
&lt;br/&gt;(URM) students in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM)
fields for &lt;br/&gt;progression to STEM graduate degree programs and to K-12
teaching in STEM subjects. &lt;br/&gt;Led by three veteran TX LSAMP partners,
and the Office of the Vice Chancellor for &lt;br/&gt;Academic and Student
Affairs Texas A&amp;M University System (TAMU System) the &lt;br/&gt;proposed
Texas LSAMP Phase III program will extend participation in its central
&lt;br/&gt;activities to the students of six additional TAMU System
universities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed TAMUS LSAMP III will be a
five-year, three-pronged program. &lt;br/&gt;The first prong of the program
features initial two-year pilot strategies for &lt;br/&gt;conducting and
modeling new, and institutionalizable .Pipeline Repair. tactics, which
&lt;br/&gt;are intended to help renew endangered URM STEM enrollment of new
students at &lt;br/&gt;TAMU and Prairie View, because these institutions enroll
and graduate the largest &lt;br/&gt;populations of URM STEM undergraduates in
the TAMU system. &lt;br/&gt;The second prong of the TAMUS LSAMP III program will
include the core &lt;br/&gt;.Undergraduate Student Development. strategies,
which will be open to students of &lt;br/&gt;all Alliance institutions. The
strategies of this prong will operate throughout the five &lt;br/&gt;years of
the TAMUS LSAMP III program. This prong will aim first, to advance retention,
&lt;br/&gt;and academic attainment by improving the self-direction (self
efficacy) of STEM URM &lt;br/&gt;students, and then, to improve the quality of
learning for URM STEM students, and &lt;br/&gt;hence their persistence toward
graduation, and progression, through undergraduate &lt;br/&gt;research and
teaching experiences. &lt;br/&gt;The third prong may be characterized as
.Graduate School and Teaching &lt;br/&gt;Articulation.. It will consist of
strategies for proactively negotiating an assisted &lt;br/&gt;transition of
TAMUS LSAMP students to STEM graduate programs, and preferably &lt;br/&gt;those
with strong systems to support URM student success, as well as encouraging and
&lt;br/&gt;assisting URM STEM students pursue professional K-12 teaching. These
strategies of &lt;br/&gt;this prong will be implemented in years three through
five and will be made available to &lt;br/&gt;target population students from
all TAMU System LSAMP campuses. What all three-&lt;br/&gt;program prongs will
have in common is the commitment to seeding URM STEM &lt;br/&gt;students with
forward-looking, ambitious perspectives toward life-long learning.