* 0331283
* Conference: IX Oxford Conference on Modeling and Control of Breathing, Fall 2003, in Paris, France
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Chi-Sang Poon, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Cole Gilbert
* 07/31/2004
* USD 12,188.00

Breathing in many animals involves a rhythmic cycle of motor activity that can
be modulated in its duration, intervals, and amplitude. Analysis of this vital
biological function of ventilation has been enhanced by contributions from
theoretical and computational scientists, modeling potential interactions among
neurons, muscles, cardiovascular effects, and biomechanics of the components
involved in breathing, in a range of animals. Since 1978 the triennial Oxford
Conference on Modeling and Control of Breathing has offered a unique forum for
respiratory physiologists, neurobiologists and modelers to exchange ideas and
present their latest findings in understanding mechanisms of control of rhythmic
breathing. This celebrated tradition has come of age in the current post-genomic
era, where the intrinsic complexity of the respiratory system from genes to
behavior calls for a concerted deployment of modeling and experimental
approaches to elucidate mechanisms of respiratory control at the molecular,
cellular and system levels. This time the conference emphasizes a synergy
between experimental and modeling approaches, adding a new attention to
integrating this 'post-genomic' perspective into understanding respiratory
control. The format maximizes interactions between workers from different fields
by providing a common forum for presentation and discussion of submitted
contributions. The talks include work on mammals other than humans and rodents,
and even include invertebrates. The potential impact of this conference is high
in fostering needed communication between experimentalists and quantitative
modelers, including theoretical and computational aspects with physiology and
behavior. The conference proceedings will be published in a peer-reviewed volume
to make results available to others interested in the broader fields of motor
control, robotics, bioengineering, and comparative physiology. This conference
will have an impact on raising the interest and visibility of young
investigators in respiratory physiology and computational neuroscience, and it
seems likely lead to new kinds of collaborative interdisciplinary interactions.
Funding from NSF will help students, postdocs, and young researchers without
access to other funding to attend the conference.