* 0331798
* US-Nepal Planning Visit:   Surface Electrical Resistivity Surveys as a Discriminant of High-Arsenic Groundwater Risk, Terai, Nepal
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Thomas Brikowski, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2004
* USD 7,758.00

Description: This award supports the US-Nepal Planning Visit: Surface Electrical
Resistivity Surveys as a Discriminant of High-Arsenic Groundwater Risk, Terai,
Nepal. PI Thomas Brikowski proposes to make a planning/ test-of-concept visit to
the Terai plains of Nepal to evaluate the utility of surface geophysical methods
in predicting the risk of high-arsenic groundwater. The geologic conditions
allowing arsenic to be mobilized in groundwater are beginning to be understood
and may be directly detectable using surface geophysical techniques such as
electrical resistivity (ER) and induced polarization (IP). The PI will assess
the performance of ER/IP surveys in the field, thereby establishing the
probability of success for a larger project aimed at determining the surface
geophysical signatures of low groundwater arsenic sites.&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
Cooperating researchers in Nepal have made substantial progress in
characterizing the highly variable temporal and spatial distributrion of high
arsenic &lt;br/&gt;groundwater in several provinces in the Terai. The US team,
which includes the PI, a postdoc, and graduate student, will gather preliminary
data on the feasibility of their proposed approach prior to developing a full-
scale proposal for submission to NSF. Ultimately, this research holds the
potential to address the Asian arsenic crisis by locating areas of probable safe
water suitable for drilling, not only in Nepal but throughout all of southern
Asia, where millions of people living on the tropical outwash plains of the
Himalayas are exposed to chronic arsenic poisoning via groundwater.