* 0331866
* Resisting Inka Imperialism in Ecuador: The Archaeology of a Militarized Frontier
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Samuel Connell, Gifford                 Clarence       H
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2005
* USD 18,091.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Clarence Gifford and his colleagues
will conduct one field season of archaeological research in the Pambamarca
mountains of northern highland Ecuador. The study area, which covers 195 km of
mountain peaks and rugged terrain along the northeast edge of the Quito Basin,
is remarkable for the density of prehispanic walled fortresses that dominate the
landscape. The goal of the research is to ascertain the extent and preservation
of 15 of the prominent fortresses and to test whether certain fieldwork methods
can be used in the region. To meet these objectives, a two-month archaeological
project will be conducted with the assistance of hired fieldworkers and
university students from Ecuador and the U.S. The investigators will conduct
three activities at each of the fortresses: first, they will evaluate and update
site plans that were prepared in 1977 from tracings of aerial photographs;
second, they will collect soil samples in an attempt to locate volcanic
sediments that might provide an efficient means to chronologically date fortress
occupation; and third, they will conduct subsurface surveys inside each fortress
using three remote sensing techniques (electrical resistivity, magnetic, and
ground-penetrating radar) to determine if any of these methods are effective in
detecting cultural features in the subsurface deposits at Pambamarca.
Establishing the usefulness of these methods will allow the investigators to
determine the feasibility of studying the imperial encounters that took place in
Pambamarca between the Inka empire and indigenous Ecuadorian societies in the
Late and Inka prehispanic periods (ca. AD 1250-1532). According to historical
accounts, these encounters along what was once the northern frontier of the Inka
empire were notably fierce as the Ecuadorians successfully resisted the Inkas
for 17 years.

The research will also be valuable on a much broader level. In cooperation with
professors and archaeologists from the host country, this project will continue
to provide Ecuadorian university students with the opportunity to learn and
train with foreign archaeologists. In addition, the results of this research
will be included in the pending application of the Instituto Nacional de
Patrimonio Cultural del Ecuador to move the Pambamarca Prehispanic Fortress
Complex from the Tentative List of UNESCO World Heritage Sites to the Permanent
List. Currently, Ecuador has four Permanent World Heritage Sites: The Islas
Galapagos, the Parque Nacional Sangay, Ciudad de Quito, and the Centro historico
de Santa Ana de los Rios de Cuenca. Pambamarca would be the first entry from
Ecuador to highlight in particular Ecuador's important prehispanic cultural
heritage.

