* 0331453
* Information Technology Research (ITR):   Building the Tree of Life -- A National Resource for Phyloinformatics and Computational Phylogenetics
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Tandy Warnow, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Maureen Kearney
* 09/30/2009
* USD 839,243.00

This collaborative project aims to establish a national computational resource
to move the research community much closer to the realization of the goal of the
Tree of Life initiative, namely, to reconstruct the evolutionary history of all
organisms. This goal is the computational Grand Challenge of evolutionary
biology. Current methods are limited to problems several orders of magnitude
smaller, and they fail to provide sufficient accuracy at the high end of their
range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned resource will be designed as an
incubator to promote the development of new ideas for this enormously
challenging computational task; it will create a forum for experimentalists,
computational biologists, and computer scientists to share data, compare
methods, and analyze results, thereby speeding up tool development while also
sustaining current biological research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
resource will be composed of a large computational platform, a collection of
interoperable high-performance software for phylogenetic analysis, and a large
database of datasets, both real and simulated, and their analyses; it will be
accessible through any Web browser by developers, researchers, and educators.
The software, freely available in source form, will be usable on scales varying
from laptops to high-performance, Grid-enabled, compute engines such as this
project's platform, and will be packaged to be compatible with current popular
tools. In order to build this resource, this collaborative project will support
research programs in phyloinformatics (databases to store multilevel data with
detailed annotations and to support complex, tree-oriented queries), in
optimization algorithms, Bayesian inference, and symbolic manipulation for
phylogeny reconstruction, and in simulation of branching evolution at the
genomic level, all within the context of a virtual collaborative
center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biology, and phylogeny in particular, have been
almost completely redefined by modern information technology, both in terms of
data acquisition and in terms of analysis. Phylogeneticists have formulated
specific models and questions that can now be addressed using recent advances in
database technology and optimization algorithms. The time is thus exactly right
for a close collaboration of biologists and computer scientists to address the
IT issues in phylogenetics, many of which call for novel approaches, due to a
combination of combinatorial difficulty and overall scale. The project research
team includes computer scientists working in databases, algorithm design,
algorithm engineering, and high-performance computing, evolutionary biologists
and systematists, bioinformaticians, and biostatisticians, with a history of
successful collaboration and a record of fundamental contributions, to provide
the required breadth and depth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring
together researchers from many areas and foster new types of collaborations and
new styles of research in computational biology; moreover, the interaction of
algorithms, databases, modeling, and biology will give new impetus and new
directions in each area. It will help create the computational infrastructure
that the research community will use over the next decades, as more whole
genomes are sequenced and enough data are collected to attempt the inference of
the Tree of Life. The project will help evolutionary biologists understand the
mechanisms of evolution, the relationships among evolution, structure, and
function of biomolecules, and a host of other research problems in biology,
eventually leading to major progress in ecology, pharmaceutics, forensics, and
security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will publicize evolution, genomics,
and bioinformatics through informal education programs at museum partners of the
collaborating institutions. It also will motivate high-school students and
college undergraduates to pursue careers in bioinformatics. The project provides
an extraordinary opportunity to train students, both undergraduate and graduate,
as well as postdoctoral researchers, in one of the most exciting
interdisciplinary areas in science. The collaborating institutions serve a large
number of underrepresented groups and are committed to increasing their
participation in research.&lt;br/&gt;