* 0331934
* 600 MHz NMR Spectrometer
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Robert Callender, Yeshiva University
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2006
* USD 200,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Mark Girvin at Yeshiva University to acquire a
600 Megahertz nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometer as a shared instrument to
study protein structure and dynamics. The three main areas of research are on
membrane proteins, protein folding, and enzyme structure and mechanism, where
the goals are to determine the three dimensional structures and dynamics
properties of the proteins to understand their mechanism of function.

The membrane proteins to be studied are involved in energy metabolism in cells
(ATP synthesis in all cell types. and light absorption for photosynthetic
organisms), in multi-drug resistance (a bacterial multidrug resistance pump), in
neutralization of a bacterial toxin (colicin E1), and in inter-cell
communication (gap juction proteins). The transition between the folded and
unfolded states of two proteins will be examined - the structure of one of the
earliest folding intermediates of apomyoglobin will be described in order to
understand how a protein folds from the extended structure in which is likely
synthesized in the cell into it's functional form, and profilin, whose
functional role in cells of binding to actin monomers appears to involve partial
unfolding of the protein. Finally, structures and catalytically relevant
conformational changes and dynamics of several enzymes that have not been
obtainable from x-ray crystallography will be determined. The enzymes include
the inhibitor-bound state of ricin, one of the most potent toxins known. For
each of these systems, isotopically labeled protein will be prepared from
expression in bacteria, and three-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance spectra
will be recorded and used to assign signals from each atom in the protein and
measure the inter-atomic distances that will be used to calculate three-
dimensional structures for the proteins.

The systems being studied have resisted other forms of structure determination.
Membrane proteins are extremely difficult to crystallize, and protein folding
intermediates do not crystallize at all. Membrane proteins, in particular, are
of vital importance for the function of all cells, but little is known at the
atomic level of how they are structured and how they carry out their function.
The research enabled by this award will provide a detailed understanding of how
ion transport across membranes occurs and can be used to drive chemical work
(ATP synthesis) and co-transport (drug efflux); it will also lead to many new
structural studies of other key membrane proteins. The enzyme studies will
assist in inhibitor design and improvement for several proteins where the
substrate-protein or inhibitor-protein complexes have not been amenable to
crystallographic study.