* 0331538
* US-Brazil Dissertation Research - Phylogenetic History and Species Delimitation in the Neotropical Plant Genus Pagamea Aubl. (Rubiaceae)
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Peter Stevens, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/2006
* USD 20,091.00

In this dissertation enhancement award supported by the Americas Program in the
Office of International Science and Engineering and the Systematic Biology
Program in the Division of Environmental Biology, Peter F. Stevens, Elizabeth A.
Kellogg, and Alberto Vicentini of the University of Missouri, St. Louis and the
Missouri Botanical Garden will use modern molecular-phylogenetic techniques and
morphometrics to produce testable hypotheses of the mechanisms that have
contributed to the diversification of Pagamea in South America. Since Pagamea is
a fairly large and difficult Neotropical genus with a wide range in the Amazon
basin, fieldwork will be conducted in Brazil, Venezuela, Peru, and Guyana.
Precise location data for plants will be combined with assembly of information
regarding the geographical pattern of climate, soils, and barriers to dispersal.
Phylogenetic relationships will be reconstructed at a fine level of resolution.
The results of this work can provide a model for studying and understanding the
systematics and evolution of this complex and unusual genus of Rubiaceae. The
foreign counterpart researcher is Rogerio Gribel at Instituto Nacional de
Pesquisas da Amazonia (INPA) in Manaus, Brazil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
should contribute to a broader understanding of biogeographical patterns in
other South American angiosperm groups with a similar distribution. A modern
classification of Pagamea is imperative for establishing conservation priorities
for rare or endangered members in South American countries. During this project
a student who is a member of an underrepresented group will gain international
experience, and contacts between three U.S. and Brazilian institutions will be
strengthened.&lt;br/&gt;