* 0331436
* SBIR Phase II:  Investigation of Charge Trapping in Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition (PECVD) Dielectrics Using Electrostatically Actuated Mechanical Resonators
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Igal Ladabaum, Siemens Medical Solutions USA, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 07/31/2006
* USD 999,882.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop high quality dielectric films and structures for a family of ultrasonic
transducers for medical imaging applications. The technology and methods
developed in Phase I to characterize charge-trapping behavior of dielectrics are
the critical innovations required to take micro-fabricated ultrasonic
transducers from their current state to a commercially viable state. Charge
trapping created by the high electric fields in the device is detrimental to
transducer performance. Charge trapping is dependent on field polarity and
causes shifts in electromechanical conversion efficiency in time. Variations in
charge trapping within a transducer array are even more disruptive. A process
that removes the polarity dependence of charge trapping and thereby enables a
new type of bipolar ultrasound imaging array that improves image quality will be
developed. Since performance and reliability are critical to successful
commercialization of these ultrasound probes, the issues of how dielectric
charging causes time-dependent loss in performance and material degradation that
could limit lifetime will be researched. The development and commercialization
of micro-fabricated ultrasound transducers (MUT) is targeted at the medical
applications market. This work will also enable the development of ultrasound
probes that can non-invasively provide more accurate diagnostic information for
doctors, such as improved ability to distinguish between cancerous and benign
tissue. The image quality to price ratio drives market share in the global
$3Billion diagnostic ultrasound market. These novel ultrasonic transducers will
significantly improve the image quality/price ratio, and thus realistically
create market share swings of 5% upon product release. Specifically, in the
$1Billion mid-to-premium segment of the radiology market most relevant to the
proposed research, $50M of annual system sales would be generated by the
introduction of MUT probes, of which approximately one third are direct probe
sales.