* 0331600
* Continuing Support for the Institute for Laboratory Animal Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Joanne Zurlo, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 413,723.00

This award provides continuation of support for the Institute for Laboratory
Animal Research (ILAR), which provides a critical service to the nation's
research institutions by developing and disseminating guidelines for laboratory
animal care, breeding, and use. ILAR's goal is to improve the humane and
scientifically valid use of laboratory animals, as well as the availability,
quality and care of laboratory animals. ILAR accomplishes this goal through a
core program, carried out by its staff, and a special-projects program, carried
out by National Academies- appointed experts. Both programs are guided by the
ILAR Council, a 15-member advisory council comprised of experts in laboratory
animal physiology, genetics, behavior, medicine, bioethics, and related
biomedical sciences. The ILAR publication "Guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals" is a standard resource for those responsible animal care
throughout the world. Periodically, ILAR issues reports on topics such as the
humane and scientific use of laboratory animals, the education and training of
scientists and technicians in the care and use of laboratory animals, the
reduction of pain and distress in research animals, the occupational safety and
health of employees, and nomenclature of inbred, transgenic, and other
genetically defined animals. The ILAR Council meets three times a year to
provide program direction and strategic planning; to oversee the communication
and information programs (consisting of the ILAR web site and the ILAR Journal);
to oversee special projects; and to direct ILAR's international programs
(including participation as the US national member of the International Council
of Laboratory Animal Sciences). This award provides partial support for ILAR's
core activities, which include maintenance of the web site, publication of the
ILAR Journal, exhibits at scientific meetings, work of the ILAR Council, and
general office operations.