* 0331297
* QSB:  Quantitative Systems Approach to Hepatic Metabolism:  To Elucidate the Effect of Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Christina Chan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 09/30/2006
* USD 256,239.00

The overall goal of this project is to develop a quantitative systems approach
to elucidate the role of elevated free fatty acids and tumor necrosis factor-
alpha on hepatic metabolism. Mounting evidence suggests that elevated levels of
free fatty acids along with tumor necrosis factor-alpha in the plasma play an
important role in regulating hepatic metabolism. Fatty acids are involved in the
generation of secondary messengers for signal transduction, regulation of
hepatic enzyme activity, mediators of gene expression, and storage of metabolic
energy. Similarly, evidence suggests tumor necrosis factor-alpha plays a role in
mediating lipid metabolism and triggers a complicated array of intracellular
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current mechanistic understanding of lipid
metabolism is limited due to the lack of comprehensive information on the
interplay of genes and proteins that may act in concert, or in opposition, in
their regulation of metabolic enzymes. This short-coming is primarily due to
traditional approaches, that measure a few physiological, biochemical or genetic
markers, which provide limited insight into the overall molecular mechanisms
involved. A "systems biology" approach reconstructs the associations that lead
to a system's behavior by integrating the information derived from RNA, protein,
and metabolite expression profiles as a function of its surrounding environment.
The ability to quantitate expression levels of multiple genes and proteins,
corresponding to a cellular metabolic state and/or environment, provides a more
comprehensive and integrative approach to understanding hepatic lipid metabolism
and elucidating relevant intracellular information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
summary, this project seeks to develop a quantitative framework to obtain
fundamental knowledge of hepatocyte metabolism that will be subsequently applied
to study the more specific aspects of Type 2 diabetes and other metabolic
diseases. The quantitative framework developed in this proposal is applicable to
other cellular systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;