* 0331697
* Information Technology Research (ITR):  Next-Generation Bio-Molecular Imaging and Information Discovery
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2010
* Leslie Wilson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/2010
* USD 7,685,312.00

This collaborative project brings together a strong multi-institutional
interdisciplinary team of investigators to study and advance the current
understanding of cellular and sub-cellular events. Continuing technological
advances in fluorescence and atomic-force microscopy allow scientists to observe
molecular function, distribution, and interrelationships in living cells.
However, a full understanding of tens of thousands of proteins and the complex
molecular processes they engage in requires a voluminous amount of image data,
which currently must be analyzed by visual inspection. To facilitate such an
analysis, researchers from the four participating institutions are focusing on
three main research thrusts. First, next-generation intelligent imaging involves
information processing at the sensor level to enable high-speed and super-
resolution imaging. The goal is to enable biologists to study cellular processes
at resolutions in time and space that are not possible with current
technologies. The second research thrust is pattern recognition and data mining
as applied to bio-molecular image collections. Salient features that
characterize the underlying patterns in cells and tissues need to be computed
for the vast volumes of images acquired through automated microscopy. Third, a
distributed database of bio-molecular images is being created. The merging of
pattern-recognition and data-mining tools with new, powerful methods for
indexing, data modeling, and collaboration, is aimed at creating a unique
infrastructure that greatly facilitates image bioinformatics, thus complementing
recent revolutionary advances in genomics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of
this research will lead to new and novel information-processing methods for bio-
molecular image data. Efficient and effective representation of such data will
enable researchers to search and browse through large collections of image and
video data and look for similar patterns in such datasets, thus facilitating
information discovery. During its five-year duration, this project will develop,
test, and deploy a distributed database of bio-molecular image data accessible
to researchers around the world. The impact of the distributed database will be
through large-scale biology in which the results of a single experiment can be
globally correlated with the results from other groups of scientists, thus
accelerating discovery of dynamic relationships between structure and function
in complex biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop new
courses, and will facilitate student exchanges, semi-annual meetings, and
workshops, benefiting students at all levels. This project will train a new
generation of biologists, computer scientists and engineers well versed in the
imaging and information-processing sciences at the forefront of next-generation
biotechnology. Partnership will be established with institutions with large
populations of students from groups underrepresented in science and engineering,
such as the California State Universities at Fresno and San Bernardino and the
Universidad Metropolitan in Puerto Rico, for undergraduate recruitment and
outreach. An effective mode of outreach for students is to educate their
teachers, and the project will offer summer fellowships for elementary, high-
school, college, and university teachers.