* 0331896
* U.S.-New Zealand and Australia Collaboration on Research for Data Compression
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Donald Adjeroh, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 01/31/2007
* USD 7,826.00

0301896&lt;br/&gt;Adjeroh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Professor
Donald Adjeroh of West Virginia University for a visit to New Zealand, where he
will work with Professor Tim Bell of the University of Canterbury, and to
Australia, where he will work with Professor Alistair Moffat of the University
of Melbourne. A companion proposal (INT-0331188) supports his U.S. colleague
Amar Mukherjee of the University of Central Florida for the same objectives.
These visits are intended to initiate a program of faculty exchange visits and
graduate student mentoring in the Computer Sciences. Their core research was
recently funded by NSF grant IIS-0312484, "Compressed Search and Retrieval for
Very Large Text and Image Repositories."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent
explosion in the amount of multimedia data typically available to an ordinary
computer user has made it crucial to find new ways to manage massive amounts of
data. These investigators are developing new methods for organizing, storing,
searching and retrieving data more efficiently. Their work involves a new
approach to data compression that uses "sorted contexts", which permits
searching for specific information within data files that are still compressed.
They are developing both new compression schemes and new search methodologies
for working with such compressed data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
have significant applications in both science and engineering research and in
societal needs such as electronic libraries, internet search engines, homeland
security, economic, environmental and medical data bases and many other forms of
text and image repositories. In addition, several graduate students are involved
in the project and will benefit from exposure to state-of-the-art research being
done outside of the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;