* 0331196
* Visualization in Earth and Ocean Sciences: Exploring the Use of Immersive Visualization Technology in Informal Science Education
* GEO,GEO
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Cheryl Peach, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 10/31/2007
* USD 163,518.00

Visualization in Earth and Ocean Sciences:&lt;br/&gt;Exploring the use of
Immersive Visualization Technology in Informal Science
Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is exploring ways to combine cutting
edge visualization technology, large-scale databases, and current scientific
research to create public and school programs for interactive science centers.
The prototype collaboration between a leading research institution and a public
outreach organization is being carried out at the University of California San
Diego's Scripps Insitution of Oceanography and the Birch
Aquarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Images, movies, and activities developed by this
project are available through the Digital Library for Earth System Education
(&lt;a href="http://www.dlese.org/' target="_blank"&gt;DLESE&lt;/a&gt;).
Teaching modules, designed to support teacher and student efforts to achieve
mastery of the content and practice articulated in the National and California
science standards, are based on topics such as:&lt;br/&gt;* The structure and
dynamics of tectonic plate boundaries: deformation as seen from
space;&lt;br/&gt;* Global seismicity: why, where and how;&lt;br/&gt;* The
structure of the Earth;&lt;br/&gt;* The Earth's oceans: bathymetry, hydrography,
and the ocean-climate connection;&lt;br/&gt;* Data manipulation and
presentation: distinguishing between evidence and explanation; and&lt;br/&gt;*
Interplanetary studies: a comparison of Earth, the Moon, and
Mars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the installation at the Scripps and Birch
locations, pre- and post-visit understanding of the concepts and content are
carried out in order to support formative and summative evaluation of the
project. Evaluations are also being carried out in student pilot program
classrooms and with teachers involved in the Teacher Institutes.