* 0331552
* Strengthening the Research and Educational Capabilities of the Virgin Islands Environmental Resource Station, St. John US Virgin Islands
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Richard Nemeth, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2007
* USD 185,000.00

Strengthening the research and educational capabilities of the Virgin Islands
Environmental Resource Station, St. John, USVI. (FSML #0331552)

Abstract A grant has been awarded to the University of the Virgin Islands (UVI)
under the direction of Dr. Richard S. Nemeth to upgrade the Virgin Islands
Environmental Resource Station (VIERS) located on St. John, US Virgin Islands.
VIERS is located at the center of the Virgin Islands National Park, the UNESCO
Biosphere Reserve and the Coral Reef National Monument, making VIERS uniquely
situated to provide researchers with reference sites for ecosystem level studies
in both marine and terrestrial habitats. Although VIERS has provided 35 years of
continuous service as a center for environmental education and research, the
outdated laboratory facilities has limited use of this facility for teaching and
especially for research to very low levels. Most of the instrumentation in the
laboratory is over 20 years old and has been severely degraded due to the
corrosive tropical environment. The VIERS lab also has no internet access or
computer facilities available for visiting scientists and major equipment, which
support field activities, have been damaged by a series of severe hurricanes.
Through an extensive planning process, UVI identified the essential needs of
current and potential users of VIERS. The primary goal of this project will be
to modernize the VIERS facility to stimulate usage by researchers and
educational groups from local, national and international institutions. Funding
from the National Science Foundation will allow UVI to purchase major research
instrumentation, renovate existing buildings and modernize the communication
systems. The acquisition of modern laboratory instrumentation and major field
equipment will expand research capabilities of VIERS from very basic ecological
observations to more sophisticated measurement and experimentation, and will
increase research capabilities at both spatial and temporal scales. The proposed
renovations will provide for a research laboratory facility with functional and
complementary workspaces including a computer lab, analytical lab, dry lab and
wet lab with running seawater system. UVI will also modernize the information
technology, communications and data management systems which will foster greater
collaboration among researchers and strengthen the linkages between research,
education and outreach programs. The close proximity of all representative
tropical environments around VIERS will provide significant opportunities for
researchers to make substantive comparisons among adjacent terrestrial and
marine ecosystems. Improving the facilities at VIERS will facilitate teaching
and research and, through community interaction with VIERS' outreach activities,
will increase public interest and involvement in their natural resources. The
broader impacts of modernizing this field biological station will also include a
greater level of collaboration and an increase in the exchange of information
and ideas between visiting scientists, educators, and students. Finally,
increased activities at VIERS will provide more opportunities in education and
research for the culturally diverse student body at UVI and K-12 students and
teachers in the USVI.