* 0331449
* Do Anoxygenic Aerobic Photoheterotrophs Contribute to the Ecology of the Open Ocean?
* GEO,OCE
* 03/19/2003,12/31/2006
* Zbigniew Kolber, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/2006
* USD 477,257.00

Aerobic anoxygenic photoheterotrophs (AAPs), and their characteristic pigment,
bacteriochloropyll a (BChla), were recently discovered throughout the surface
waters of the open ocean (Kolber, 2000; Kolber, 2001). AAPs comprise upwards of
about 11 % of the total microbial community, they are globally distributed in
the euphotic zone, and display high levels of photosynthetic activity. More than
twenty isolates have been obtained from different ocean basins. These organisms
are facultative photoheterotrophs, and represent a potentially significant, but
hitherto unrecognized component of the marine microbial community. Their
potential role in the ecology of the upper ocean is determined by their
contribution to the energy and carbon fluxes, and by their interactions with
other components of marine ecosystems.

To elucidate this role, this project is investigating mechanisms of
photosynthesis, carbon fixation, and respiration in AAPs, to identify factors
controlling expression of phototrophy vs. heterotrophy, and to estimate the
extent of AAP-specific energy, carbon, and redox under varying environmental
conditions. AAPs are readily cultivated on organic-poor media. The investigators
are establishing a library of the open ocean isolates, and characterizing the
phylogenetic relationship between AAPs from different geographical regions. AAPs
use photosynthesis to produce ATP and to fix CO2. The investigators are
characterizing the photosynthetic properties of AAPs, evaluating the effect of
light on their carbon metabolism, and investigating the effect of photosynthesis
on the incorporation of dissolved organic material (DOM). Where DOM is abundant,
AAPs perform mostly heterotrophic metabolism, respiring the available organic
carbon. When DOM is limited, AAPs synthesize photosynthetic pigments and
reaction centers, shifting their metabolism toward phototrophy. The
investigators are assessing the extent and the factors controlling these
transitions. Unable to oxidize water, AAPs rely on other substrates to serve as
electron donor(s). Although most of the photosynthetic electron transport in
AAPs is cyclic, external electron donors are necessary to replenish the
electrons lost to photosynthetic carbon fixation, or to external electron
acceptors. The researchers are investigating which of the organic/inorganic
reductants present in the upper ocean serve as potential electron donors to
AAPs, and explore the AAP-mediated redox reactions, with particular emphasis on
oxidation of the reduced sulfur species, and reduction of iron and nitrogen
species.

Phototrophy alleviates AAPs' dependence on the organic carbon, reducing the
rates of carbon remineralization in the upper ocean, thus affecting the extent
of new production. If effective in reducing iron and nitrogen species, AAPs will
also affect the physiology of oxygenic phototrophs. By addressing these
questions, this project is providing the most basic knowledge regarding the
potential role of AAPs in the upper ocean ecology.