* 0331237
* Inquiry-Centered Model for Learning with Understanding the Concept of Radiative Forcing in Climate
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Catherine Gautier-Downes, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2006
* USD 153,173.00

Gautier 0331237

This proposal develops an undergraduate-level tool and associated extensible
instruction centered around quantitative inquiry about climate radiative
forcing. Climate radiative forcing is associated with enhanced greehouse effect
gases, cloud and land surface changes, ozone depletion and aerosol concentration
increases. The approach is to use the scientific inquiry process as the main
vehicle to acquire understanding about radiative forcing.

A research-grade radiative transfer model (SBDART,
http://www.crseo.ucsb.edu/esrg/pauls_dir/), will be the centerpiece of this
inquiry-guided instruction. Originally developed for research purposes, the
model has been recently adapted for undergraduate instruction and tested by the
PI in her classroom. An interrogative approach, similar to that used by
scientists and scholars in the production of new knowledge is applied by
students working to acquire and understand an important concept in climate
studies.

A number of "big" questions are developed as a starting point for the
pedagogical activities through which students develop further explanation-
seeking questions. Quantitative answers, based on the application of the model,
and qualitative answers based on scientific information gathered from the web,
are collaboratively constructed by the students. The evaluation activity is
designed to assess the transformation of students' questions, the quality and
nature of information gathered, and the advancement of student competency and
the level of understanding acheived through these activities.

The teaching tools produced by this grant are available through Digital Library
for Earth Science Education (DLESE, http://www.dlese.org/) and the National
Science Digital Library (NSDL, http://www.nsdl.org/).