* 0332132
* NGS: Autnomic Computing Workshop (The Fifth Annual International Workshop on Active Middleware Services - AMS 2003)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Salim Hariri, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 08/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

This is a proposal to organize the Autonomic Computing Workshop (ACW 2003) which
will be held in conjunction with the 12th IEEE International Symposium on High
Performance Distributed Computing (HPDC-12), June 25th, 2003 at Seattle,
Washington and with the 8th Global Grid Forum. More information about the
workshop can be found at http://www.caip.rutgers.edu/ams2003/. The proliferation
of Internet technologies, services and devices, have made the current networked
system designs, and management tools incapable of designing reliable, secure
networked systems and services. In fact, we have reached a level of complexity,
heterogeneity, and dynamism that our information infrastructure is becoming
unmanageable and insecure. Furthermore, current design techniques and software
tools that control and manage the information infrastructure are incapable of
handling its complexity, heterogeneity, uncertainty, and security requirements.
On the other hand, biological systems have developed successful strategies and
techniques to handle these issues. The main goal of the Autonomic Computing
Workshop is establish a world-class forum to investigate the research issues and
enabling technologies toward the convergence of biological technological and
information systems (called Autonomic Computing). Autonomic computing research
will enable the design of the next generation of networked systems and services
that are capable of managing and controlling themselves, and can anticipate
their workloads and automatically adjust the configurations of their resources
to meet the new loads. NSF sponsored the second through the fourth Active
Middleware Services that were held in conjunction with the IEEE High Performance
Distributed Computing Symposiums (HPDC-9 - HPDC-11). These three workshops were
very successful, with invited and contributed research papers presented at each
workshop. The proceedings of the Second AMS Workshop was published by Kluwer
Academic Publishers in 2000 as a book entitled "ACTIVE MIDDLEWARE SERVICES" and
edited by Salim Hariri, Craig A. Lee, and Cauligi S. Raghavendra. The Third and
Fourth Annual AMS workshop proceedings were published by IEEE Computer Society.
The success of the AMS workshops has motivated the organization of the present
workshop which is the fifth workshop in this series . The fifth AMS workshop
will focus on the research issues and challenges facing the development of
autonomic computing systems that have the capabilities of being self-defining,
self-configuring, self-healing, self-optimizing, self-anticipating, being
contextually aware of their environments, are and open.