* 0332862
* GDSE/RES - Programming with a Purpose: An Experimental Investigation on the Role Narrative Plays in Supporting Girls' Understanding of Programming Concepts
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Dorothy Bennett, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2005
* USD 465,953.00

The Center for Children and Technology at the Education Development Center will
conduct a two-year experimental research project to systematically investigate
the power of narrative in enabling girls to learn key programming concepts and
skills. The hypothesis is that when girls are given the opportunity to learn
programming situated in a meaningful narrative context their understanding of
core programming skills will be enhanced. The experiment consists of teaching an
introductory programming curricular unit to a treatment and control group of
ninth grade students attending computer application classes in a predominantly
Latino urban high school, Union Hill High School in New
Jersey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basis of the curricular unit involves students
using a research tool built on top of an object-oriented programming language,
such as JAVA, which is easily customizable. The research tool will consist of a
flexible drag and drop software environment that uses the metaphor of
choreographing ice-skating routines to make the task of learning computer
programming more familiar to girls. In the treatment group, the research tool
will enable users to design ice-skating performances by combining and shaping
various routine elements into an executable, cohesive program. In the control
class, students will use the same research tool and assemble identical
subroutines as the treatment class, but instead of a graphic interface that
shows skaters dancing in a rink, the research tool will be customized to enable
students to work with abstract shapes moving across the screen (as in a screen
saver). Using pre-post surveys, clinical interviews, and transfer tasks, the
study will investigate whether girls' understanding of core programming skills
and concepts (i.e., sequential thinking, understanding parameters and variables,
and the structure of code) are increased when exposed to programming tasks
within a rich narrative context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to research,
programming is not intrinsically interesting to many girls. They are more likely
to be attracted to learning skills situated in a meaningful context, and
especially as a way to solve a genuine social, personal or environmental
problem. With the advent of object-oriented programming languages (such as
JAVA), it is possible to make programming more accessible to girls since object-
oriented languages allow one to program by manipulating the relationships
between objects in a narrative context rather than executing abstract, linear
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader aim of the study is to investigate
whether girls can learn as much or better if a traditional programming
curriculum is reverse-engineered to provide a meaningful context for the
investigation of core programming skills and processes (i.e., reading, using,
modifying, and implementing aspects of code) advocated by the Advanced Placement
Computer Science curriculum and the Association for Computing Machinery.
Findings from this study will help drive the future development and reform of
computer science curricula for youth, particularly as Advanced Placement
guidelines move toward the use of JAVA programming as the basis for introductory
computer science at the high school level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;