* 0332898
* GDSE/RES: Realtime, Applied Programming for Underrepresented Students' Early Literacy
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2008
* Kenneth Perlin, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 10/31/2008
* USD 897,724.00

New York University and University of Oregon Eugene propose a three-year
research project to build a successful software environment for realtime,
applied programming for underrepresented students' early literacy (RAPUNSEL) in
order to address the critical shortage of women in Computer Science (CS) careers
and degree programs. The goal is to develop an engaging system with which to
teach computer programming to middle school girls. The system is designed to
become a scalable, approachable simulation game that appeals to girls' sense of
communication, curiosity, and play while boosting confidence and developing
programming expertise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project aims to
study three areas related to gender and CS. First, how do the design of the
programming software environment and the role of the peer group within such an
environment affects girls' motivation and engagement to learn programming?
Second, what is the depth to which middle school girls are able to learn
programming concepts such as procedural thinking? Third, can we increase girls'
overall confidence and self-efficacy levels in a software
environment?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RAPUNSEL addresses these issues through the
design of a JAVA-based networked play environment in which girls can alter and
create original characters, scenes, and scripts to build collaborative
narratives online. Using 4 web-based modules, girls will learn programming
progressively through manipulating the objects in the modules and receiving
immediate feedback. RAPUNSEL allows girls to share their creations and gradually
gain access to programming through guided hint systems in the form of character
agents. No previous initiatives have focused specifically on the tiered use of a
commonly used programming languages for middle school girls within an online
software environment, and no other project has empowered girls to create their
own programmatic objects for others to use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will
build prototypes to fit into a larger framework for what they call "unfoldable
environments" which motivate girls to unwrap the characters and worlds presented
to them, manipulate them, and create new objects and environments. They will
work with small groups of Oregon and New York girls as users, testers,
informants, and design partners. Large-scale assessment will occur in the Eugene
Oregon 4J school district.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team includes
experienced, award-winning scientists, artists, designers, and educators with a
unique blend of academic and industry experience. Industry-related consultants
on the project include Will Wright, the founder of Maxis Entertainment and
creator of The Sims games, and Lindsay Gupton, Executive Studio Director of Know
Wonder, maker of the Harry Potter, American Girl, and Magic Schoolbus games.
Educators serving as consultants are middle school teachers in Eugene, Oregon as
well as the 4J school district in Eugene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When completed,
RAPUNSEL will be distributed online as a user-friendly environment and will also
be available as open source for other researchers to use. It has potential to
influence technology education at the middle school level, addressing the
national need to invite more female students to develop technical and design
skills.&lt;br/&gt;