* 0332723
* A Center for Product and Process Development and Commercialization for Small U.S. Manufacturers
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Edwin Miller, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/2008
* USD 600,000.00

0332723&lt;br/&gt;Hoberock&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to Oklahoma State
University to support the activity described below for 36 months. The proposal
was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF-03521).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include Oklahoma State University (Lead Institution), Oklahoma Alliance for
Manufacturing Excellence, Oklahoma Technology Commercialization Center, Langston
University, Southwest Oklahoma State University, Meridian Technology Center,
Klutts Equipment Corporation, Unibridge Corporation, and Bermuda
King.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this partnership is to
facilitate the transformation of knowledge into innovations that will create new
wealth and strengthen the regional economy in the area. University partners
provide the research and development and the technologically literate workforce
and the company partners provide the manufacturing and commercialization.
Collaborative product development by the partners is one of the major focuses
for the award. The Oklahoma Technology Commercialization Center is the location
where faculty, students and industry partners go from product conception to
prototype development to manufacturing engineering to manufacturing and
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Oklahoma has a very large number of small rural manufacturing
firms that cannot afford the research and development, state-of-the-art rapid
prototyping, and manufacturing engineering needed to remain competitive in the
global marketplace. The university collaboration provides this capability and a
technologically literate workforce that has learned to work with small
manufacturers. Oklahoma sees its economic future tied to manufacturing in the
rural areas. The proposed effort of knowledge transfer, workforce education and
training, and establishment of a strong enabling infrastructure for sustainable
innovation will provide jobs and a workforce to perform those jobs will result
in economic and societal well being in the state. The effort will improve the
competitiveness of the existing manufacturing sector and bring new manufacturing
companies into the state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
activity lies in advances in knowledge through fundamental research in
engineering in general and manufacturing in particular and in providing a more
industrially-relevant educational experience for the students through working
with the small manufacturers from product conception through design and
prototyping to manufacturing engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the activity include educational diversity, educational outreach to
industry, and regional economic development to ensure long-term sustainability
of economic and societal well being. Underrepresented groups will participate in
the activities of the award.&lt;br/&gt;