* 0332583
* Partnership for Innovation:  Economic Excellence in Photonic Materials
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* John Ballato, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2007
* USD 599,733.00

0332583 Ballato

This award is to Clemson University to support the activity described below for
36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-03521).

Partners The partners include Clemson University (Lead Institution), University
of North Carolina at Charlotte, Western Carolina University, Greenville
Technical College, TriCounty Technical College, Alcoa-Fujikura, Bell South,
Cisco Systems, Kigre, Pirelli Communications Cables and Systems North America,
Tetramer Technologies, Carolina Crescent Coalition, Greenville Chamber of
Commerce, Optical Society of America, Upstate Alliance, Upstate Council on
Economic Development, and Ottawa Photonics Cluster.

The goal of this project is to develop and grow the photonics industry in South
Carolina by: (1) developing an expert workforce, (2) improving transfer of
academic innovation to industry, and (3) providing enhanced entrepreneurial
resources to support the industry. The project is designed to promote transfer
of new technology from university to the photonics industry, to develop a
workforce to meet the needs of the emerging industry, to promote inclusion of
underrepresented populations in the high tech industry, and to have a sustained
impact on the local economy.

Potential Economic Impact The economic fortunes of South Carolina have been tied
to agriculture and textiles for many years. Automation in agriculture and
globalization of the textiles industry have depressed employment opportunities
and suppressed economic growth for the citizens of the state. The award fosters
development of a skilled workforce in photonics and provides transfer of new
knowledge based on research at the universities to companies to create jobs for
the workforce. The subsequent economic well being will be a major outcome of the
activities of the award.

The intellectual merit of the activity lies in its focus on establishing an
extended regional partnership including researchers, educators, industrial
partners, economic development groups, and entrepreneurs that can help South
Carolina create the innovation infrastructure needed to realize economic
benefits from the photonics research already being performed at Clemson
University and the other partner institutions.

The broader impacts of the activity include increasing the content of science,
engineering, and business in the education of students at all levels from K-12,
2-year, 4-year, and post-graduate schools in the region, as well as raising the
wages in the region by creating higher paying high tech jobs in the emerging
photonics sector. Underrepresented groups will participate in all levels of the
program.

