* 0332278
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Environmental Versus Social Contingencies and the Origins of Irrigation Farming in Highland Southwest Arabia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Joy McCorriston, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 11,998.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Joy McCorriston, Michael Harrower will gather and
analyze data on the archaeological remains of irrigation in Yemen's remote
southern highlands. Archaeologists and historians know well the great Arabian
city states that flourished on the caravan traffic in frankincense and myrrh.
But the small-scale communities that preceded these incense kingdoms did so with
the help of water management technologies that remain poorly known. In order for
the southern Arabians to adopt agriculture from adjacent regions, they required
a means of harnessing scarce water sources, and they drew on substantive
knowledge of local conditions to do so. As we learn more about the development
of irrigation technologies in Arabia, we can better understand the mix of
environmental and social factors that propelled ancient societies toward the
high Arabian civilizations out of which Islam and its charismatic leadership
expanded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates the logistical and
organizational requirements of southwest Arabian small-scale spate irrigation,
which occurs when farmers concentrate the infrequent flash floods of modest
water catchments onto a small patch of arable ground and raise a crop. Such
technology-its introduction, adaption, and development-can be examined in the
archaeological record by using several strategies in the highlands where
catchments are small. First, the researchers will conduct archaeological survey
assisted by Global Positioning System (GPS) technology and image maps generated
from satellite images. Such images can be digitally manipulated to highlight
differences in ground conditions (soil, vegetation, slope, for example), and
these differences point archaeologists toward the most promising locations to
find irrigation structures. Where irrigation structures can be found,
environmental variables also offer a means of comparing and compiling the
factors critical in ancient farmers' decisions to build and operate them. For
this purpose, the project will construct a multivariate GIS model of irrigation
structure locations. Archaeologists assume that by comparing site locations with
non site locations, one can identify the environmental variables that attracted
(and repelled) human farmers. Non-environmental reasons (social behavior) also
played a role in early farming, and one expects that these social behaviors
contribute to the factors unidentified by GIS analysis. Finally, to better
understand social behavior, Harrower will conduct ethnoarchaeological studies of
traditional small-scale irrigation in Yemen today, emphasizing the decisions and
social constraints in innovating, building, maintaining, and operating
particular types of water-management structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tony
Allen, a leading economic specialist in the Middle East, has said that
contemporary conflicts in the Middle East are fights for water. There are
therefore significant lessons to be drawn from ancient challenges and solutions
embedded in the unique histories of the region, lessons that may prove useful in
proposing and evaluating future solutions to water crisis, and by extension,
some political crises. The research also fosters positive working relationships
among Canadian, American and Yemeni researchers at a time when research
cooperation can help bridge cultural and political divides. Further, by
providing graduate training and a classroom model of ongoing research, this
project strengthens US education in the Middle
East.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;