* 0332687
* Montgomery Bioscience Park
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2010
* Hercules Pinkney, Montgomery College
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 11/30/2010
* USD 600,000.00

0332687 Pinkney

This award is to Montgomery College Rockville to support the activity described
below for 36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships
for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-03521).

Partners The partners include Montgomery College Rockville (Lead Institution),
University of Maryland College Park, Montgomery County Public Schools,
Montgomery County Department of Economic Development, MedImmune, Celera, RRD
International, GenVec, Bio Reliance, Toucan Capital, and Emerging Technology
Partners.

This project seeks to ensure constant generation of well-educated and highly
trained scientists, technicians, entrepreneurs for a scientifically and
technologically literate workforce capable of enabling the growth and
competitiveness of the regional biotechnology industry. The effort seeks to
develop a world-class biotechnology education and training program that will
serve all levels of the education continuum, maximize the synergy between
academia and the businesses in the biotech sector in the region, integrate the
education programs with the biosciences business park and incubator, increase
the participation of underrepresented groups in the biotech workforce in the
region, and track the participation and success rates of students and industry.

Potential Economic Impact The biotechnology industry in the United States has
doubled in size in the last decade. The global public companies generated
revenues of $35 billion, spent $16 billion I research and development, and
employed more that 175,000 people in 2001. More that 70% of the revenues were
generated in the United States. Most of these companies are clustered
geographically where there are academic institutions, a technologically literate
workforce and (sometimes) federal government research laboratories. The Maryland
region surrounding Montgomery College has a biotechnology cluster that will
continue to need a well-educated workforce to remain competitive.

The intellectual merit of the activity lies in creation of an integrated
education partnership to provide a workforce from K-12 through advanced degrees,
which will provide a workforce that remains at the stat-of-the-art in this
rapidly evolving biotechnology sector.

The proposed consortium broadens the participation of different types of
educational and research institutions and an even more diverse population of
students in the biotechnology workforce.