* 0332270
* US-India Workshop: Commutative Algebra, Algebraic Geometry and Combinatorics, Bangalore, India, December 2003
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Hema Srinivasan, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2004
* USD 30,000.00

Description: This award supports the US-India Workshop: Commutative Algebra,
Algebraic Geometry and Combinatorics, India, December 2003. Professors Hema
Srinivasan, University of Missouri and Verma Jugal, Indian Institute of
Technology, Bombay are the organizers of this two-part workshop. The first
segment, a combinatorial and computational algebra school, will take place at
the Harish-Chandra Research Institute (HRI), Allahabad, December 8-13, 2003; a
complementary second segment is a special session of the Joint Meeting of the
American and Indian Mathematical Societies, Bangalore, December 16-20, 2003,
which focuses on mainstream commutative algebra and algebraic geometry. The
objective is to bring together researchers and students in commutative algebra,
algebraic geometry and combinatorics to develop closer interactions among
research groups in the U.S. and India working on related problems. The
computational school and the special session on Commutative Algebra and
Algebraic Geometry are designed for young/junior scientists to learn new
techniques and to present research results to their peers. &lt;br/&gt;Scope:
India mathematicians have made significant contributions in commutative algebra,
algebraic geometry, and combinatorics. This activity will be valuable for the
professional development of both junior and senior scientists and will open
doors for future interactions, collaborations, and learning. . Full support is
provided for the workshop organizers and for 12 young scientists; partial
support is provided for senior mathematicians and recognized leaders in the
field. The NSF Division of Mathematical Sciences is providing cofunding for this
workshop.