* 0332971
* Microbial Observatories: Second Annual Microbial Observatories Meeting: Building a National Network, to be held Fall 2003 in Arlington, VA
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Eric Triplett, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2005
* USD 48,165.00

Microbes are responsible for many processes that are vital to biosphere
function. The National Science Foundation (NSF) Microbial Observatories (MO)
program supports integrative studies that explore novel microorganisms, their
interactions in consortia and communities, and aspects of their physiology,
biochemistry and genomics in relationship to the processes that they carry out
in the environment. Investigators funded through the MO program use a variety of
molecular biology and microbiology techniques to directly examine microbial
communities. This work has resulted in the discovery of novel microbial
lineages, increased our understanding of the complexity and diversity of
microbial communities, and helped to link microbial taxa to critical ecosystem
processes in a wide variety of natural environments, ranging from the extremes
of Antarctic lakes or Yellowstone hot springs to more ubiquitous environments
such as agricultural and forest soils, and marine or freshwater systems.

A scientific workshop that brings together researchers funded through the MO
program is proposed as a means to 1) share new findings and ideas on sampling,
new methods, database linkages, environmental genomics and metagenomics, and
synthesis; 2) identify specific, formal ways that MO activities can be
coordinated nationally over the long term; and 3) explore ideas and directions
for the future of microbial life research. The specific objective of this work
is to discuss ways to link activities of Microbial Observatories projects
through a coordinated network that will build synthesis and synergy between all
MOs. In addition to the MO-funded researchers, postdoctoral associates who are
currently funded through the NSF Microbial Biology postdoctoral program,
including underrepresented minorities in science, have been invited to attend
this workshop.