* 0332115
* Collaborative Research:  Explaining the Eruption of Huge Volumes of Magma-Sediment Mixtures Preceding Flood Basalt Effusion, Karoo Lip, South Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 09/30/2002,06/30/2004
* Ian Skilling, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2004
* USD 127,400.00

Skilling&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106103&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The onset of flood basaltic
volcanism is frequently explosive but this explosive volcanism is often
overlooked with respect to the voluminous flood basalts that follow. We document
here unusual voluminous basaltic breccias that predate and are interbedded with
the earliest flood basalts of the Karoo Large Igneous Province (LIP), South
Africa. No detailed studies or facies models for these deposits exist, nor can
existing models for explosive volcanism explain them. The Karoo breccias have an
outcrop area of &gt;1000km2, a total volume of at least 500km3, which can be
divided into flow units with volumes which may be as high as 27km3. The breccias
consist of juvenile vitric clasts in a matrix dominated by sedimentary sand
grains. These sediment-magma mixtures infill large caldera-like collapse
structures from which they were probably erupted, and also form outflow sheets
interbedded with the earliest Karoo lavas. Juvenile clasts in the breccias are
very similar to those of associated fluidal peperites suggesting a continuum of
mixing processes from the subsurface to surface. The collapse structures contain
bodies of dolerite juxtaposed with large blocks of fused sandstone, suggesting
prolonged intervals of efficient heat transfer.&lt;br/&gt;This study will look
at pre-eruptive, eruptive and emplacement mechanisms that led to the production
of the Karoo lavas, by studying and comparing infill and outflow facies, and by
looking at proximal to distal variations within a representative outflow sheet.
We will develop and test the hypothesis that mixing was preceded by underplating
of large areas of wet unconsolidated sand by sustained and constantly
replenished high-level sills of basalt. Mixing and eruption may have been
accompanied by upwelling of gravitationally unstable slurries, or jetting of
magma-sediment mixtures issuing from close-spaced, but ephemeral vents. We will
use detailed geological mapping and facies analysis to infer emplacement
processes and SEM and image analysis of juvenile clasts to constrain pre-
eruptive degassing and fragmentation mechanisms. In year 1, we will study the
infill sequence of the Sterkspruit Complex, selected because, in addition to
excellent exposure, it contains an unusual near-vent deposit on its margin. In
year 2, we will extend the study beyond the Complex to characterize outflow
deposition and place the complex in a regional context. We will use chemical
stratigraphy to construct the interplay between effusive and explosive phase,
and will constrain this work by Ar/Ar age determinations.&lt;br/&gt;The study
has implications for the onset of eruption in all flood basalt provinces.
Similar deposits are currently under study, by White and students, for the
stratigraphically equivalent Ferrar LIP of Antarctica. Little studied voluminous
breccias also occur at the base of the flood basalts in the East Greenland area
of the North Atlantic Tertiary LIP, and in the Siberian Traps LIP. Models for
the global impact of flood basalts are predicated only on the effusive
component. This study will add data that will enable refinement of these
models.&lt;br/&gt;