* 0332765
* GDSE/DIS:  HER-STORY:   Women Pioneers in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics--Then and Now
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Mary Darcy, WAMC Northeast Public Radio
* Standard Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 11/30/2004
* USD 105,484.00

WAMC will produce 20-30 (bi-weekly) 2-minute radio modules on historical and
contemporary women in STEM fields and careers (Women STEM Pioneers in History);
and 6 (bi-monthly) 7-15 minute radio segments covering current gender diversity
in STEM mentoring and professional development programs, with a priority on
coverage of programs serving minority women. These segments will have a specific
focus on program participants (Creating the Women STEM Pioneers of the Future).
Both series will be produced for national radio broadcast and targeted
dissemination to young women, parents, educators and institutions (with a
priority on reaching minority populations) via the Internet, print media, and
distribution of tapes and CDs. The first all new Women in STEM radio website
will also be created with audio archives of the radio programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed project lies in the
research, production and presentation of quality radio programs that: 1) depict
the lives of successful women in STEM fields and careers; and 2) provide in-
depth coverage of successful and replicable projects addressing gender gaps in
STEM fields. Multiple venues will maximize access to the shows, for use in
formal and informal educational settings for adults and students. The broader
impacts of this work include reaching and educating the general public and
target audiences nationwide, providing them with information and tools for
promoting greater participation of women--including those from traditionally
underrepresented populations--in STEM education and careers. &lt;br/&gt;