* 0332819
* Preparatory NSF Workshop for the EU/US International Conference on Aging, Disability, and Independence, June 26-27, 2003, Royal Academy of Engineering, London, England
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Abdelsalam Helal, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 02/29/2004
* USD 54,500.00

0332819 Helal The EU/US International Conference on Aging, Disability, and
Independence (Washington, DC, December 4-6, 2003) is comprised of seven tracks:
High Technology; Low Technology; Consumer Prospective; Home
Modification/Universal Design; Injury Prevention; Business Perspective;
Transportation. The specific objectives of the Preparatory Workshop, June 26-27,
2003, Royal Academy of Engineering, London, England, are 1) to develop the Smart
Home portion of the technical program for the High Technology Track of the
International Conference, and 2) to identify strategies for future research and
development. Support for United Kingdom participants in the workshop is provided
by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council and is hosted by
the UK Focus for Biomedical Engineering.

The EU/US International Conference builds on two White House initiatives: the
October 2000 White House Forum on Technology for Successful Aging, and the
current New Freedom Initiative. In the United Kingdom the EQUAL (Extend Quality
Life) activity has much the same purpose. The year 2003 is the European (EU)
Year of People with Disabilities wherein progress is expected to be driven
towards achieving equal rights for people with disabilities. Both the
Preparatory Workshop and the International Conference are elements of the EU
program.

The EU/US International Conference will focus on research, practice, and policy
in areas outlined in the New Freedom Initiative. In recognition of the
challenges faced by the aging of our population, the Preparatory Workshop and
the EU/US International Conference bring together experts in technology,
research, development, and applications to document the state-of- the-science
and to identify research needs in Smart Home technologies.

The EU/US International Conference web site is
http://www.asaging.org/icadi/03/index.cfm