* 0333843
* Collaborative Research:  Developmental, Molecular and Evolutionary Analysis of Chaetognaths:  A Deuterostome-Like Ecdysozoan
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Kenneth Halanych, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 04/30/2007
* USD 135,484.00

0236479&lt;br/&gt;Halanych&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chaetognaths, or
"arrow worms", are one of the most abundant marine invertebrates found in all
the world's seas. The phylogenetic position of this ubiquitous group of animals
is currently unknown. Until recently, chaetognaths were considered to be basal
deuterostomes based on developmental features such as their radial cleavage
program, classic enterocoeley, posterior position of the blastopore, and
tripartite adult body plan. New molecular evidence, including Hox gene data
presented in this proposal, has suggested that chaetognaths are not
deuterostomes but basal protostomes closely allied with ecdysozoans such as
arthropods and nematodes. In fact, chaetognaths are now thought to be one of the
most pivotal and understudied groups of metazoan animals for gaining insight
into the evolution of protostome body plans. Only a handful of cellular and
molecular investigations of chaetognath development have ever been made,
however. Drs. Martindale and Halanych's proposal describes a comprehensive and
multidisciplinary set of approaches designed to characterize how chaetognath
embryos "work". Using both modern developmental (intracellular cell lineage
labeling and laser cell deletion experiments) and molecular (cloning, in situ
hybridization) techniques, Martindale and Halanych will collect vital
information on the normal development of these interesting animals, and be able
to and examine the conservation of genetic regulatory mechanisms in the Metazoa.
In addition, techniques of gene discovery (EST screening) will provide valuable
new information on the ancestral mechanisms of body plan evolution. These data
will not only be important to determine the phylogenetic position of
chaetognaths, but to also provide molecular and developmental insight in to the
evolution of the ecdysozoan clade, and the "evolveability" of developmental
programs. Chaetognaths could be the most informative and tractable basal
invertebrate system available that will allow an understanding of the evolution
of the nematode and arthropod clades, the two most genetically heavily studied
group of animals on earth.&lt;br/&gt;