* 0333345
* Fundamental and Applied Aspects of Miniemulsions
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2003,05/31/2008
* E Sudol, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/2008
* USD 323,975.00

Research

Miniemulsions are a special class of emulsion (typically a dispersion of
submicroscopic droplets of oil in water), which allow the preparation of
materials (polymers, composites, encapsulated particles, etc.) that can not be
made by the conventional industrial emulsion techniques. These materials can
have applications ranging from the mundane but important (e.g., adhesives and
coatings) to the exotic (e.g., biomedical and optoelectronic devices). However,
a crucial aspect of the understanding of how these miniemulsions are transformed
into the final products has been lacking because of the difficulty in observing
such small size species (often in the nanosize range); the usual measurement
methods disturb the size of the species simply by the act of trying to measure
them. Solutions to this dilemma (some involving recently developed technology)
and their application will be explored in the fundamental aspect of this
research.

The application of miniemulsions to the preparation of new materials will be
explored with some emphasis on unique photonic devices. The special ability of
miniemulsions to control various properties of the materials (including size,
composition, surface properties) will be exploited in this research.

Broad Impact

The fundamental work is expected to have a direct and substantial impact on the
ability to apply miniemulsion technology to the development of unique materials
both in this work at Lehigh and for others, particularly in industry. As water-
based systems, they can promote environmental responsibility in large volume
applications such as coatings and adhesives. Small-volume, high-value materials
are envisioned in drug delivery, medical diagnostics, and photonics and
optoelectronics.

The rapid dissemination of the results will be ensured; annual presentations to
members companies of the Emulsion Polymers Institute's Industrial Liaison
Program, as well as lectures at short courses (Advances in Emulsion
Polymerization and Latex Technology; at Lehigh and overseas) designed for
industrial research scientists and engineers will include significant findings,
in addition to the expected presentations at international meetings and
publications in prominent journals.