* 0333427
* AEESP Symposium:  On Frontiers in Assessment Methods for the Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Deborah Swackhamer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 08/31/2004
* USD 70,673.00

0333427 Brezonik This proposal requests funds to organize and conduct a national
symposium called Frontiers in Assessment Methods for the Environment (FAME),
which is being sponsored by the Association of Environmental Engineering and
Science Professors (AEESP). FAME will focus on the groundbreaking advances being
made in environmental measurement systems and assessment methods, which promise
to revolutionize the ways scientists and engineers study and solve complicated
environmental problems over a range of scales. The symposium is being organized
for the AEESP primarily by faculty in the environmental engineering program from
the University of Minnesota and will be held in Minneapolis, August 10-13,
2003.&lt;br/&gt;The symposium is an outgrowth of a series of workshops held to
develop CLEANER, an initiative in the environmental engineering area of the NSF.
CLEANER stands for Collaborative Large-scale Engineering Analysis Network for
Environmental Research. It is envisioned as a networked infrastructure of
environmental field facilities to enable formulation and development of
engineering and policy options for the restoration and protection of
environmental resources. Thus far, three workshops have been held on CLEANER: at
Stanford University in December, 2001; the University of Minnesota in October,
2002; and Duke University in February, 2003.&lt;br/&gt;In a result of these
workshops, leaders of AEESP became aware of the need for a broad symposium to
bring together engineers and scientists who are making groundbreaking advances
in measurement and assessment technologies, modeling, data processing and
networking tools and the engineers and scientists from academic institutions who
can use these techniques to revolutionize field research and develop more
effective research in environmental engineering science.&lt;br/&gt;The symposium
thus will include individuals from the disciplines responsible for technological
advances in measurement/assessment methods and potential users of this
technology in the environmental engineering/science community. These advances
include sensors for chemical and biological contaminants, in situ instruments,
new modeling techniques to analyze physical, chemical, and biological processes
in complex systems, and advances in computer systems to&lt;br/&gt;take advantage
of the large databases generated by new technologies. Symposium participants
will have an opportunity to learn about proposed NSF initiatives for
instrumented and networked environmental research facilities, such as CLEANER,
that are a natural outgrowth of these advances.&lt;br/&gt;The symposium will be
attended by engineers and scientists from academic institutions across the
United States, as well as representatives of federal and state agencies that
conduct environmental research involving field investigations, and engineers
from the private sector. A report summarizing results of the symposium will be
prepared by the steering committee and submitted to the Environmental
Engineering Program in NSF by December, 2003.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
symposium will bring together leaders from a variety of disciplines at the
forefront of developing measurement and analysis systems and researchers from
the environmental engineering and sciences communities who will be applying
these advances in exciting new ways to improve research into large-scale
environmental problems and their solutions.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
symposium will be highly interdisciplinary and will promote an exchange of ideas
and information on cutting-edge technology across these disciplines that will
promote the development of research programs aimed at solving some of society
most pressing and complicated environmental problems. Our previous CLEANER
workshop was highly effective in involving women and members of under-
represented minorities, and we will emphasize this involvement in the symposium
FAME.&lt;br/&gt;