* 0333184
* Student and Young Faculty Support to Attend the 34th Semiconductor Interface Specialists Conference; Arlington, VA; December 4-6, 2003
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2003,11/30/2003
* Robert Wallace, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 11/30/2003
* USD 5,000.00

A conference on semiconductor/insulator interfaces, and the interaction between
materials science, device physics, and technology will be held December 4-6,
2003 in Arlington, VA. The conference is interdisciplinary, and will cover many
areas of MOS science and technology, including: alternative and high-k gate
dielectric materials; physics of thin dielectrics and their interfaces; gate-
dielectric conduction and breakdown; silicon carbide and its interfaces;
physical and electrical characterization of si/sio2 interfaces; micro-roughness
measurement, modeling, and device-related effects; hot carrier, plasma damage
and radiation effects; nitrogen-containing oxides and stacked interfaces;
surface cleaning technology and effects on dielectrics and interfaces; novel
oxidation, deposition, and etching techniques; and theory of oxide and interface
defects. An important goal of the conference is to provide an environment that
encourages interplay between scientific and technological issues. The program is
organized as a workshop-style conference to provide a forum for device
engineers, solid state physicists, and materials scientists to discuss topics of
common interest both formally through invited and contributed presentations, and
informally during a variety of events including a poster presentation session.
Objectives are to stimulate communications among the broad community of
researchers addressing semiconductor/insulator interfaces and their relationship
to technology. A variety of disciplinary backgrounds-chemistry, physics,
engineering and materials science, is represented and contrributes positively to
the intellectual content of the Conference. Along with the opportunity to assess
the field and future directions, it is expected that new ties will be
established between universities, research institutions, and industry. %%% An
evaluation of the progress and status of semiconductor/insulator interfaces and
related device issues along with current assessments of the most important
developments will be of significant value to the understanding and enhanced
utilization of electronic materials in computing, data processing, and
communications. ***