* 0333036
* IDLP: International Collaboration to Advance User-oriented Technologies for Managing and Distributing Images in Digital Libraries
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Ching-chih Chen, Simmons University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2010
* USD 584,006.00

This project will develop user-oriented image management of distribution
technologies for digital libraries. An interdisciplinary team of computer and
information scientists from US, China, and Taiwan will investigate efficient
ways to search digital collections of images using an integrated approach. The
US team of researchers consists of faculty members and students of Simmons
College, University of Pennsylvania, and The Pennsylvania State University.
Several technology areas will be studied: (1) ontology-based image retrieval,
(2) machine learning based image retrieval including object-based partial image
search, (3) automatic image annotation, and (4) intellectual property (IP)
protection techniques. The team will use real-world digital library datasets to
develop user-oriented technologies suitable for practical deployment. Notably,
the research will utilize an existing collection consisting of a large quantity
of images associated with the first Emperor of China of all types of resolution
and with enormous cultural significance as well as the existing rich descriptive
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance understanding of
digital imagery management and distribution technologies. It is likely to result
in more efficient and effective methods for retrieving images from large
collections. It will provide means to decrease labor-intensive activities by
providing automatic image annotations. It will enable more willing networking of
quality image collections in distributed locations with the access model and IP
techniques to be developed by the project. The project has significance for
addressing the issue of user-oriented image-related technologies in a general
way. The resulting techniques can be applied to other subject contents as well
as technology-driven domains, such as computer
vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the positive broader impacts will be
enhancement of the international infrastructure for digital library research,
providing larger-scale universal access to culture and heritages than what is
possible now, and expanding the participation of the global digital library
research community. This project will also address the national need for
scientists by training interdisciplinary graduate students and by offering new
interdisciplinary courses for undergraduate students. This international
partnership will promote the involvement of small college and minority students
in this type of advanced multidisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;