* 0333402
* Collaborative Project: Digital Educational Resources in Microbial Ecology, Evolution and Diversity  (DERMEED-1)
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2007
* David Mogk, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Daphne Y. Rainey
* 10/31/2007
* USD 471,732.00

DERMEED-1 is a definitive and expanding educational resource providing expert
information about microorganisms for a diverse community of educators and
students. Its scope covers microbial evolution, diversity and ecology and life
in extreme environments. This collaborative project (Woods Hole Marine
Biological Laboratory and Montana State University) draws together researchers
with strong and previously independent track records in developing web-mediated
educational resources, and it fills an important niche in the NSDL, bridging the
fields of molecular biology, genomics, microbial ecology, and Earth system
science. In addition, it addresses curricular needs for instructional resources
in these areas as well as the public's interest in the diversity and occurrences
of life in all its forms. The portal is served by the Bay Paul Center of the
Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, and builds on earlier contributions as
part of the NASA Astrobiology Institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DERMEED-1 is
aggregating and disseminating collections of images, data, scientific
contributions from related projects (e.g. micro*scope, Tree of Life), and making
available the Taxonomic Name Server - a mechanism to handle taxonomic metadata -
through the NSDL network. In addition, thematic collections of instructional
materials are being developed, using DLESE cataloging practices, as an
educational overlay to these databases. These resources augment curriculum
requirements from K-16 and serve the needs of public outreach organizations
(museums, national parks), or those committed to life-long learning. Selection
of instructional resources is being driven by pedagogic best practices that
provide resources to meet the needs of the community of users. The co-
development of collections of scientific resources (images, data) and
instructional resources (thematic collections) is significantly addressing NSF's
goal of integration of research and education. DERMEED-1 provides educational
resources along many dimensions of microbiology for learning by many audiences;
adds value to scientific resources by repurposing them for educational use;
links materials and resources across the life and physical sciences; and
contributes to the development of information systems (e.g outlinking) that are
broadly applicable in the NSDL.