* 0333451
* IGERT: Vision and Learning in Humans and Machines
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2010
* Karen Dobkins, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 09/30/2010
* USD 3,663,975.00

Consider creating (a) a computer system to help physicians make a diagnosis
using all of a patient's medical data and images along with millions of case
histories; (b) intelligent buildings and cars that are aware of their occupants
activities; (c) personal digital assistants that watch and learn your habits --
not only gathering information from the web but recalling where you had left
your keys; or (d) a computer tutor that watches a child as she performs a
science experiment. Each of these scenarios requires machines that can see and
learn, and while there have been tremendous advances in computer vision and
computational learning, current computer vision and learning systems for many
applications (such as face recognition) are still inferior to the visual and
learning capabilities of a toddler. Meanwhile, great strides in understanding
visual recognition and learning in humans have been made with psychophysical and
neurophysiological experiments. The intellectual merit of this proposal is its
focus on creating novel interactions between the four areas of: computer and
human vision, and human and machine learning. We believe these areas are
intimately intertwined, and that the synergy of their simultaneous study will
lead to breakthroughs in all four domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our goal in this
IGERT is therefore to train a new generation of scientists and engineers who are
as versed in the mathematical and physical foundations of computer vision and
computational learning as they are in the biological and psychological basis of
natural vision and learning. On the one hand, students will be trained to
propose a computational model for some aspect of biological vision and then
design experiments (fMRI, single cell recordings, psychophysics) to validate
this model. On the other hand, they will be ready to expand the frontiers of
learning theory and embed the resulting techniques in real-world machine vision
applications. The broader impact of this program will be the development of a
generation of scholars who will bring new tools to bear upon fundamental
problems in human and computer vision, and human and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will develop a new curriculum that introduces
new cross-disciplinary courses to complement the current offerings. In addition,
students accepted to the program will go through a two-week boot camp, before
classes start, where they will receive intensive training in machine learning
and vision using MatLab, perceptual psychophysics, and brain imaging. We will
balance on-campus training with summer internships in
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year of the program, awards
are being made to institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;