* 0333069
* NSDL: Towards Reusable and Shareable Courseware: Topic Maps-Based Digital Libraries
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Darina Dicheva, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 06/30/2006
* USD 121,895.00

The effectiveness of instructors and efficiency of learners engaged in open-
learning and teaching tasks in Web-based course support environments depend
crucially on the support they receive: for learners in retrieving relevant
information to perform their learning tasks and for instructors in creating and
maintaining online teaching and learning material. Two groups of related
problems concern correspondingly findability of learning resources and
reusability and shareability of digital educational repositories. A solution to
these problems is only viable if the digital content of the repositories is
standards-based. Standardization of e-learning repositories should be addressed
not only from a technological perspective but also from a knowledge perspective.

This project provides a path to better understanding and solving some problems
related to efficient retrieval, sharing, reuse, and interchange of discipline-
specific repositories of learning objects on the Web. An in-depth analysis of
the application of the new ISO standard, Topic Maps, within the framework of
NSDL reveals how it compares to other Semantic Web solutions along similar
dimensions. The concept-based architecture of digital course libraries provides
grounds for efficient context-based retrieval of learning resources as well as
for deeper understanding of the ontological structure of the specific subject
domain. The topic maps-based implementation of the architecture provides a
unifying framework for standards-based knowledge and information representation
and management, which implies reusability, shareability, and interoperability of
the learning content. The developed environment for supporting ontology-aware
digital course libraries offers an alternative solution to courseware authors
and users, which in some cases could meet better their needs.

This project impacts Web-based educational systems and digital libraries
communities including designers, developers, and users (instructors, authors) of
such systems, and through them on learners involved in various forms of
education - formal, informal, and lifelong learning. It promotes the use of the
new ISO standard Topic Maps for educational purposes and provides insight about
the role that ontologies can play in digital libraries and instructional
technology.

This software tool improves the performance effectiveness of both learners and
instructors in Web-based learning support environments.