* 0333418
* Globalization and International Development
* EHR,DGE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2010
* Seymour Spilerman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 09/30/2010
* USD 3,755,230.00

The IGERT program at Columbia University will be a new interdisciplinary
graduate training program in the study of globalization and international
development. Globalization can be a powerful engine for international
development, but in many developing countries globalization has instead meant
rising poverty and inequality. Columbia has brought together a distinguished
interdisciplinary social science faculty to investigate why, and to provide a
deeper understanding of the impact of globalization on developing countries.
Through the IGERT program, these faculty will train the next generation of
researchers in new models and new methods for studying international
development.

The IGERT trainees will be drawn from the departments of economics, political
science, sociology, the newly created program in development studies, and from
the urban planning program. The program combines a rigorous disciplinary
grounding, acquired chiefly during the first two years, with an intensive and
interdisciplinary training experience that includes a semester-long course in
globalization taught by the PI; a two-semester interdisciplinary foundations
course in international development (to be created specifically for the IGERT
program); an integrated mentored team research experience; and a research
internship on a faculty-led project. Columbia's program has a strong
international dimension. All IGERT trainees will undertake a summer research
internship abroad, accompanied by training in research ethics with a focus on
international issues and by intensive language training as needed. The program
also includes funding for symposia and smaller-scale dialogues that will attract
international researchers and policymakers. Through this curriculum, the
trainees will gain a firm disciplinary grounding along with an understanding of
key concepts and approaches of the other disciplines. This interdisciplinary
fluency will permit more effective cross-disciplinary collaboration as well as
innovation through the appropriation of ideas and tools across disciplinary
boundaries.

The intellectual merit of the IGERT program is in the commitment to bring new
disciplinary and cross-disciplinary perspectives and tools to bear on the
problem of globalization and international development. To better understand the
implications of globalization for economic development, models are needed that
systematically incorporate the social and political institutions, rule of law,
transparency, and other factors that can modify or enhance the impact of
markets, as well as the geographic and environmental factors that can shape the
course of development. This research will necessarily be more analytically
complex, modeling interdependence among countries and regions and examining the
pacing and sequencing of development. The program will have significant broader
impacts of two main kinds. First, it will develop new graduate curricula in
globalization and development, including course syllabi, that will be available
to other institutions through the program website. Second, it will disseminate
research by IGERT faculty and student trainees to scholars and policymakers via
major symposia on international development as well as smaller-scale dialogues.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep
knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
this sixth year of the program, awards are being made to institutions for
programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported
by NSF.