* 0333336
* International Workshop on Processing of Strong Motion Recordings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* J. Carl Stepp, Consortium of Organizations for Strong Motion Observation System
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2004
* USD 20,000.00

NThis action is to provide partial support for the International Workshop on
Processing Strong Motion Recordings organized by the Consortium of Organizations
for Strong Motion Observation Systems (COSMOS). The workshop will be held in
Oakland, CA, November 2003, and will include ten foreign strong motion network
operators or strong motion record processing experts. Participants will prepare
a description of the method they use for processing strong motion recordings and
present the discussion in the workshop.

The objectives of the workshop are: 1) to compile strong motion record
processing methods currently being used by major strong motion data providers
both in the United States and internationally, 2) to identify current and
anticipated future uses of strong motion recordings for linear and non-linear
analysis of various types of structures and for soil response analysis, 3) to
develop recommended processing criteria appropriate for the intended range of
uses of strong motion recordings, 4) to identify any additional research
required to develop a suitably comprehensive technical basis for a consensus
record processing guideline for international use, and 5) define differences in
processing schemes for older recordings, including film recordings, and for
future recordings from digital instruments. This workshop is an element of a
larger COSMOS Project to develop a consensus guideline for processing strong
motion recordings. The workshop proceedings and possibly, the results of
research or analysis that may be defined by the workshop will serve as the
technical basis for the consensus guideline. The workshop proceedings will be
published in CD format and posted on the COSMOS Home Page (http://www.cosmos-
eq.org).

The availability of uniformly processed strong motion recordings from strong
motion monitoring programs world wide will significantly advance the use of
strong motion recordings for both research application and earthquake
engineering practice.