* 0333128
* NER:   Microscopic Modeling of the Surfactant Mediated Reactive Assembly of Nanostructured Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Sanat Kumar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 09/30/2003
* USD 74,200.00

Microscopic Modeling of the Surfactant Mediated Reactive Assembly of
Nanostructured Materials

Sanat K. Kumar Department of Materials Science and Engineering and

Department of Chemical Engineering, Pennsylvania State Univ., University Park,
PA.

Evangelos Manias Department of Materials Science and Engineering Pennsylvania
State Univ. University Park, PA.

Executive Summary

We propose to develop highly integrated multiscale simulation tools to model
the surfactant-mediated synthesis of nanomaterials. The proposed research will
focus on a prototypical example of this methodology, the synthesis of ordered
arrays of metal nanodots. The development of the proposed multiscale simulation
approach is essential for two reasons. First, these synthesis methods involve
reactions and self-assembly which span a variety of length [and hence time]
scales, from the molecular [A and fs] to the macroscopic [m and s]. Second,
since current synthesis routes were developed by empirical methods, predictive
strategies for creating materials with desired structures are missing. This is,
perhaps, the biggest bottleneck to the broad-based use of these novel materials.
As a first step towards providing a predictive understanding of these syntheses,
in this NER we shall model molecules as catenated strings of structureless beads
so as to examine (a) if multiscale methods can be developed to successfully span
from local, nanoscopic length and time scales to the macroscopic and (b) more
importantly, if these coarse grained models can qualitatively capture the
essential physics in these situations and identify the rate limiting mechanisms
in each synthetic method. If this exploratory research is successful, then, the
long term goal will be to include the critical molecular-level details so as to
gain quantitative insights into synthesis strategies. These will directly aid in
the development of new, generally applicable paradigms for synthesizing
nanostructured materials which are relevant to a variety of interdisciplinary
contexts that cross the boundaries of physics, chemistry, biology, and materials
science.

