* 0333613
* An Intelligent Digital Environment for Groundwater Education and Research
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Roger Wallace, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 09/30/2007
* USD 460,000.00

This project is expanding Interactive Groundwater (IGW), a comprehensive,
combined research and educational software environment, into a complete digital
learning environment. This is being accomplished by coupling the existing
digital laboratory to a comprehensive digital library that consists of a
groundwater science library, a visualization library, a spatial data library, a
documentation library, and a library of related problems and exercises. The
resulting digital learning environment has the following innovative
characteristics: 1) An active library that is larger than its collection - The
digital laboratory and library interact intelligently. This two-way interaction
makes the library larger than its physical collections and the laboratory more
than just an experimental facility. While the digital laboratory provides hands-
on theme dynamics to learn around, the digital library provides instant
situational support on the implementation and science. It provides ideas,
interpretations, theories, examples, literatures, applications, and background.
This integrated learning environment provides a place for students to access
information as well as to consume and to create information. It allows students
to learn, to practice, to explore, and to discover. 2) High impact contents that
capitalize on the advantages of digital media - The digital library presents
such information in a non-conventional way. It takes advantage of the digital
media and capitalizes on the power of visualizations and the power of
interactions. In particular, it provides dynamic, engaging, and interactive
learning materials in ways that substantially improve knowledge assimilation and
retention and promote active learning. The digital library utilizes a unique and
systematic collection of interactive visualizations to illustrate difficult
groundwater concepts, processes, dynamics, theories, solution techniques, and
applications. The library allows students to see the unseen and understand the
invisible. The creation of this unique groundwater visualization library is made
possible by the innovative IGW digital laboratory. 3) A powerful content
organization and delivery paradigm that supports problem-based learning - The
digital library shares the same interface as the digital laboratory, allowing a
student to rapidly find the information at the time it is needed. The coupled
interface to information access and exploration is highly effective for situated
or problem-based learning and allows students to singularly focus on the
exploration and problem solving. 4) An adaptable learning environment that
supports students of different levels - The digital laboratory-library system
provides a unique and adaptable framework for learning. Students determine their
own learning routes and control the degree of difficulty or sophistication. As
such, the new learning environment allows accommodating students of different
levels and of different backgrounds. Depending on the level and focus of a
course, the digital learning environment can be used in a variety of ways: for
real-time demonstration and visualization of basic concepts and processes; to
visualize and better understand solution techniques and procedures; or to
provide integrated modeling exercises or a virtual field experience. The
extension of IGW into a digital learning environment impacts the entire
groundwater educational community. It benefits researchers by giving them a tool
for in-depth and collaborative research. It benefits instructors by providing a
means for them to present active and innovative learning techniques in the
classroom. Most importantly, it benefits students by allowing them to construct
knowledge in ways that help them to become self-sufficient learners and
thinkers. Significant co-funding of this project is being provided by the
Division of Earth Sciences in the NSF Directorate for Geosciences in recognition
of the importance that this project has on the development of a digital learning
environment supporting problem solving associated with groundwater education and
research.