* 0333872
* Ensemble Kalman Filter Assimilation of Multisensor Observations from Convection for Storm-Scale Analysis
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2007
* Louis Wicker, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 10/31/2007
* USD 249,361.00

Observational capabilities on the storm scale have increased dramatically during
the past decade. The national network of operational Doppler radars provides
observations of convective storms and their environments every five minutes. In
the near future, rapidly scanning phased array radars, dual polarization data,
and regional high-density networks of radars could also be available. Surface
data from local surface mesonets have also become increasingly available. The
availability of these data will spur the development of new retrieval and data
assimilation methods for storm scale
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations of Doppler velocity and
reflectivity are not often available near the ground. At the same time the
convective cold pool and storm wind field plays a critical role in determining
significant surface weather, convective initiation, and storm rotation.
Therefore retrieval of the wind, temperature, and moisture fields near the
surface is both difficult and crucial toward increasing understanding of storm
dynamics and improving forecasts and warnings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently the
ensemble Kalman filter (EnKF) has been shown to be a viable method for obtaining
convective-scale atmospheric state estimates from Doppler radar observations.
Assimilation experiments using synthetic data sampled from convective storm
models indicate that this method can be used to retrieve the unobserved fields
within storms. Initial experiments using observed Doppler winds indicate that
EnKF has potential for real data as well. An attractive feature of the EnKF is
that it is a relatively simple methodology and can be implemented into a
forecast model with little effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major goal of this
research is to assess the potential of EnKF in assimilating real observations of
convective storms through the use of a series of observing system simulation
experiments. Unique aspects of this work include the use of an ultra-high-
resolution numerical cloud model to produce synthetic observations as well as
considering the role of model error associated with the microphysical
parameterization. Both radar and in situ surface observations will be generated
synthetically. The methodology will be to use multiple Doppler radars and
surface-based observations to retrieve wind, temperature, and hydrometeor fields
at low levels. Retrieval of low-level fields are particularly important toward
understanding storm dynamics, since these features play an important role in
determining storm evolution and severity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
increases intellectual knowledge in both the theoretical and applied
meteorological communities. The development of robust methods for estimating
near-surface wind, temperature, and moisture fields within storms from various
observational platforms will greatly enhance theoretical understanding of storm
dynamics within more realistic environments. Research results can then be
applied in the operational community to enable regional forecasters to focus on
smaller regions where the conditions are most conducive for severe storm
development. Increased knowledge of storm scale dynamics will also help local
forecasters improve the warning process by increasing lead times and reducing
false alarms.