* 0333273
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Sequencing and Annotation of the Bdellovibrio Strain W Genome
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Allison Gillaspy, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 281,000.00

The single goal of this project is to sequence and annotate the genome of
Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus. The intellectual merit of this project will link two
seemingly unrelated processes, bacterial predation and morphogenesis. One genus,
Bdellovibrio, is especially unique among all the differentiating species because
it undergoes morphogenetic changes as a part of a life-cycle that is dependent
upon attacking and invading gram negative bacteria for food. Every Bdellovibrio
isolated to date has been obligatorily dependent (host dependent - HD) upon a
host (prey) cell for growth to carry out its life cycle (attack phase cell to
filamentous cell to fragmenting filament/lysis to attack phase). One unique
strain (W) has the ability to form environmentally resistant cysts which may
have practical value. To provide the framework for the systematic and detailed
investigation of these phenomena, high throughput DNA sequencing and subsequent
annotation of the genome of B. bacteriovoris strain W will be carried out.
Closure and annotation will be carried out in the PI's laboratory. The broader
impact of this research has implications in training. The sequence database will
allow this group and collaborators (John Tudor at St. Joseph's University in
Philadelphia and Mark Martin at Occidental College in Los Angeles) to exploit
the information to design training projects for undergraduate students. Using
summer workshops, 4 undergraduates and their mentors will be trained in the
techniques of sequence closure and annotation. A web-based bioinformatics suite
will allow the trainees to return to their home institutions and continue
projects begun during the workshops.