* 0333074
* YIA: Genomics of Rice, Sorghum and Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Doreen Ware, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,355,076.00

Cereals are a large and diverse set of agronomically important crops from the
family Gramineae. They are the main source of dietary calories for most human
populations whether they are consumed directly, as in rice, or indirectly as
animal feed. The primary subject of this research is gene colinearity, the
evolutionarily conserved order along the chromosome of genes among different
species. The movement of blocks of genes of rice chromosome 1 relative to the
corresponding regions of maize and sorghum will be analyzed. The research will
enhance the understanding of genome organization of these agronomically
important cereal crops. The structure of cereal genomes and their genes are key
to understanding the evolutionary relationships within this important family.
However, due to the size and complexity of these genomes it is unlikely in the
next few years that complete sequences will be available from each of these
genomes. Although there has been much work on cereal macro and micro-
colinearity, gene dense islands, and links between gene amplification and gene
movement among the cereal genomes, there has been no large-scale analysis of
these phenomena to date. This project will take an unbiased large-scale approach
to identify whether these are indeed true trends or represent selected events in
cereal genomes. To do this, a rough map of shared segments between rice, sorghum
and maize using existing public data will be generated. Gaps in the comparative
maps will be closed by selecting candidate rice genes to use as additional
anchor points and map them to conserved blocks in the sorghum and maize genetic
and physical maps. The final product will be a high-resolution comparative map
of rice 1 with the corresponding regions of sorghum and maize. The comparative
physical maps will be a starting point for studies to understand the
organization of the three cereal genomes and their evolutionary relationship. In
the process, methods will be developed for building and finishing comparative
maps, which can be applied to genome-scale projects in the future. It will also
serve as a valuable resource for the identification of genes involved in
agronomically important traits.

Information generated: 1.70 maize genetic markers anchored to the maize IBM map
and maize physical map 2.SSR database for maize and sorghum sequences 3.STC
database for BACs found in the maize and sorghum physical maps BAC end sequences
for clones selected in the minimum tiling path 200 rice gene models anchored to
maize 75 rice gene models directly sequenced from maize and sorghum 4.Integrated
BAC map of maize and sorghum across colinear regions in rice chromosome 1 based
upon sequence similarity and overgo hybridization. 5.1 MB of cereal BAC
sequences 6.Develop a pilot curriculum for high school students on "Colinearity
of Genes in Cereal Genomes"