* 0333173
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Sequencing of the Frankia CcI3 Genome, a Nitrogen-Fixing Plant Symbiotic Actinomycete
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Pilar Francino, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2009
* USD 926,990.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. David R. Benson of the University of
Connecticut, and his collaborators, Dr. Pilar Francino at the Lawrence Berkeley
Laboratory, University of California, and Dr. Louis S. Tisa, University of New
Hampshire to establish the first complete nucleotide sequence of the genome from
Frankia sp. strain HFPCcI3. Members of this group of bacteria live in root
nodules on certain woody plants and provide nitrogen for plant growth. The
plants colonize nitrogen poor soils in subarctic, temperate and tropical regions
of the world and help remediate soil impacted by human activity. Frankia strains
also display some unique characteristics. They are filamentous, produce spores
in sporangia and make unique cellular structures known as "vesicles" that are
induced specifically to house the biochemical machinery that fixes nitrogen. The
DNA of the organism will be isolated, purified and extracted and each fragment
will be sequenced and subsequently the complete genetic code will be pieced
together by a combination of state-of-the art molecular and computational
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genome sequence generated in this project
will provide researchers who study plant symbioses and Frankia biology, with a
wealth of information and tools for years to come. More broadly, this project
will be felt by the scientific community as a whole, and by schools and colleges
who will be able to access the genome via a website constructed at different
levels of complexity. The broader scientific community, especially those
studying the evolution of related bacteria, including antibiotic-producing
bacteria, will benefit by having access to the sequences as they emerge in
public databases. Sequence information will be exploited concurrent with its
emergence for stimulating existing undergraduate and graduate courses at the
Univ. Connecticut and Univ. New Hampshire. To introduce students to the
ecological significance of the symbiosis, readily grasped biological concepts
will be integrated with insights derived from the genome sequence at a Frankia-
dedicated website created to be accessible in classrooms for high school and
beginning undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;