* 0333701
* DIGITAL CHEMISTRY LIBRARY
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Alexander Pines, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Pratibha Varma-Nelson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 400,462.00

This project establishes a digital chemistry library composed of tightly
integrated learning objects drawn from distance learning resources in use at UC
Berkeley. Beyond merely collecting these objects, the project addresses two
important open questions facing digital libraries:

1) How is interoperability engineered into resources that carry extensive,
domain-specific metadata or tightly integrated educational connections? 2) How
can collection design encourage new contributions and promote resource reuse?

The answers to these questions advance the NSDL as an educational resource. By
applying techniques from other disciplines such as Document Engineering, the
project offers a fresh approach to the problem of integrating domain-specific
learning objects into generic digital libraries.

A major focus of the project is to enable the passing of educational connections
between learning objects across multiple collections. The development of
chemistry learning object vocabularies identify analysis methods, models, and
context machinery that can lead to significant interoperability when replicated
in other domains. These descriptive vocabularies make it possible for library
users to reassemble content into cross-disciplinary curricula in new ways that
replace earlier labor-intensive techniques. More importantly, these methods
enable students to reassemble what they are learning into organizational
structures that are optimized to meet their learning objectives or goals.

This project's collection is also designed to reach under represented students
and under resourced community colleges and high schools with high quality,
accessible, usable educational material. In addition the integration of multiple
media types (audio, video, text, images) into each learning object makes the
library accessible to students with disabilities. The resulting digital library
of tightly integrated learning objects promises to be a valuable contribution to
the NSDL that leverages the work of partner libraries (the J. Chem. Education
Digital Library and the Biology, Physics and Chemistry Advanced Placement
Digital Library). The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the NSF
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences is providing significant co-
funding of this project in recognition of the importance of a digital library
for the support of the learning of chemistry.