* 0333415
* IGERT: Integrative Graduate Research and Training in Evolutionary Primatology--Reinvigoration and Reorientation of NYCEP (New York Consortium in Evolutionary Primatology)
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2003,04/30/2012
* Ian Tattersall, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Boone
* 04/30/2012
* USD 3,989,671.00

NYCEP, the New York Consortium in Evolutionary Primatology, is a graduate
research and training program funded for the past 10 years by an NSF Research
Training Groups (RTG) award. In drawing faculty from City University of New
York, Columbia University, New York University, the American Museum of Natural
History, and the Wildlife Conservation Society, NYCEP represents a rare
combination of public and private universities together with privately endowed
(and publicly assisted) institutions dedicated to bringing science to the
public. Our consortium links over 45 faculty whose research perspectives on
human and nonhuman primates include comparative morphology, paleontology,
systematics, molecular and population genetics, behavior, ecology, and
conservation biology. Students take courses in all these areas, attend seminars
drawing on the staff of all five institutions, and have multiple opportunities
to conduct original research at field sites, laboratories, and museums. NYCEP is
unique for the range and diversity of courses and research opportunities that it
offers. This IGERT award will further enhance and refocus our successful
graduate training program by implementing a series of innovative educational,
curricular, and research initiatives, as well as to provide support for the
training of a cohort of talented graduate students who would not otherwise
benefit from this integrative program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 1992, we have
trained 110 students (including 63 females and 15 from groups underrepresented
in science) with benefit from NSF/RTG funding, and we awarded 49 Ph.D.s. Of
those with direct NYCEP funding, 22 have already received Ph.D.s, and many have
obtained high-profile positions in universities, zoos and industry. We will
build upon these successes by increasing our emphasis on the following areas:
(1) professional development through student presentations and a new course
covering the ethical conduct of science, oral and written communication skills,
grant application, and job search; (2) student participation in international
field research on behavioral ecology, conservation and paleontology; (3)
visibility and public awareness, through an annual conference to showcase NYCEP
activities and improve science literacy and interest; and (4) outreach to
undergraduate, especially minority, students through interaction with college
science programs on our campuses and elsewhere. Each of these features will
enhance both the intellectual merit and the broader impacts of our program. This
IGERT grant and associated university financial aid will support over 35 new
students and fund about 180 student-years of graduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet
the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year of the program, awards
are being made to institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;