* 0333408
* IGERT:  Multinational Collaborations on Challenges to the Environment
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2011
* Gretchen Kalonji, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 01/31/2011
* USD 3,396,700.00

The goal of our project is to create a new collaborative multinational model for
interdisciplinary graduate education and research. In our approach, a small,
dedicated, and carefully selected set of partner institutions will work in
concert to: 1) develop collaborative and sustainable interdisciplinary graduate
research opportunities; 2) implement new project-based courses which are offered
cooperatively at multiple sites; 3) create international internship
opportunities for participating graduate students, 4) implement a multinational
mentoring, advising and communications network, 5) develop teaching and
curriculum development experiences for graduate students which provide them with
a rich international perspective on the challenges facing higher education, and
6) share experience in more effectively targeting university research to address
practical problems facing our regions. Our partner universities are: Tohoku
University (Japan), the University of Auckland (New Zealand), the Polytechnic of
Namibia (Namibia), the University of Natal (South Africa), Eduardo Mondlane
University (Mozambique), Can Tho University (Vietnam), Sichuan University and
Tsinghua University (both in China). We will also work closely with Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL), our region's major governmental research
lab, in the design of the research and educational programs for our
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our focus on 5 interwoven environmentally-related
themes, specifically 1) water quality and wastewater treatment; 2) "eco-
materials" (or reducing the environmental cost of materials processing and use);
3) biodiversity, with a focus on botanical and aquatic systems; 4) goods and
services from forest ecosystems; and 5) environmental social sciences. Together,
we will implement a coherent and powerful set of interdisciplinary experiences
for our students that will enable them to emerge as imaginative and effective
leaders in our communities. Simultaneously, our program will offer new insight
to all partners on the strengthening of graduate education across the
disciplines. Our educational program incorporates: 1) participation in one or
more of the 5 interdisciplinary thematic research clusters, as described above;
2) a year-long, project-based course on Coupled Human, Natural and Materials
Systems, which brings together faculty and students from all of the 5 thematic
clusters; 3) a required research internship at one of the partner institutions
(6 - 12 months) under the supervision of a local co-advisor; 4) a "pedagogical"
internship working either at the K-12 or undergraduate level on a project
related to international educational reform in science and engineering; 5) an
on-going weekly IGERT seminar; 6) two "dissertation workshops" (one in the
early, problem-definition stage of their research, and another in the writing
stage); and 7) activities focused on career awareness, ethics, and professional
development, with a particular emphasis on the international dimensions of these
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merits of the proposal include:
the high quality scientific research it will enable; the plans for linking the
research to the solution of common, practical regional problems, and the
innovative strategies for integrating international research and graduate
education and training. &lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of the program include 1)
the contribution we will make to the generation of a globally-engaged, diverse
and technically astute international workforce, and 2) the insight we will
provide to the broader higher education community on such basic questions as:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How to create international research experiences for our
graduate students that are effectively integrated with the rest of their
professional development and research; &lt;br/&gt;How to structure inter-
institutional partnerships in graduate education such that the benefits are
truly reciprocal and sustainable; &lt;br/&gt;How to structure interdisciplinary
international programs so that they are more effective in attracting and
retaining a diverse set of graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;