* 0333086
* International Workshop on  Cold Neutron Time-of-Flight (TOF)  Spectroscopy, Washington, DC, July 14-17, 2003
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2003
* Paul Sokol, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 12/31/2003
* USD 16,650.00

This project is an international workshop on scientific opportunities with cold
neutron time-of-flight (TOF) spectroscopy, being held on 14 - 17 July 2003 in
the Washington, DC area. Cold neutron spectroscopy is the best method to use for
exploring phenomena that occur on timescales of atomic vibrations or longer,
typical of collective phenomena in condensed matter, polymers, quantum liquids,
and other areas. The workshop will examine novel scientific opportunities as
well as techniques to enhance the performance of instrumentation. An important
aspect of the workshop will be to introduce younger scientists - graduate
students, postdocs, and junior faculty - to this field. The workshop will
endeavor to identify new types of instrumentation needed to realize the new
scientific opportunities, and it will explore opportunities to apply cold
neutron spectroscopy to fields in which it has not traditionally been used; for
example, environmental chemistry, geology, biology, and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neutrons with low energies (called "cold"
neutrons) are very useful probes of the properties of matter. Beams of such
neutrons are especially responsive to structural and dynamical properties of
matter on spatial and temporal scales ranging from atomic dimensions to micro-
meters. These are scales characteristic of, for example, polymers, grains in
metals and alloys, and living cells. Neutrons also provide unique probes of
magnetic properties on similar scales. "Cold neutron time-of-flight
spectroscopy" involves the study of minute energy changes in a beam of neutrons
produced by interaction with a sample of matter. Such investigations enable the
determination of many physical properties on the scales probed by the neutron
beam. While U.S. investigators have been using such neutron-scattering studies
for decades, most of the facilities needed for such investigations have been
constructed in other nations. This is now beginning to change as the Spallation
Neutron Source (SNS) approaches completion at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. To
prepare for the beginning of SNS studies in 2006, it is necessary to begin now
to educate a new generation of scientists in the use of these techniques and to
help scientists from disciplines that have not traditionally used such methods
to learn how they may be valuably applied in new areas. It is also necessary to
explore new types of instrumentation that can enable such investigations. This
project is an international workshop specifically intended to help address these
needs.&lt;br/&gt;