* 0333375
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Does Space Matter in Ethnic Labor Market Segmentation? A Case Study of Chinese in the San Francisco CMSA
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Kavita Pandit, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2006
* USD 12,000.00

The past few decades have seen a rise in the emergence of "ethnic niches" --
occupations that are dominated by workers from a particular ethnic group. Most
explanations of this phenomenon focus on the personal characteristics of workers
that draw them to particular jobs, the ethnic networks of recruitment and
hiring, and macrostructural forces that have created a large number of low wage
and low skill jobs to be filled by immigrants. To a great extent, however, space
is missing in most studies. Drawing from the literature on ethnic enclaves and
spatial labor markets this doctoral dissertation research project will examine
the spatial influences on ethnic labor market segmentation -- how the locations
of workers' residences and workplaces influence the emergence of niche
occupations. The project will include a case study of Chinese ethnic workers in
the San Francisco Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area and will use a
detailed individual-level Census Bureau dataset that is available under highly
controlled conditions. The data identifies, at the census tract level, a
worker's employment sector, place of residence, and place of work. The project
will examine the ethnic segmentation of San Francisco's labor market and
identify Chinese niche sectors. It will identify Chinese residential and
workplace concentrations and examine the social and economic characteristics of
these concentrations. It also will evaluate how the geography of home and work
influences the emergence of Chinese occupational niches. The analyses will be
based on a combination of logistic regressions, multiple analysis of variance
(MANOVA), and GIS-based spatial analysis techniques. The investigators expect to
demonstrate that human and social capital is built through particular spatial
arrangements,and that residential and workplace locations can influence
occupational choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research makes efforts
to incorporate the spatial context of workers and jobs into the understanding of
the ethnic segmentation of labor markets. Spatial labor market perspectives will
be integrated with ethnicity-race studies, thereby ultimately linking together
residential segregation, labor market segmentation, and work place segregation.
The findings will provide valuable insights into a number of questions of
critical importance to urban policy makers. For example, does residential
segregation impede labor market opportunities? Do ethnic enclaves confer more
advantages or more disadvantages for their residents? Can labor market
segmentation be eliminated through deliberately designed housing and
transportation strategies? Although the present study is concerned with the
Chinese in San Francisco, its conceptual foundation, data, and methodology will
be broadly applicable to other ethnic groups and metropolitan areas. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;