* 0333210
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  The Genome Sequence of Methanosaeta concilii - An Educational Tool
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Kerry Smith, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 276,247.00

Biogenic methane is a major contributor to the 1% yearly increase in atmospheric
methane and accounts for 80% of the 500 million metric tons of methane produced
each year. Approximately two-thirds of all biogenic methane is derived from the
methyl group of acetate, yet only two genera, Methanosarcina and Methanosaeta
(formerly Methanothrix), are able to utilize acetate as a substrate for
methanogenesis. Methanosarcina continues to be extensively studied; however,
Methanosaeta has received little attention in recent years due to difficulties
in culturing. While Methanosaeta is a specialist able to use only acetate,
Methanosarcina prefers numerous methylated compounds as growth substrates
compared to acetate. Methanosaeta are widely distributed in nature, and due to
their high affinity for acetate prevail over Methanosarcina in the low acetate
environments of rice paddies and anaerobic waste digestors, both major sources
of biogenic methane. Thus, Methanosaeta is likely to be the predominant methane
producer on earth. Sequencing of the genome of Methanosaeta concilii GP-6, the
type strain of the species, will be conducted at the University of Washington
Genome Center and annotation and curation will be performed at Clemson
University and the University of Wisconsin-Parkside. Addition of Methanosaeta to
the methanoarchaeal genome sequence compilation will have a broad scientific
impact, offering an opportunity for significant insight into this difficult-to-
study microbe and the use of comparative genomic approaches to address the
nature of these microbes and their biological impact and potential. The M.
concilii genome sequence also provides an ideal platform for microbial genome
education through involvement of undergraduates in annotation and curation of
the genome sequence and comparative genomics.