* 0333578
* Bio-Based Composite Panel Systems for Residential Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Richard Wool, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/2006
* USD 283,654.00

The goal of the research is to design, fabricate, test and evaluate an
innovative&lt;br/&gt;panelized system for residential construction made from
bio-based composite materials, which&lt;br/&gt;can be fabricated simply and
inexpensively. The panels will be of a sandwich type
construction,&lt;br/&gt;consisting of a foam core sandwiched between outer
sheets or irskinsle. The panels will be&lt;br/&gt;designed with or without
iiwebsld between the skins. The composite materials will consist
of&lt;br/&gt;soybean based resins and all-natural reinforcement, such as
recycled paper, chicken feathers,&lt;br/&gt;and Nano clays.&lt;br/&gt;The
specific objectives of the proposed research are to:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Design a
prototype, multi-function, bio-based composite panel suitable for
residential&lt;br/&gt;construction&lt;br/&gt;(2) Develop low-cost processes for
manufacturing large sandwich panels made from bio-&lt;br/&gt;based composite
materials, and&lt;br/&gt;(3) Test and evaluate the panels for normal, in-plane
shear, axial compression and bearing&lt;br/&gt;load capacity.&lt;br/&gt; The
research plan is organized into three primary tasks. Task 1, Design of
the&lt;br/&gt;prototype multi-function panel, will involve basic research to
improve the performance of the&lt;br/&gt;resin and composite system, and design
of a generic, multi-function panel. Task 2, Alternative&lt;br/&gt;low-cost
fabrication processes for composite panel systems, will explore innovative
methods for&lt;br/&gt;fabricating large composite panels. This will include an
efficient VARTM process, and also what&lt;br/&gt;we term composite casting.
Finally, in Task 3, Testing and analysis of the composite
panel,&lt;br/&gt;panels will be tested in bending, in-plane shear, axial
compression and bearing, to determine&lt;br/&gt;their stiffness, load capacity,
ductility and failure mode. Analytical models of the panels will
also&lt;br/&gt;be developed to be used in design and analysis of the
system.&lt;br/&gt;The research will benefit society at large by providing an
Advanced&lt;br/&gt;Panelized System for residential construction that is made
entirely from all-natural, bio-based&lt;br/&gt;composite materials. The system
will reduce our dependence on petroleum products and&lt;br/&gt;reduce
deforestation. The research brings together expertise in civil engineering,
chemical&lt;br/&gt;engineering, materials science and composites manufacturing:
the multi-disciplinary nature of&lt;br/&gt;the research will provide a unique
opportunity for students and faculty to learn from each other&lt;br/&gt;and
explore, together this very interesting and quickly expanding of field. Results
of the study&lt;br/&gt;will be made available to the community through archival
journals and the World Wide Web.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will use the resources of the
RISE program at the University of Delaware to recruit and&lt;br/&gt;encourage
the participation of minority students on the project.&lt;br/&gt;