* 0333095
* Conference:  2003 Rustbelt RNA Meeting to be held October 31-November 1, 2003 in Mt. Sterling, Ohio.
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Martin Tuck, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 08/31/2004
* USD 5,500.00

The Rustbelt RNA Meeting (RRM) will be held on October 31 and November 1, 2003
in the Lodge at Deer Creek State Park & Resort in Mt. Sterling, OH. The
intellectual objective of the RRM is to provide an inexpensive, high caliber,
interdisciplinary meeting for RNA researchers in the Midwest. The field of RNA
(bio)chemistry continues to expand and touches many broader topics due to the
middle position of RNA in the central dogma of molecular biology. As a result,
research groups need a forum where they can hear and discuss new results and
techniques in areas of RNA research that may be distant from their own but may
provide new insights or research tools to further their own aims. The topics to
be presented at this meeting will cover the full range of RNA biology from
structure to function, using biophysical, biochemical, genomic and genetic
approaches in a number of different organisms. The size and organization of the
meeting provides an excellent environment for discussions between research
groups, including not only interactions between PIs but also between trainees
and PIs and between the trainees themselves. The RRM emphasizes trainee
participation, with the vast majority of presentations being given by trainees.
In addition to offering opportunities for interactions with PIs and other
trainees, the RRM provides invaluable experience presenting research in a
friendly and supportive atmosphere.