* 0333555
* PER-CENTRAL: A Digital Library Supporting Physics Education Research
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Robert Beichner, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2008
* USD 486,624.00

This project teams up North Carolina State University and the American
Association of Physics Teachers in the creation of a digital library serving the
physics education research (PER) community as well as teachers wanting to use
innovative, research-based instructional methods. The goal of this Collections
project is to provide a virtual clearinghouse where researchers and teachers can
easily find the very latest work in physics education along with the best of
what has been learned from previous research. The efforts of this project
include a) creation of a website archiving much of the existing PER literature;
b) establishing a free electronic journal to facilitate the sharing of new
findings in PER; c) collecting an annotated bibliography/database of PER
articles from a variety of existing sources; d) providing detailed descriptions
of PER-based curricula, along with links to the developers' sites; and e)
assembling additional materials of use to the PER and teaching communities,
including conference proceedings, syllabi from relevant courses, spreadsheets
and web-based tools for statistical analysis, reviews of qualitative analysis
equipment and software, links to existing discussion lists of researchers and
teachers (PhysLrnr, Phys-L, plus archives), along with connections to a world-
wide collection of research groups and individuals. The centerpiece of this
effort is the creation of an electronic journal to support peer-reviewed
electronic publication of PER research. A successful electronic journal will
have enormous impact on the community, providing a much-needed avenue for
scholarly research output that will be available freely to anyone with Internet
access. A business plan is in place to sustain the effort after the conclusion
of NSF support and the project has been endorsed by the editors of the American
Journal of Physics (currently the main publication for researchers in the
field). The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the NSF Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) is providing significant co-funding of
this project in recognition of the importance of physics education research to
the mission of MPS.