* 0334824
* Designing multimedia (MM) in digital libraries and travel support for DELOS MM Workshop, Crete, Greece
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Ching-chih Chen, Simmons University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Griffin
* 11/30/2006
* USD 21,000.00

Proposal : IIS- 0334824&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Simmons College&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Ching-chih Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests travel
support for US researchers to participate in the "Designing Multimedia (MM) in
Digital Libraries"to be held in Crete, Greece The workshop is cosponsored by the
DELOS Forum, a major organizer of digital libraries research and planning
activities in Europe. DELOS receives support from the Information Societies
Technologies (IST) 5th Framework Programme of the European
Commission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop contin;ues the dialogue and
research agenda begun under an US-EU/DELOS working group on "Digital Imagery for
Significant Cultural and Historical Materials" The working group has met over
the past year to discuss and evaluate fruitful joint activities and research
paths for collaborative activities in this general topical area and produced and
circulated an influential report on their findings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Importantly, this workshop will include in the agenda
pressing issues related to the recent loss of antiquities in Iraq. This will be
addressed in coordination with an interagency effort convened to explore
possible remediation and recovery efforts for irreplacable cultural heritage
artifacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;