* 0334521
* Collaborative Research:  CEDAR: Sprite Energetics
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Matthew McHarg, United States Air Force Academy
* Interagency Agreement
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 01/31/2007
* USD 63,326.00

The objective of this research is to determine the amount of energy sprites
deposit in the mesosphere. Sprites are large (~50km scale size) luminous events
seen above thunderstorms. The investigators will make altitude resolved optical
spectra at millisecond and higher time resolution. The observations will
determine how sprites modify the mesosphere. Most sprites are associated with
positive cloud to ground lighting strikes, and luminosity may extend from cloud
tops up to ionospheric heights. Sprites lasts a few millisecond (ms) to 10's of
ms with initiation commonly at an altitude of 70-75 km followed by both upward
and downward propagation of luminosity. Sprites are predominantly red, but
tendrils at low altitude are blue. Spectral measurements at TV frame rates (33
ms resolution) show the emissions to be from molecular nitrogen. Blue emissions
from ionized nitrogen are expected to be present, but this has not been
confirmed. The data available so far have not been able to answer firmly the
central questions of how much energy is deposited into the mesosphere, and the
resulting modification of the mesosphere by sprites. To address the time
development of the energy deposition in sprites, the investigators will make
spectral observations with ms time resolution. The primary instruments on a
common mount will be an imaging slit spectrograph and two 16-channel multi-anode
spectral photometers together with a TV imager to provide spatial context. The
imaging spectrograph will provide better spectral resolution, while the spectral
photometers will provide better temporal resolution. In addition, an imager will
be deployed at a separate location to provide triangulated altitude information.
The measurements will be compared to first principles models of sprite emissions
to determine the energy deposition as a function of altitude and time. The
investigators will also determine the amount of ionization and resulting changes
in conductivity within the mesosphere caused by sprites. Two extended ground
campaigns are planned. This research will provide clear understanding of sprite
formation and propagation as a function of time and altitude. Spectral
measurement will provide an unambiguous record of the neutral and ionized
nitrogen emissions from sprites. Comparison of data obtained from this project
with models of sprite emission will provide the time history of sprite
energetics. The research will provide a balance of experimental and theoretical
development suitable for a student working towards a PhD. The research plan also
includes undergraduate cadets from the Air Force Academy in the calibration of
the spectral photometers, and the gathering and analysis of the data. These
experiences will provide the undergraduates a first hand look at real research,
hopefully interesting them in further study at the graduate level. In addition
the investigators plan a vigorous outreach program directed at high school
students and teachers.