* 0334228
* Collaborative Research:  Physical and Chemical Impacts on the Ice Nucleating Properties of Atmospheric Particles in Springtime
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Sonia Kreidenweis, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2006
* USD 375,518.00

The physical and chemical influences on ice nucleation processes are poorly
understood at present, and understanding the transformations from aerosol
particles to ice is of high interest in the field of atmospheric sciences. This
collaborative project builds upon previous work by the lead investigator - in
this case combining aerosol and ice nucleus measurements at a field site to
determine the chemical composition of aerosols that nucleate ice as well as
characterizing those transformations from aerosol particles to ice crystals.
Through collaborations between Colorado State University (CSU), University of
Colorado (CU) and a government laboratory the investigators will use a
combination of methods, including the CSU continuous flow diffusion chamber for
ice nuclei number density measurements, electron microscopy for size and
composition of nucleated ice particles, and the NOAA Aeronomy Laboratory
Particle Analysis by Laser Mass Spectrometry instrument and CU aerosol mass
spectrometer to continuously analyze size-resolved chemical residuals of freshly
nucleated ice particles in real time. The investigators will compare physical
and chemical characteristics of particles active as ice nuclei with ambient
atmospheric aerosol to determine which characteristic factors are associated
with the ability to form ice crystals at typical cirrus temperatures and
supersaturations. The results of this research should be important for
understanding the role of aerosols in global climate as well as their impacts on
the chemistry of other species. The results of the research should have an
impact on climate and global change relative to issues related to anthropogenic
influences on clouds and radiative forcing - particularly with respect to cirrus
formation. Experimental data will provide new data to constrain climate models,
and make parameterizations more robust and representative. The project involves
interdisciplinary collaboration between two university groups and a government
laboratory. Contributions to education include support for postdoctoral
researchers and graduate students to gain professional research experience.