* 0334761
* CEDAR: A Theoretical and Modeling Study of Global Change in the Mesosphere and Thermosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Rashid Akmaev, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra G. Fesen
* 12/31/2007
* USD 245,464.00

The investigators will study a number of science questions related to global
change effects on the mesosphere and thermosphere. The theoretical study entails
comparisons with recent estimates of a thermospheric density decline from long-
term satellite-drag observations over the last few decades. This will require
extension of a three-dimensional Spectral Mesosphere/Lower Thermosphere Model
(SMLTM) to the exobase and incorporation of relevant physical processes,
including interactive diffusive separation of the main species. Preliminary work
shows that the global thermospheric response is amenable to analytical analysis,
which will provide a deeper insight into the workings of the upper atmosphere.
The second thrust of this project will be investigation of robust universal
spatial structures of the response found in previous numerical simulations and
will be based on development of appropriate analytical models in conjunction
with a global mean one-dimensional version of the SMLTM. Inconclusive and
sometimes-contradictory analyses of available long-term observational records
are generally consistent with the notion of greenhouse cooling in the
mesosphere, thermosphere, and ionosphere (MTI). The cooling is caused by
increasing amounts of greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, transported from
the lower atmosphere into the MTI region and resulting in more efficient
emission of infrared radiation into space. It typically manifests in colder MTI
temperatures, a noticeable thermospheric density decline, and a downward
displacement of various ionospheric layers. The magnitude of these changes is
expected to be substantially greater than in the lower atmosphere and they may
well serve as predictors of global change in the whole terrestrial atmosphere
system. Several modeling studies performed to date have elucidated the role of
various mechanisms, provided uncertainty estimates, and explained some of the
observed features, for example, the seasonal-latitudinal dependence of the
cooling. Outstanding science issues still remain, however, to be addressed by
suitable numerical models. Fuller understanding of the MTI response to thermal
forcing may be achieved in combination of diagnostics of computer simulations
with appropriate analytic models and their direct comparison with data analyses.
Better estimates and forecasts, deeper understanding, and more adequate models
of possible anthropogenic changes in the MTI will substantially enhance the
infrastructure and provide new tools for research not only in the upper
atmosphere but in the wider area of climate change in the whole Earth atmosphere
system.