* 0334595
* CEDAR: A Complement of Optical Instruments for the Polar Cap Observatory: Continued Support
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Qian Wu, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 12/31/2007
* USD 330,000.00

The investigators will deploy, maintain, and operate three co-located, high
performance optical instruments at the Early Polar Cap Observatory at Resolute
Bay in the Northwest Territories for three consecutive observing seasons. They
will analyze the data from the instruments to systematically address a number of
problems in mesospheric and thermospheric physics. The instruments are: A new
Fabry-Perot interferometer (FPI) with multi-emission capability, for
measurements of Doppler winds and temperatures; an all-sky camera (ASC) system
with a bare CCD detector and programmable filter wheel; and a Spectral Airglow
Temperature Imager (SATI) from the Korea Ocean Research and Development
Institute (KORDI) to provide rotational temperatures from OH and O2 emissions.
The ASC and SATI are already installed on site. The FPI is operational in
Boulder and will be deployed at Resolute in July 2003, replacing the original
FPI, which made neutral wind measurements using only the OH emission. The new
FPI will be able to measure 557.7 and 630 nanometer emissions as well, providing
winds and temperatures at multiple altitudes. Specific research objectives are
investigation of gravity and planetary wave characteristics, mesopause dynamics
and energetics, lower thermospheric dynamics and energetics at high geomagnetic
latitude; impact of high-latitude auroras on structure and dynamics; plasma
drifts, patches and blobs; and ionosphere-magnetosphere coupling processes,
including Joule heating. Data will be made available to the aeronomy community
and the investigators will continue allocating community use of the instruments
to support other experimental campaigns. Filter wheel positions in the FPI are
available for use by other investigators. Support for other researchers through
observational and analysis partnerships will be pursued. A significant
international partnership is a key element of the research. Educational
opportunities for field observational work by students has been an important
aspect of prior work and will continue to be pursued through university
partnerships.