* 0334927
* ATOL: Collaborative Research:  Assembling the Tree of Life: An Integrated Approach to the Origin and Diversification of Protostomes
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Ward Wheeler, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 12/31/2005
* USD 146,676.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Ward Wheeler and Dr. Rob DeSalle of the American
Museum of Natural History to assemble the basic backbone of the protostome tree
of life, which includes all triploblastic animals except those directly related
to vertebrates. Protostomes constitute more than one million of the 1.7 million
named species of living organisms, including familiar animals such as mollusks,
insects, flatworms, roundworms, and many others of medical and economic
importance. However, relationships among these groups are still contentious, so
the backbone of the animal tree of life cannot currently be proposed without a
large degree of uncertainty. This proposal will integrate and disseminate the
broadest possible collection of information on selected representative
protostomes to address questions of their origin and evolution over more than
540 million years. In order to do this we will integrate anatomical data on
extant and extinct fauna with developmental data using cell-lineage studies and
broad-based genomic information. Those data will be collected for a large pool
of protostome species which will be studied at a level never before attempted in
non-model organisms. The awarded grant will contribute to the training of
students at different academic levels, emphasizing underrepresented groups in
science. Results will be disseminated to society through partnership with five
of the most prominent natural history museums in the world, including the
Harvard Museum of Natural History and the American Museum of Natural History in
the USA, and the most important museums in Australia and Denmark. It is also the
intention of the PI to publish an article in non-specialist scientific magazines
for a broad lay audience.

