* 0334939
* AToL: Collaborative Research: AmphibiaTree---An Integrated Phylogenetic and Bioinformatics Approach to the Tree of Amphibians
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* David Wake, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,043,023.00

0334939 Wake and Wake A grant has been awarded to Drs. David Wake and Marvalee
Wake at the University of California at Berkeley, as part of a four-institution
collaboration, to study phylogenetic relationships of the living amphibians and
their close fossil relatives. Living Amphibians are a prominent part of the
Earth's vertebrate fauna and include three orders: the caecilians (Gymnophiona),
salamanders (Caudata), and frogs and toads (Anura). Despite recent advances in
discovering and describing their diversity, many critical questions in amphibian
evolution remain unresolved and a fresh analysis of evolutionary relationships
is needed to take new discoveries into account. Furthermore, the recent decline
and apparent extinction of amphibians from many environments makes it urgent
that we discover and classify the diversity present today. A team of seven
investigators from diverse institutions (University of Texas at Austin,
University of California at Berkeley, Harvard University, and the University of
Kansas) and their colleagues will collaborate to resolve modern amphibian
relationships. Field sampling in biodiversity hotspots will provide materials of
new or previously unsampled lineages. Anatomical and morphological data from
living and fossil forms will be combined with DNA sequences from a set of
defined mitochondrial and nuclear genes for as many species as possible, and
will be integrated with existing data sets. Analysis of these large data sets
will be used to gain insight into such questions as repeated patterns of
evolution, geographic patterns, and rates of evolution. Drs. Wake and Wake and
their students and colleagues will focus on molecular and morphological studies
of caecilians and salamanders, with targeted field work in South America and
Africa, and will have special responsibility for the AmphibiaWeb component, as
well as contributing to the overall integration of molecular and morphological
datasets for phylogenetic analysis. Understanding the evolutionary history of
modern amphibians is critical for developing conservation strategies for
amphibians as well as completing the vertebrate portion of the tree of life. The
project will involve extensive student training and interaction with US and
international colleagues. Communication with the public will utilize web
resources, especially AmphibiaWeb, an existing site that will be expanded and
further developed to provide information on all species of amphibians for
professionals and the public at large. AmphibiaWeb will also provide training
opportunities for students and senior professionals to enable them more
effectively to communicate their findings.