* 0334814
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research:  Nielsen Fixed Point Theory and Related Topics
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Peter Wong, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/2008
* USD 30,914.00

In this U.S.-Brazil collaborative project funded by the Americas Program of the
Office of International Science and Engineering, Wong of Bates will collaborate
with Daciberg L. Goncalves, Fernanda S. Cardona, and Lucilia D. Borsari of the
University of Sao Paulo on topics in topological fixed-point theory. The main
objective is to study the fundamental group and the computation of the Nielsen
number. Nielsen fixed-point theory has been generalized to many different
settings among which are (i) Nielsen coincidence theory and (ii) equivariant
Nielsen fixed point theory. The proposed project attempts to tackle a more
general coincidence theory that has not been extensively studied in the
literature. New techniques from obstruction theory, group cohomology, group
theory, and low dimensional topology will be employed, thereby relating it to
other mainstream research areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project
should have impact in group theory, topology and analysis, which in turn may be
applied to problem-solving techniques, such as partial differential equations.
By incorporating an undergraduate into the project, the PI will introduce a
young mathematician to a field that is considered difficult for undergraduates.
The undergraduate student is a woman, and two of the mathematicians in Brazil
are women. This project will foster partnerships between the PI and two new
collaborators, Borsari and Cardona.&lt;br/&gt;