* 0334950
* Preliminary Damage Assessment of the Bingol Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2003,11/30/2003
* Mete Sozen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 11/30/2003
* USD 28,202.00

The earthquake of moment magnitude 6.4 (USGS and KOERI) occurred at 10 km north
of Bingol at 03:27 am (local time) on 1 May 2003. The epicenter of the
earthquake was at 38.94N- 40.51E (ERD-Ankara). The depth of the quake was
estimated to be at 6 km. The strongest record of the earthquake was recorded at
Bingol. The peak ground accelerations (PGA) of the three components of this
record are 0.55g (NS), 0.28g (EW) and 0.47g (UP). The duration of the strong
motion is 17 s. After the earthquake 12 buildings were collapsed and 13
buildings were damaged severely. It was also reported that several bridges
appear to have been destroyed pending verification. The official numbers of
fatalities and injuries were 105 and 600, respectively. The main objectives of
the group are to document: &lt;br/&gt;(a) the damage to reinforced concrete
frame buildings and monuments, &lt;br/&gt;(b) the damage to bridge structures,
and &lt;br/&gt;(c) the geotechnical and geological aspects of the event.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From our experience in connection with the aftermath of
the 1999 Marmara and Duzce earthquakes in Turkey, we know that documenting the
properties of the structures that survived the ground motion is as important as
documenting the properties of the damaged buildings. Therefore, we intend to use
our time in Bingol to document not only the damaged but also the undamaged
structures. It is also our plan to use the data from Bingol to expand our
database (anatolianquake.org) and to test and improve the methods
&lt;br/&gt;developed for assessing earthquake vulnerability. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Significance: &lt;br/&gt;The collection and recording of scientific
perishable data related to the Bingol event in as precise form as possible is
proposed so that this experience can be shared with interested engineers and
scientists. It is hoped that the careful study of the data shall contribute to
earthquake hazard mitigation efforts in the US, Turkey and other seismic regions
of the world. In particular, there is a great deal of knowledge to be gained
from the performance of 4-5 story reinforced concrete structures. Such
structures abound in the Midwest and Eastern United States. Also, it is
important to document the bridge performance to assist code developers and
engineers dealing with seismic upgrading of bridges in the US.
&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the investigation is proposed in close collaboration
with researchers from METU, to promote cooperative activities between Turkey and
the USA in the field of earthquake engineering. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;For this
effort we are requesting $28,202.00 to cover travel and other related expenses
for a team consisting of eight members. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;