* 0334327
* Support of the International Symposium on Relations Between Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Catalysis (ISHHC)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2003,08/31/2003
* Tobin Marks, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 08/31/2003
* USD 5,000.00

The International Symposium on the Relations between Homgeneous and
Heterogeneous Catalysis is a key forum for scientists throughout the world to
explore the fundamental connections between heterogeneous and homogeneous
catalytic science and engineering. Northwestern University will host the
symposium on July 20-25, 2003, which is the first time for a US location in over
a decade. The conference will feature plenary speakers, expert panelists from
industry, government, and academia, and paper/poster presentations. New topics
for the conference include bio-and supra-molecular catalysis, catalysis as a
route to new materials, the intersections between nanoscience and catalysis,
green chemistry, and emerging physicochemical or theoretical techniques. Three
specific sessions will address new emphases involving international
collaboration in "Nanotechnology and Catalysis", "Catalytic Issues in Green
Chemistry", and "Graduate Research and Education in Catalysis." Over 200
attendees are expected from academia, industry, and government laboratories.
Graduate and postdoctoral students will receive assistance from NSF funding to
attend the symposium. This will significantly increase the educational
experience of these outstanding young researchers, especially since attendance
at the US location is feasible. The strong international aspects of the
symposium will advance the student's appreciation of worldwide research in
catalysis. Students will have an excellent opportunity to learn about the newest
research developments in their areas, dialog with other academic, industrial,
governmental researchers, and advance their participation in professional
societies.