* 0334994
* Optical:  Nanoengineering of InAs Quantum Dot Medium for High Speed Vertical Cavity Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Serge Oktyabrsky, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 11/30/2006
* USD 254,912.00

0334994&lt;br/&gt;Oktyabrsky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-frequency directly
modulated Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Lasers (VCSELs) and dense VCSEL
arrays are expected to change the whole paradigm of short-range
interconnections. Substitution of electrons with photons is expected to
dramatically increase bandwidth and reduce power of interconnects ranging from
silicon IC I/O's to module- and board-level. Quantum Dots (QDs) due to their
discrete electronic spectrum have fundamental advantages over quantum wells that
could benefit performance characteristics of laser diodes. The proposal
addresses nanoengineering of both homogeneous and inhomogeneous electronic
spectra of quantum dots to achieve the performance of the gain medium suitable
for utilization in high-speed VCSELs for short range (down to off-chip I/O)
optical interconnects. The major target performance characteristics of the
device include direct modulation bandwidth &gt;40 GHz, low-power operation of a
few mW, and operation temperatures up to 100 0C, necessary for direct
integration with a Si chip. The approach involves: (i) development of MBE-
related nanoengineering methods to control size, density, shape, and ultimately
electronic spectrum and transient phenomena in self-assembled InAs multilayer
QDs; to provide minimum size dispersion of the QDs; give the means for shape
engineering to increase wave function overlap integral and accelerate the
relaxation dynamics to the lasing state; reduce evaporation of carriers from the
dots. (ii) Band-structure engineering and implementation of high speed VCSEL
structure for QD medium to increase microcavity Q-factor; reduce relaxation time
onto the QD ground (lasing) states via application of resonant tunnel junction
for direct injection into the QD ground state; reduce series resistance and
parasitic capacitance. The work plan includes theoretical analysis and
simulation of the QD laser heterostructures; development of QD active medium
with high gain and fast capture and relaxation times using control of growth
kinetics, band-structure and shape engineering, and doping; testing of the gain
medium in edge-emitting laser diodes; design and implementation of VCSELs with
tunnel injection heterojunctions; systematic characterization and testing of the
QD structures and test devices using in-situ RHEED, and ex-situ SEM, SPM, FIB-
cross sectioning, analytical TEM, photoluminescence, electrical DC and microwave
methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;