* 0334664
* US-France Planning Visit and Workshop:  Modern Biogeochemical Cycling Processes in Mud Wave-Deltaic Deposits Along the Guianas Coast, Kourou, French Guiana
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Josephine Aller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2006
* USD 16,518.00

0334664&lt;br/&gt;Aller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year award supports a
planning visit to Kourou, French Guiana and subsequent workshop to explore
U.S.-France cooperative research on biogeochemical cycling processes in mud
wave-deltaic deposits along the Amazon - Guianas coast. Mangrove-fringed
coastlines, such as those along the Guianas, recycle and exchange nutrients with
the coastal ocean and significantly increase the fertility of adjacent waters.
Led by Josephine Y. Aller of the State University of New York (SUNY) at Stony
Brook and Francois Fromard and Alain Pave of the Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS) research laboratory in Kourou, French Guiana, the U.S. and
French researchers will lay the groundwork for investigations in microbial
biogeochemistry and modern elemental cycling in a typical coastal mud wave
system along the Guianas. They will address issues of sedimentary transport
processes, early digenetic reactions, the microbial community in the intertidal
and sub tidal deposits, and the exchange of material between the mangrove
fringe, coastal waters, and atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF will fund
travel to French Guiana of a 6 person multidisciplinary team from SUNY Stony
Brook, Tulane University, and University of Louisiana. They will meet with
scientists from several French universities and from the CNRS research platform
located in Kourou, the National College for Agricultural Engineering, Water
Management and Forests in Kourou, and the Research Institute for Development in
Cayenne. This workshop would set the stage for advancing research on the central
role of tropical coastal margins, which presently dominate continental inputs of
materials in the world oceans. &lt;br/&gt;