* 0334260
* Nano Workshop for US Scientists at the International Conference on NANOMATERIALS AND NANOTECHNOLOGIES  - NN2003, Crete, Greece, Aug 30-Sep 6, 2003
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Sudipta Seal, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Julie Chen
* 12/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00

The emerging fields of nanoscience and engineering - the ability to work at the
molecular level, atom by atom, to create large structures with fundamentally new
molecular organization - are leading to unprecedented understanding and control
over the fundamental building blocks of all physical things. To address the
issue of international cooperation and monitoring, it is prudent for US
scientists to arrange frequent visits to foreign countries as well as to develop
collaborative research programs with foreign institutions. This proposal is
aimed at organizing a visit by a US delegation of eight to participate and
organize "Nano Workshop for US Scientists at the International Conference on
NANOMATERIALS AND NANOTECHNOLOGIES - NN2003, Crete, Greece, Aug 30-Sep 6 -
2003". It is envisioned that this conference will provide an opportunity to
discuss important research activities in nanoscience through state-of-the-art
review lectures, contributed papers, panel discussions, and workshops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is also expected to create a sufficient
interest among the researchers of USA and rest of the world to develop and
further expands the cooperative research activities. Finally, in order for the
field of nanostructure science and technology to truly reach fruition, it is an
absolute necessity to create a new breed of researchers who can work across
traditional disciplines and think "outside the box." Educating this new breed of
researchers, who will either work across disciplines or know how to work with
others in the interfaces between disciplines, is vital to the future of
nanostructure science and technology. This event will comprise a diverse
community, including internationally renowned experts, young researchers,
graduate students and minorities. The US delegation involves diverse
demographics including female and minority researchers in the field. The
gathering of invited international experts to address this area of high
technology will bring a broad impact to R&amp;D in the US, European, Asian and
other countries, with consequent benefits to the regional and global economy.
Proceedings of the workshop and conference will be edited for a broader
dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;