* 0334379
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research Program:   Theoretical High Energy Physics - Nonperturbative Studies in String Theory
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* David Lowe, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/2006
* USD 40,000.00

0334379&lt;br/&gt;Lowe&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program award will
support collaboration between Dr. David Lowe of Brown University, Prof. Alberto
Guijosa of the Instituto de Ciencias Nucleares, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de
Mexico (UNAM), and Prof. Hugo Garcia-Compean of the Centro de Investigacion y de
Estudios Avanzados del IPN (CINVESTAV). The collaborators intend to work on some
of the central outstanding issues in quantum gravity and string theory. Their
main goal is to achieve a better understanding of string theory when
gravitational effects are dominant, such as in black hole spacetimes and in
cosmology where current perturbative techniques break
down.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years various nonpertubative formulations
of string theory have been conjectured. These conjectures open the door to
understanding many of the outstanding issues in string theory, such as vacuum
selection, physics in strong gravity spacetimes, the idea of holography in
gravitation theories, and early universe cosmology, as well as deepening our
understanding of quantum field theories dual to string theory. The U.S.
collaborator is a leader in the study of the duality between string theory and
ordinary quantum field theory, especially in connection with various aspects of
black holes, while the Mexican side brings to the collaboration expertise in
analyzing black hole physics and physics in noncommutative
spacetimes.&lt;br/&gt;