* 0334889
* Formal and Empirical Analyses of Bureaucratic Delay:  The Case of FDA Drug Review
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Daniel Carpenter, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/2003
* USD 21,491.00

&lt;br/&gt;Why do bureaucrats delay? Why do regulatory choices made under
identical&lt;br/&gt;administrative procedures exhibit highly varying decision
times? The&lt;br/&gt;investigator conducts a formal and empirical analysis of
the duration of&lt;br/&gt;bureaucratic decisions, with applications to drug
approval times by the&lt;br/&gt;U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The
speed with which drugs are&lt;br/&gt;reviewed is now one of the most
controversial issues in federal regulation,&lt;br/&gt;and is arguably the most
salient case where the duration, more than the&lt;br/&gt;content, of
bureaucratic decision making is at issue. While the political&lt;br/&gt;control
of agencies has been well studied, relatively little is known
about&lt;br/&gt;why agencies wait, and whether the duration of agency decisions
is subject&lt;br/&gt;to political control and from what
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project tackles this problem through the
elaboration of a&lt;br/&gt;generalizable formal model of the approval decision.
The investigator models&lt;br/&gt;product approval as an optimal stopping
decision by an uncertain&lt;br/&gt;regulator subject to political demand for the
drug. The regulator seeks to&lt;br/&gt;preserve a reputation for consumer
protection and sees drug approvals as&lt;br/&gt;irreversible (or reversible only
at a significant reputation cost). The&lt;br/&gt;payoff of approval is also a
function of the political "demand" for drug&lt;br/&gt;approvals from consumers
(patients) and producers (firms). The model&lt;br/&gt;predicts that even under
risk-neutrality, quick approvals are highly&lt;br/&gt;unlikely, not all drugs
will be approved, and that larger firms receive&lt;br/&gt;"protection" (quicker
approvals) even when firms are not
politically&lt;br/&gt;organized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator tests
this model using maximum likelihood&lt;br/&gt;duration analyses of FDA drug
review times. The formal model suggests that&lt;br/&gt;the proper hazard
function for estimation is the inverse Gaussian&lt;br/&gt;distribution, which
has a non-monotonic hazard function. Drug approval&lt;br/&gt;times will be
modeled as a function of political preferences, budgetary&lt;br/&gt;shifts,
media coverage and congressional hearings on the diseases treated&lt;br/&gt;by
the drug, and characteristics of the submitting firms.
Preliminary&lt;br/&gt;results on a partial sample of 67 drugs approved from 1985
to 1995 support&lt;br/&gt;the model's predictions, and also suggest that
political "control" in drug&lt;br/&gt;approval occurs less through "principals"
(Congress and the presidents)&lt;br/&gt;than through organized interests
(patients and firms) and the media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;