* 0334771
* Optical:  Collaborative Research: Bandgap Engineered Ultrafast Heterostructure Avalanche Photodiodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Joe Campbell, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 09/30/2006
* USD 185,000.00

0334771&lt;br/&gt;Campbell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this collaborative
program is to develop high-speed, ultra-low-noise avalanche photodiodes (APDs)
for high-capacity fiber optic communication links. The program will have two
main thrusts: (1) a theoretical and simulation effort to design and optimize the
high-performance APDs and (2) an experimental program to fabricate,
characterize, and distribute the APDs. Commercially-available APDs have been
widely deployed in 2.5 GB/s optical receivers but have not achieved the
anticipated performance advantage at 10 GB/s and it appears unequivocal that
they will not be adequate for future 40 GB/s systems. The PIs propose to
significantly improve APD performance by introducing new structures and
materials based on APD technologies that have recently been developed by the
PIs. These include (1) the development of evanescently coupled waveguide
structures and (2) the incorporation of optimized impact-ionization engineered
multiplication regions. The availability of high-performance APD receivers at
40GB/s as well as 3 to 5 dB improvements in the sensitivity of 10GB/s receivers
will have a momentous impact on high-capacity optical transmission
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important feature of the program is the
development of human resources who will be trained to work in this critically
important field. The students who work on this project will become experts in
their particular area and will gain extensive understanding in the field of
optoelectronics. Of particular note, one of the participating institutions, the
University of New Mexico (UNM) is a minority-serving institution (40% of the
undergraduate students belong to minority groups including members of several
Indian tribes), which gives the PIs the opportunity to recruit undergraduate and
graduate students from a pool of under-represented groups. The PIs continue to
bring into the classroom relevant elements of their research experience. Both of
the PIs' institutions have been actively involved in and advocating web-enhanced
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;