* 0334869
* NMR Investigation of Density Waves, Organic conductors, Superconductors, and Conducting Polymers
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/2003,12/31/2006
* W. Gilbert Clark, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2006
* USD 325,000.00

This individual investigator award supports a project whose main thrust is an
experimental study of correlated electron systems and conducting polymers,
mostly using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). NMR is a powerful tool to measure
the static and dynamic properties of the magnetic field and charge
configurations of a density wave, single electrons, band electrons, local
electronic moments, or the vortex lattice in a superconductor. Topics to be
studied include: (1) properties of the order parameters in the charge density
wave system Rb(0.30)MoO(3); (2) unusual properties of the electron-doped cuprate
superconductor Pr(1.85)Ce(0.15)CuO(4-y); (3) magnetic and electronic properties
of the organic conductor lambda-(BETS)(2)FeCl(4), which has a paramagnetic metal
phase, an antiferromagnetic insulating phase, and a field-induced
superconducting phase; and (4) electron transport and dynamics in conducting
polymers. These investigations will characterize the unusual properties of these
systems, help to understand the way in which interactions determine these
properties, and provide basic information that may be used in their technical
applications. Important components of the work are the education of
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers, and the
development of advanced instrumentation and experimental techniques used for
this work and made available to the broader scientific community.

This individual investigator award supports a project whose primary thrust is an
experimental study of materials in which interactions among many electrons lead
to unusual physical properties. The main experimental tool to be used is nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR), which has proven to be very informative in such
investigations. Systems to be studied include a high temperature superconductor,
a two-dimensional organic conductor with very unusual properties, including a
superconducting phase that is turned on by a very high magnetic field, and
electrically conducting polymers that cover a wide range of conductivity from
nearly insulating to metallic behavior. The value of these investigations is
that they will characterize the unusual properties of these systems, help to
understand the way in which interactions among electrons determine these
properties, and provide basic information that may be used in their technical
applications. Important components of the work include the education of
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers, as well
as the development of advanced instrumentation and experimental techniques used
for this work and made available to the broader scientific community.