* 0335590
* Collaborative Research:  Miocene Volcanism in the Sierra Nevada, California:  Stratigraphy, Volcanology, Geochronology and Structural Geology
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Ian Skilling, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 02/28/2005
* USD 59,551.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0125050&lt;br/&gt;Skilling&lt;br/&gt;University of
Southern Mississippi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Collaborative Research proposal
between the UC Santa Barbara and the University of Southern Mississippi will
establish a regional stratigraphic structural and geochronological framework for
Miocene volcanic rocks of the northern to central Sierra Nevada, and at the same
time reconstruct structural settings and volcanological processes. The main
motivation is to evaluate the tectonic significance and relationship of these
mid-Miocene volcanic rocks to modern and ancient subduction, Basin and Range
extension, and hotspot settings. Detailed volcanic and sedimentary lithofacies
maps will be produced and used to determine the nature and timing of synvolcanic
faulting. Petrography, image analysis and Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)
imaging of the Sierran breccias will be employed to study and quantify clast and
matrix types, morphologies, dimensions and fragmentation styles (brittle,
ductile, transitional), and results will be compared with published examples of
volcanic breccias of all plausible origins. Preliminary XRF geochemical analysis
of representative suites (including all samples to be dated) will be completed
and compared with compositions of clasts with matrices in the breccias. To test
for geological consistency in our age data, sampling for 40Ar/39Ar geochronology
will concentrate on stratigraphic successions containing at least three or four
different datable units. Ar geochronology of single mineral grains (total
fusions) as well as incremental step heating experiments will be completed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;