* 0335390
* SGER:     Cost-Effective Substitutes for Carbon Nanotubes and Other Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Bor Jang, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/2004
* USD 63,415.00

Cost-Effective Substitutes for Carbon Nanotubes and Other
Nanocomposites&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Shing-Chung Wong, Co-PI Bor Z Jang,
&lt;br/&gt;Department of Mechanical Engineering&lt;br/&gt;North Dakota State
University&lt;br/&gt;Fargo, ND 58105 &lt;br/&gt;Email: Josh.Wong@ndsu.nodak.edu
&lt;br/&gt;Tel: (701) 231-8840 Fax: (701) 231-
8913&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
novel design for nanocomposites using nanoscaled graphene plates (NGPs) is
investigated. Processes for carbon nanotube (CNT), despite its great promise in
maneuvering varied functionality, are prohibitively expensive for composite
applications. Instead of trying to discover much lower-cost processes for CNT,
we make use of a mass production processing technology and formulate a distinct
and cost-effective breed of nanoscale reinforcements. If successful, these
nanomaterials will be available at much lower cost and tailorable for different
end-use requirements. The proposed nanocomposites are distinctly different from
existing carbon black, CNT and nanoclay reinforcements. Yet they can be used as
functional fillers like CNTs. Preliminary data showed that the resulting
composites dramatically reduced the percolation threshold, competitive with
those of CNTs, for electrical transition from an insulator to a semiconductor.
Interesting observations like reduced melt viscosity and improved UV shielding
were made. The proposed research includes fabrication, characterization and
multiscale modeling of NGPs and their nanocomposites. &lt;br/&gt;