* 0335411
* Design, Validation, and Dissemination of Measures of Content Knowledge for Teaching Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Heather Hill, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2010
* USD 4,343,980.00

Research on teacher learning has suffered from a number of chronic
methodological difficulties. Despite repeated calls for improved scholarship and
more empirically grounded policy recommendations, the field been constrained by
what scholars have been able to measure: characteristics of the learning
opportunities themselves; teacher attitudes and beliefs which result from those
opportunities; and, to some extent, teacher practices which emerge after such
encounters. Typically left unmeasured, however, is a component which mediates
each of these and is itself a significant target of many interventions, namely,
teachers' content knowledge. The project proposed here would aim to help redress
this problem in the area of K-8 mathematics, building on previous work to
continue developing measures of teachers' mathematical knowledge for teaching.
These measures will then be made available to MSP mathematics projects in hopes
of improving the evaluation of those with programs for teacher learning and
preparation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five categories of work are proposed: (1)
expanding existing measures upward to capture middle grade mathematics content
for teaching, and developing new measures in key content areas; (2) validating
these measures through interviews with MSP participants and other teachers,
reviews by mathematicians and mathematics educators, and other means; (3)
supporting high-quality uses of these measures via tools (database, core scales)
and technical assistance to MSP evaluators; (4) building a self-sustaining
system of measures use; and (5) building and testing theory through piloting and
validation work. As these five aspects of work progress, we will carefully
consider issues of equity, both from the theoretical and measurement
perspectives. We will also consult with measurement and statistical experts to
promote the production of the most technically sound and valid measures
possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal will help advance knowledge and understanding in two related fields: in
defining the component elements of knowledge for teaching K-8 mathematics, and
in understanding the effects of professional development meant to improve that
knowledge. The authors are qualified to do this work through their past
experiences with theory and measures development, and have laid out a careful
plan of instrument development over a five-year period.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
enhances the infrastructure for research into teacher professional development.
Based on interest in existing measures, the authors expect these measures to be
useful not only to MSPs, but also to others who seek to understand teacher
learning. These measures can be used to evaluate teachers' learning in pre-
service teacher education programs; to make comparisons between preparation in
traditional teacher education programs and alternative routes to certification;
to judge the efficacy of professional development aimed at improving teachers'
content knowledge for teaching; and to estimate the effects of curriculum
materials designed to improve teachers' knowledge of mathematics and students.
Finally, this project contributes fundamentally to theory development, asking
the question, "What do teachers need to know and be able to do with mathematics
in order to teach mathematics?" By answering this question through item-writing
and psychometric analyses as work progresses, the authors seek to contribute to
progress in theory, practice, and policy in this field.&lt;br/&gt;