* 0335244
* NRT:  ORBIT:  Open-Access Research Testbed for Next-Generation Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Roy Yates, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2008
* USD 5,978,115.00

This collaborative research proposal is focused on the creation of a large-scale
wireless network testbed which will facilitate a broad range of experimental
research on next-generation protocols and application concepts. It is recognized
that powerful technology and market trends towards portable computing and
communication imply an increasingly important role for wireless access in the
next-generation Internet. At the same time, new sensor and pervasive computing
applications are expected to drive large-scale deployments of embedded computing
devices interconnected via new types of short-range wireless networks. The speed
of technology innovation in the wireless networking field can be significantly
increased with the development of a flexible, open-access wireless network
testbed that can be shared by experimental researchers across the networking
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed ORBIT (Open Access Research Testbed
for Next-Generation Wireless Networks) system is a two-tier laboratory
emulator/field trial network testbed designed to achieve reproducibility of
experimentation, while also supporting evaluation of protocols and applications
in real-world settings. In particular, the laboratory-based wireless network
emulator will be constructed using a novel approach involving a large two-
dimensional grid of static and mobile 802.11x radio nodes which can be
dynamically interconnected into specified topologies with reproducible wireless
channel models. All radio devices in the system provide open API's that permit
end-users to download radio link, MAC and network layer protocols to construct a
specific networking scenario. Once the basic protocol or application concepts
have been validated on the lab emulator platform, users can migrate their
experiments to the field test network which provides a configurable mix of both
high-speed cellular (3G) and 802.11x wireless access in a real-world setting.
Extensive measurement tools will be provided to support research evaluation,
including both network traffic and radio link/spectrum usage
aspects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the development of the ORBIT
wireless testbed infrastructure, this project includes a comprehensive set of
"experimental work packages" intended to generate design requirements and serve
as end-user application drivers for the system being developed. Specific
research topics to be covered during the course of this project
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Ad hoc networking in 802.11x WLAN scenarios
[Raychaudhuri, Seskar; Rutgers &amp; Acharya; IBM]&lt;br/&gt;2. Message-based
multimedia delivery [Schulzrinne, Columbia; Yates, Rutgers]&lt;br/&gt;3. XML-
based content multicasting for mobile information services [Ott, Raychaudhuri;
Rutgers]&lt;br/&gt;4. Location-based mobile network services [Schulzrinne;
Columbia]&lt;br/&gt;5. Pervasive computing software models for sensor networks
[Parashar, Zhang; Rutgers]&lt;br/&gt;6. Security protocols for next-generation
wireless networks [Kobayashi; Princeton &amp; Trappe; Rutgers]&lt;br/&gt;7.
Intelligent network middleware (INM) for mobile services [Paul; Lucent Bell
Labs]&lt;br/&gt;8. Peer-to-peer infrastructure for VoIP and IM [Acharya, Saha;
IBM Research]&lt;br/&gt;9. Power/bandwidth efficient media delivery to portable
platforms [Ramaswamy, Wang; Thomson R&amp;D]&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will be conducted as a collaborative effort between several university research
groups in the NY/NJ region: Rutgers, Columbia, and Princeton, along with
industrial partners Lucent Bell Labs, IBM Research and Thomson. The wireless
network testbed will be developed and operated by Rutgers WINLAB, using
facilities located at the Rutgers New Brunswick campus and at partner sites in
the area. The testbed will be available for remote or on-site access by other
research groups nationally, subject to NSF guidelines for use. Additional
partners will be sought during the course of the program both for testbed
infrastructure development and for research
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific/technical merits of the
proposed project are: advancing the state-of-the-art in design
and&lt;br/&gt;implementation of flexible and scalable wireless network testbeds,
and experimental investigation of novel&lt;br/&gt;architectures, protocols and
service concepts for next-generation wireless networks. Broader impacts are
in&lt;br/&gt;acceleration of the R &amp; D cycle for wireless networking by
providing the research community with a shared-use experimental platform, and in
fostering increased use of experimental methods in both research and teaching.