* 0335933
* Rhenium-Osmium Isotope Investigations of the Taitao Ophiolite
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Richard Walker, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William P. Leeman
* 12/31/2007
* USD 222,817.00

Accurately constraining the average 187Os/188Os ratio of the upper mantle (where
187Re decays to 187Os with a half life of about 42 billion years) should prove
useful in determining how long subducted oceanic crust remains isolated from the
upper mantle source of mid ocean ridge basalts. The parent element of the Re-Os
isotope system, Re, is preferentially removed from the mantle and concentrated
in oceanic crust, when oceanic crust is created through mantle melting. The
daughter element, Os, largely remains behind in the mantle residue. Because of
the reduction in the parent-daughter ratio in the residual mantle, long-term
removal and isolation of oceanic crust (perhaps by removal to the lower mantle)
from the upper mantle will lead to retarded growth of the 187Os/188Os ratio of
the upper mantle compared to that which would have occurred had the oceanic
crust not been removed from it. Thus, determination of the average 187Os/188Os
ratio of the upper mantle can reveal how much oceanic crust has been removed
from the upper mantle, and not yet mixed back into the upper mantle. &lt;br/&gt;
Some previous studies have targeted ophiolites (slivers of upper oceanic mantle
and crust emplaced into long-lived continental crust) to reveal the gradual
evolution of Os isotopes in the upper mantle through time. The interpretation of
Os isotopic data derived from ophiolite rocks, however, has proven
contentious/problematic because of uncertainties in the origin of the Os present
in different rocks of an ophiolite. Here, we propose to study the 187Os/188Os
ratios and Re and Os concentrations of rocks and minerals from the different
rocks present in the Taitao ophiolite of southwestern Chile. The Taitao
ophiolite is perhaps the youngest ophiolite (&lt;16 Ma) and is associated with
the Chile triple junction. Study of a very young ophiolite is important for
understanding the origin of Os isotopes in ophiolites because the youth of the
ophiolite reduces uncertainties in initial isotopic compositions resulting from
age corrections, a large source of uncertainty for the Re-Os system in such
rocks. This simplification will permit a focus on other processes that may
complicate the Re-Os systematics of ophiolite assemblages, such as melt-rock and
water-rock interactions. The results of this work will allow isotopic
comparisons between bulk peridotites, chromites, olivine, pyroxene and possibly
sulfides. It may also be possible to compare the isotopic compositions of the
various types of ophiolitic rocks. Knowledge about the behavior of the Re-Os
isotope system in the Taitao ophiolite will ultimately be applied to the
interpretation of the growing global database for older ophiolites. This
information in turn can potentially be used to place more reliable constraints
on the evolution of the 187Os/188Os ratio of the upper
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;