* 0335143
* SGER:     Toward the Automated Tactilization of Graphical Images
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Melody Ivory-Ndiaye, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2004
* USD 82,715.00

Tactual perception of graphical images is a challenging problem. In this
project, the PI and his team propose to develop new image processing and
understanding techniques that specifically relate to low-bandwidth tactual
perception. The PI and his team will design and build a prototype of an
interactive Tactile Image Editor (TIE) that will enable sighted users to
translate, as automatically as possible, graphical images into highly
comprehensible Braille graphics (raised dots embossed on paper) that can be
viewed tactually by blind persons. The focus is on graphical images (drawings,
graphs, charts, and diagrams) that appear in textbooks, research papers, and Web
pages that are used by scientists, engineers, and mathematicians (students and
professionals). Criteria will be developed for what makes a Braille graphic as
understandable as possible. That information will be provided to graphical image
transcribers to enable them to make good decisions about the transcription of
graphical images either manually or with the assistance of the TIE. To achieve
his goals, the PI and his team will explore the use of image processing
techniques to automate and expedite the conversion of graphical images that are
in print or digital format into Braille graphics. They will explore application
of low-level image processing techniques such as denoising, edge detection,
smoothing, and resolution reduction, to determine heuristics for producing
effective Braille graphics. They will validate developed heuristics with an
experimental study, in which blind participants will evaluate the readability
and comprehensibility of images produced by the derived heuristics. They will
explore the application of segmentation techniques to enable them to locate text
and other objects that need special attention within an image (for instance,
text must be extracted and placed appropriately). They will develop
classification and learning algorithms to enable them to determine the type of
image being processed, because different kinds of images may require different
processing steps. They will develop a software prototype, the Tactile Image
Editor (TIE), which will enable them to easily apply the image processing
heuristics, segmentation techniques, and classification and learning algorithms
in future research. They will conduct an observational study of Braille
transcribers, to better understand the processes they use and to inform the
future design of the TIE's interface and
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will lead to
better and more timely access by blind scientists, engineers, and mathematicians
(students and professionals) to graphical images that are becoming more and more
prevalent in textbooks, research papers, and on the Web. The research will also
lead to a better understanding of what makes Braille graphics most
understandable; this information will be useful for graphical image
transcribers, whether they use the TIE tool or not. Although the focus of the
research is on scientific graphical material, the TIE is potentially useful in
other areas that rely on graphical images to covey information. The students,
both graduate and undergraduate, who work on the project will benefit from its
cross-disciplinary nature.&lt;br/&gt;