* 0335110
* Optical:  NSF Collaborative Research:  Ultra-High-Capacity Optical Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Alan Willner, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2008
* USD 480,000.00

0335110&lt;br/&gt;Willner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultra-small photonic crystal
structures have emerged as a potentially critical technology due to their
promise of small size, ability to perform many functions on a single chip, and
low cost. However, key challenges remain in order to match specific fabrication
designs to system performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will combine
expertise in optoelectronic device fabrication (CalTech) and optical systems
design (USC) to link these unique structures with potential revolutionary
applications. He intends to innovate a common technology platform that can: (i)
accommodate different types of devices, (ii) provide monolithic integration, and
(iii) operate simultaneously on many wavelengths. He will emphasize that these
devices will generate and process an optical signal in new and exciting ways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will concentrate on: &lt;br/&gt;(a) classical
networks: enabling all-optical data-packet processing for =40 Gbit/s signals,
including: correlation, header recognition, AND/OR/XOR logic, addition, and
check-sum.&lt;br/&gt;(b) quantum networks: enabling highly-secure communications
by secret-key single-photon generation and transmission. We will determine the
effects of fiber dispersion, PMD and nonlinearities.&lt;br/&gt;He will build
"nanophotonic chips" that include: (i) quantum dot lasers, and (ii) optically-
pumped nanocavity logic gates with gain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The research will help remove key obstacles that may prevent the realization of
ultra-high-performance and highly-secure future dynamic all-optical networks.
The PI will also make strides towards a single, integrated materials platform
for many types of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational Impact: The PI
will provide a multidisciplinary collaborative environment that will incorporate
students from: (a) Caltech's Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships and
Minority Undergraduate Research Fellowships, and (b) USC's Undergraduate
Research Merit Scholars Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
vertically-integrated collaboration between device and systems groups will find
a connection between device parameters and systems performance. Moreover,
developing a common materials platform is a significant step forward, as is
finding building blocks for packet-based classical and quantum
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;