* 0335304
* NRT:  Heterogeneous Wireless Access Network Test Bed (Rev.)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Dirk Grunwald, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joseph B. Evans
* 11/30/2004
* USD 811,360.00

Over the next 10-15 years, the core and access networks will evolve in different
directions.&lt;br/&gt;The core will evolve toward an all-optical system, while
the access network will continue to&lt;br/&gt;experience a proliferation of
technologies and network types, tuned to the economics of
specific&lt;br/&gt;deployments and the requirements of users and applications.
In particular, wireless technologies&lt;br/&gt;will play an increasing role not
only for mobile applications but as a cost-competitive substitute&lt;br/&gt;for
fixed wire access networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers propose to
develop a test bed focused on the access network, containing both wired
and&lt;br/&gt;wireless components. It will act as a shared-facility test bed for
research on connectivity, quality&lt;br/&gt;of service, security,
reliability/availability, and network and traffic management
for&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous access networks. The test bed will also serve as a
proof-of-concept test bed for&lt;br/&gt;wireless networks that exploit advanced
flexible software defined radio devices, steerable&lt;br/&gt;antennas and upper
millimeter wave point-to-point links to improve network performance
under&lt;br/&gt;resource constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will be two
main academic centers of activity (Stevens Institute of Technology,
and&lt;br/&gt;University of Colorado), supported by activities at one other
institution, (University of Utah).&lt;br/&gt;There will also be substantial
participation from non-academic partners, including
technology&lt;br/&gt;companies (Vanu, Inc., Lightpointe, and BBN). Use of the
test bed by others will be solicited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The access network is vitally important for service to the end user,
yet&lt;br/&gt;frequently neglected in studies that focus on the high-speed core
or the wireless link in isolation.&lt;br/&gt;A test bed in this area will enable
collaborative research on ways to exploit and manage multiple&lt;br/&gt;networks
simultaneously for overall optimization, maintain connectivity as mobile devices
roam,&lt;br/&gt;exploit one network to support another, and improve security. In
the past networking research&lt;br/&gt;has focused on layers 3 and higher, while
wireless research has primarily looked at layers 1 and&lt;br/&gt;2. A critical
aspect of this test bed is that it will support cross-layer integrated
experiments all the&lt;br/&gt;way from layer 1 to layer 5, leading to future
networks that can exploit physical layer flexibility,&lt;br/&gt;application
awareness, and advanced routing for overall better performance and
service.&lt;br/&gt;The hardware and software deployed in the test bed will be
designed for easy modification&lt;br/&gt;and repeatable experiments at all
layers. The team building the facility brings deep experience in&lt;br/&gt;these
modifiable systems: Dirk Grunwald (Colorado) with the Click modular router, John
Chapin&lt;br/&gt;(Vanu, Inc.) with Vanu Software Radio, Jay Lepreau (Utah) with
the Emulab software platform,&lt;br/&gt;Craig Partridge (BBN) with protocol
software, and Igor Alexandrov (Stevens) with millimeter&lt;br/&gt;wave bands
radio. The effort is led by Paul Kolodzy (Stevens), formerly of the FCC
and&lt;br/&gt;DARPA, who brings a wide overview of access network
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed test bed will provide
a major research facility, bringing&lt;br/&gt;together a community from all over
the country to focus on the interrelated problems facing&lt;br/&gt;access
networks. In addition, novel educational approaches will be pursued where
students will&lt;br/&gt;have access to multiple advisors with key complementary
expertise, and key industrial partners.&lt;br/&gt;A series of high profile
workshops will facilitate research agenda setting and
community&lt;br/&gt;formation. Tangible products will include widely
disseminated research papers and a series of&lt;br/&gt;white papers aimed at
non-specialists. Finally a series of demonstrations of the test bed will
be&lt;br/&gt;conducted for the research and lay
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress on the research problems of access
networks will reduce the cost and increase the&lt;br/&gt;service level provided
to all users of the Internet, especially those in currently
underserved&lt;br/&gt;communities. Additionally, devices and techniques that
better handle heterogeneous wireless&lt;br/&gt;networks will improve the
interoperability problems facing public safety and homeland security.