* 0335621
* Advancing the State-of-the-Art in Evaluation: Developing a Comprehensive, Value-Engaged Approach to Evaluating STEM Educational Programs
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2006
* Lizanne DeStefano, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 11/30/2006
* USD 310,530.00

Intellectual Merit: The investigators propose to develop an evaluation model
that will (1) include multiple methodological traditions, multiple evaluation
theories, and multiple stakeholder perspectives and interests; (2) explicitly
engage complex, socio-political issues of diversity, difference, equity, and
justice, specifically as they relate to historical underrepresentation of
individuals from particular demographic groups in science and mathematics
related educational and career tracks-notably, females, people of color, people
with disabilities, and residents of rural and other under-served areas; (3)
engage critical contexts of contemporary educational reform and emphasize
challenges of context for meaningful STEM program designs and activities; and
(4) incorporate meaningful applications of technology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The model will further understanding of
how to enable and enhance meaningful student learning among all students, with
particular attention to those traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields and
thus to issues of equity and fairness in STEM policies, programs, and practices.
The evaluation model has unique potential to not only assess the quality,
effectiveness, and equity of STEM educational programs, but also to help
constitute better, more equitable programs&lt;br/&gt;