* 0335539
* 5th Bone Fluid Flow Workshop: Organ to Cell, Lab Bench to Bedside, on Earth and in Space, Cleveland, Ohio, September 17-18, 2003
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Melissa Knothe Tate, Cleveland Clinic Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 01/31/2004
* USD 5,000.00

0335539&lt;br/&gt;Knothe Tate&lt;br/&gt;Partial support is being provided for
undergraduate and graduate student trainees from underrepresented groups to
participate in the 5th Bone Flow Workshop, Cleveland Clinic, September 17-18,
2003. Minority high school students are to provide support services for the
meeting (help with audiovisual systems; prepare abstract books; assist with
registration; assist with lab tours). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the workshop lies in its focus on the fluid flowing through the complex
milieu that is bone. The workshop is expected to have a broad impact in moving
the field of inquiry from its dominance by theoretical and experimental studies
of macroscopic tissues toward addressing the importance of general properties of
fluid flow at the micro-nano level. The workshop is specifically centered around
investigation of these small length scale aspects of bone fluid flow and how
they relate to the previous macroscopic studies. The traditional Mechanical and
Bioengineering departments represented at previous workshops has been broadened
by including speakers from departments of Engineering Physics, Chemical
Engineering, and Anatomy. This should expand the base of investigators
interested in the problems of bone fluid flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meeting
results are to be posted on the website http://www.ncmr.org/events/bone2003/,
with abstracts of talks and posters and is to include a report with synopses of
major discussion points and new insights. &lt;br/&gt;