* 0335111
* Workshop to Synthesize Research Priorities in the McMurdo Sound-Ross Sea Region, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* David Ainley, H.T. Harvey & Associates
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/2004
* USD 52,060.00

The Antarctic freshwater-based ecosystem in the McMurdo Dry Valleys is one of
the most completely studied ecosystems in Antarctic due to establishment of a
Long-term Ecological Research (LTER) program. A very well studied marine
ecosystem in the Antarctic is that of McMurdo Sound and the immediately adjacent
southwestern Ross Sea. This is the result of several decades of research in the
vicinity by three national research programs (the United States, New Zealand and
Italy), including in-depth studies of circulation, sea ice variability, nutrient
availability, primary productivity and algal composition, composition and
productivity of the epontic community, benthic community organization,
ecophysiology of fish, birds and seals, and the demography of resident seal and
bird populations. A number of efforts have extended long enough through time to
have assessed the long-term, decadal and interannual variability in circulation,
sea ice and seals and bird demography, and benthic community composition;
significant decadal and interannual signals have been identified. Despite this
effort and the collection of ecological knowledge, a number of components and
their linkages within the food web of McMurdo Sound remain poorly known. This
workshop will examine the portfolio of past research and current understanding
in order to prioritize research themes for the upcoming decades. In addition,
the workshop will also examine the feasibility and value of establishing an LTER
program in the vicinity of McMurdo to address deficiencies and to fully
understand the critical interactions among ecosystem components so as to be able
to predict ecological variations that are driven by large-scale changes in
physical forcing (e.g., circulation, climate) as well as top-down forcing. The
broader impacts of education and public outreach will be addressed in
discussions. A McMurdo Sound LTER program would complement the LTER program
already in operation in the western Antarctic Peninsula (Palmer LTER). Moreover,
a McMurdo Sound LTER would take advantage of the substantial logistic and
scientific resources available through the McMurdo Station Crary Lab and USAP
personnel. To assess the feasibility and challenges of initiating an LTER
program for McMurdo Sound, the workshop will both polar and non-polar
scientists, with discipline and regional expertise. Also, attendees will include
scientists from underrepresented groups and scientists from the international
community. The results of the workshop will be disseminated broadly via a
website.