* 0335589
* Coordination and Management of the U.S. JGOFS Synthesis and Modeling Project:  The Second and Final Phase
* GEO,OCE
* 05/12/2003,04/30/2005
* Scott Doney, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2005
* USD 153,231.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-009738 / OCE-0097327&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project constitutes the management component for the second and final phase of
the Synthesis and Modeling Program (SMP) of the U.S. Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (U.S.JGOFS). The overall objective of the SMP as defined in the
Implementation Plan (U.S. JGOFS, 1997) is to "synthesize knowledge gained from
the U.S. JGOFS and related studies into a set of models that reflect our current
understanding of the oceanic carbon cycle" with emphasis on the processes
controlling the partitioning of carbon among oceanic reservoirs and between the
ocean and atmosphere. The success of the SMP therefore depends heavily on
fostering strong interactions between the observational and modeling
biogeochemical communities and on focusing those efforts in a coordinated
fashion. Over the past three years, the SMP has grown into a vigorous scientific
effort with some 50 funded projects from NSF, NASA, NOAA, and DOE and about 100
principal and co-investigators. This project will therefore support the SMP
management team's involvement in project oversight and coordination, ongoing
program scientific relevance, development of the required infrastructure, and
communication among SMP components and to the outside
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;