* 0335173
* Strongly Correlated Electron Phenomena in Rare Earth and Actinide Intermetallics
* MPS,DMR
* 10/15/2003,12/31/2006
* M. Brian Maple, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2006
* USD 455,000.00

As a result of hybridization between localized f-electron and itinerant electron
states, compounds of rare earth and actinide elements with an unstable valence
(e.g., Ce, Sm, Eu, Tm, Yb, U) display a rich variety of novel electronic
phenomena. This Individual Investigator Award will support research that focuses
on normal and superconducting states near quantum critical points,
unconventional types of superconductivity, and other strongly correlated
electron phenomena in materials such as CeMIn5 (M = Co, Rh, Ir) and the new
filled skutterudite heavy fermion superconductor PrOs4Sb12. The research
integrates the preparation of novel f-electron materials with the measurement of
their transport, thermal, and magnetic properties as a function of temperature,
magnetic field, and pressure, all in the same laboratory. Results obtained will
advance understanding of strongly correlated electron phenomena, while possibly
leading to the discovery of new phenomena and/or novel materials. The research
may have implications for technological applications involving high temperature
superconductors and materials for thermoelectric refrigeration and magnetic
information storage. Involved postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and
undergraduate students will be trained in advanced techniques for the
preparation and characterization of novel materials and the measurement of
various physical properties of these materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
materials formed from rare earth or actinide elements display a rich variety of
extraordinary and as yet poorly understood phenomena, due to unusually strong
electron interactions. Examples include high-temperature superconductors, heavy
fermion materials in which electrons act as if they are hundreds of times
heavier than usual, and materials in which superconductivity and magnetism
coexist despite their usual mutual exclusivity. This Individual Investigator
Award will support research that integrates, in the same laboratory, the
preparation of such novel materials and the measurement of their physical
properties under different conditions of temperature, magnetic field, and
pressure. Results of these studies will help advance understanding of the way in
which the interactions between electrons generate these striking types of
behavior, and could lead to the discovery of new phenomena and/or novel
materials. The research may have implications for technological applications
involving high temperature superconductors and materials for thermoelectric
refrigeration and magnetic information storage. Involved postdoctoral
researchers, graduate students, and undergraduate students will be trained in
advanced techniques for the preparation and characterization of novel materials
and the measurement of various physical properties of these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;