* 0336581
* Student and Faculty Learning Communities to Increase Graduation Rates in STEM Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2004,09/30/2009
* William Cobern, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2009
* USD 1,971,358.00

This project is developing support structures and learning communities for
first-year students in STEM disciplines, and coupling these with professional
development and support activities for faculty involved with introductory STEM
courses to shift their focus from teaching to learning. The project builds on an
earlier collaboration between faculty in the College of Engineering and Applied
Sciences (CEAS) and the College of Education (COE) that now also includes the
College of Arts and Sciences and the Mallinson Institute for Science Education.
Particular features of the project include clustering of introductory courses in
mathematics, chemistry, and writing; development of a First-Year STEM Seminar;
and Drop-In Centers for group study and tutoring. The First-Year STEM Seminar
includes career development; readings and discussions that present science and
technology in historical, social, and cultural context; and an innovative
outreach activity to middle school students through the design, construction,
and presentation of STEM principles by the STEP undergraduate students.
Components of the faculty learning community formation include reading and
discussion, faculty development on alternative pedagogical strategies, and
course coordination to improve the overall learning environment for the
students.