* 0336390
* STEP - AHEAD:     Access to Higher Education through Academic Retention and Development
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Stuart Long, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2009
* USD 1,560,449.00

The number of students graduating in engineering or other STEM disciplines is
being increased by use of a combination of recruitment and retention strategies.
The program has four components; two directed toward retention in engineering,
another toward recruiting females into engineering or other STEM majors and the
fourth one is a more global recruiting effort to increase the number of
engineering majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A one-week program for beginning
sophomores and transfer students is designed to improve retention. The program
designated a "Redshirt Camp" embodies a learning community to enhance students'
abilities in problem solving, areas of mathematics and MATLAB programming. The
intent is to enable the students to be successful in courses in circuits,
statics and, thermodynamics. During the ensuing year, students will attend
follow-up workshops scheduled for weekly two-hour
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recruitment effort primarily is directed
toward the number of women entering engineering or other STEM disciplines by
engaging them in a one-week GRADE (Girls Reaching and Demonstrating Excellence)
camp for 9th - 12th grade females. The fourth component is the Independent Study
Mentorship for high school juniors and seniors. Students will be paired with
local engineers to become aware of the opportunities and requirements in
engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is increase
the annual graduation of engineering majors by 100 to 120
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;