* 0336455
* Convexity Problems in Submanifold Geometry and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 05/09/2003,05/31/2005
* Mohammad Ghomi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2005
* USD 70,844.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0204190.

The principal investigator is interested in concrete problems in classical
differential geometry and topology of curves and surfaces in Euclidean space,
specially those which involve some notion of convexity. The proposed
investigations include: (i) Certain nodal domains (shadows) cast on a surface by
vectorfields which correspond to natural transformations, and developing the
applications of these for surfaces of constant mean curvature, and surfaces
whose gauss map satisfies a two-piece-property; (ii) Closed curves without
parallel tangent lines (skew loops) and their relation to quadric surfaces;
(iii) Global properties of locally convex surfaces with boundary, including
connections with Monge-Ampere equations, and a convex hull property which is
dual to that of minimal surfaces; (iv) Existence and regularity of certain
deformations of space curves (unfoldings) to study extremals of knot energies
and distortion.

The study of curves and surfaces has been the primary motivation for the
development of much of differential geometry and geometric topology, which in
turn has found significant applications in physical sciences. Notions of
convexity have often proved fruitful for solving problems in this area,
specially those which involve optimizing various quantities. Those aspects of
the principal investigator's work dealing with shadows on illuminated surfaces
is motivated in part by a study of soap films and may lead to applications for
computer vision. Further, the investigations on knot energies may be of interest
in studying the DNA. The primary motivation of the investigator, however, is
based on aesthetic considerations and the intuitive visual appeal of low
dimensional geometric problems.