* 0336637
* Animal Health for the Environment And Development (AHEAD) Planning Forum - World Parks Congress, Durban, South Africa, September 2003
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Steve Osofsky, Wildlife Conservation Society
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2004
* USD 17,970.00

The Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) will launch an initiative called Animal
Health for the Environment And Development (AHEAD) within the context of the
IUCN World Parks Congress to be held in Durban, South Africa in September 2003.
With AHEAD's initial focus on East and southern Africa and its key protected
areas, buffer zones, corridors and transboundary visions, this venue is
particularly timely. The theme of this World Parks Congress, a gathering that
only occurs approximately once every ten years, is Benefits Beyond Boundaries.
The participants will include regional (Eastern and southern Africa) and other
world-renowned scientists to participate in the two-day forum. Fifty-five
participants are anticipated, and will include a mix of experts from both basic
and applied science fields, all recognized by their peers as leaders in their
fields. The symposium will focus on concrete deliverables in terms of addressing
the ecological impacts of infectious disease, including a plan for follow-on
action in the management and research arenas. Catalyzing real world change for
the better is of course very important, and the goal of this workshop.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animal and human health issues represent a neglected
sector of critical importance to the long-term ecological and sociopolitical
security of protected areas around the world and costs US authorities millions
of dollars to manage. These issues merit more proactive attention in and around
many of the world's protected areas than they have gotten to date. Finding
solutions to these issues is a multifaceted and complex process and requires
sound basic and applied science as well as input from leading practitioners in
the field- an iterative process that the proposed forum has a unique opportunity
to catalyze.&lt;br/&gt;