* 0336392
* SURE-STEP Supporting Undergraduate Research and Education
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2009
* S. Narasinga Rao, University of Central Oklahoma
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 09/30/2009
* USD 1,999,050.00

The University of Central Oklahoma (UCO) and its four partners in the SURE-STEP
Consortium, Cameron University, East Central University, Langston University (a
Historically Black College or University), and Southwestern Oklahoma State
University, plan to increase the number of students who graduate in STEM majors
by 10%. As participants in the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics program for the past seven
years, all five of the consortium universities have helped students realize
their dreams of earning baccalaureate degrees. Through this project, the
Consortium is piloting methods not previously related in these institutions in
order to interest, retain, and graduate many more students in the STEM
disciplines, working with students from high school graduation through their
critical first years of college experience. Under earlier efforts supported by a
variety of agencies, the partners have made progress in attracting more STEM
majors. Retaining STEM majors to graduation has not proved as successful. Among
the five SURE-STEP universities, 4,700 students declared STEM majors in the
Fall, 2001 semester. However, for the entire 2001-2002 school year, only 588
students graduated in these majors (OSRHE 2002 report). The SURE-STEP grant
program is creating the vital bridge to academic excellence and student
engagement that promises to increase the number of STEM graduates at all five
institutions. First, underrepresented, low-income and first-generation students
who have been admitted for the Fall semester are being recruited from area high
schools for the four-week summer bridge component. Spaces available after
recruitment are filled first-come, first-served by other interested students.
Participants engage in discipline-specific research and academic skill-building
workshops, explore the campus with faculty and peer mentors, and begin to get
acquainted with their student cohort. SURE-STEP participants also have on-line
access to mentors and supplemental instruction (SI) leaders. In the Fall, each
university offers supplemental instruction for the historically difficult first-
year STEM courses (biology, physics, mathematics, chemistry, and computer
science). In year two, SURE-STEP participants become Research Ambassadors,
recruiting students by speaking at high schools, local math and science days and
seminars. Others in the program mentor new students. Participants continue to
mentor, as well as work in internships in business, industry, and research labs.
Because of the strength of the research component at the consortium
universities, Oklahoma EPSCoR has committed to help support SURE-STEP
participants in summer research experiences. In order to disseminate the results
of the program, all SURE-STEP participants produce abstracts and research
posters for Research Day at Regional Universities. Formative assessment of the
SURE-STEP program is based on faculty, peer mentor, SI leader and participant
surveys and interviews. Summative assessment will include retention data for the
participants as well as a control group and GPAs. Data will be available on the
website. Results of the project will be presented/published at local, state,
regional and national seminars and symposiums.