* 0336612
* Expanding Pathways to Success in Science
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Larry Spears, University of Houston - Downtown
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2009
* USD 1,965,428.00

This is a joint project between the University of Houston-Downtown (UHD) and San
Jacinto College North (SJCN) designed to: (1) enhance the undergraduate learning
environment in science and technology; (2) establish a bridge program to
facilitate successful transfer from the community college (SJCN) to the
university (UHD); (3) motivate students, especially women and minorities, to
pursue careers and graduate degrees in science beginning with increasing the
number of students earning associate, baccalaureate, and graduate degrees in
areas of natural science and science-based technologies (e.g. biotechnology);
(4) promote both on-campus and off-campus student participation in research; and
(5) provide students with growing opportunities to explore the interdisciplinary
nature of science and its applications in society. Financial assistance is being
made available to undergraduate students, particularly to first-time-in-college
students, many of whom are economically disadvantaged and cannot otherwise
enroll as full time college students. First-time freshmen majoring in science
also often require effective mentoring. Our STEP project is centered around
activities associated with the new and innovative Scholars Academy (SA) of the
College of Science & Technology (CST) at UHD. It is facilitating the
establishment of cooperative 2+2 programs in science and technology, including
both student and faculty activities, such as sharing faculty and facilities and
the establishment of cooperative programs with local and national industrial and
government laboratories for student experiential-based learning. Through these
activities we are recruiting and retaining more students in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). The broader impact of this project is based
on its success in encouraging more minorities and females (most of whom are
first-time students) to pursue and complete STEM associate and baccalaureate
degrees and continue their education at the graduate level or obtain STEM-
related employment. Both UHD and SJCN are providing sufficient facilities,
financial, and personnel support to ensure the success of the project and ensure
its sustainability. In achieving the goals of the project, UHD and SJCN are
making maximum use of student peer interactions, faculty/student STEM-related
activities and projects, and the many STEM resources available in the Houston
area and nationally. The results of this project will be disseminated statewide
through the Texas Coordinating Board for Higher Education and the UHD and SJCN
websites, and by presenting papers at national STEM and STEM education meetings.