* 0336439
* Partial Travel Support for US Researchers to Attend 2003 IEEE/ASME Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics Conference (AIM03)
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2003
* Bin Yao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 12/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Recognizing the needs for a synergistic integration of mechanical engineering
with electronics and intelligent computer communication and control in the
design and manufacture of products and processes, a new International Conference
on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM) was jointly approved by the Institute
of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) and the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers (ASME) in 1997. Since its first inception in 1997 in Tokyo,
the IEEE/ASME AIM Conference has been held biennial, rotating the host country
among Japan (AIM'97), the United States (AIM'99), Europe (AIM'01), and, in the
future, other Asian Pacific-Rim nations as well. The conference has been co-
sponsored by the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society (IES), the IEEE Robotics
and Automation Society (RAS), and the ASME Dynamic Systems and Control Division
(DSCD). The great practical significance of the conference theme has made past
three AIM conferences a success and the conference has been expanded
significantly from predominantly Asians participants in AIM'97 in Tokyo to a
good representation of US scientists and engineers in AIM'99 in Atlanta, and the
European participants in AIM'01 in Como, Italy. This year, the conference will
be held in Kobe, Japan, in July 20-24, 2003. The conference will provide a
unique venue where researchers, engineers and industrial exhibitors from the
globe who are interested in advancing the state-of-the-art of mechatronics
gather and discuss effective ways to advance mechatronics as an emerging
engineering technology and a new discipline in the 21st century. In order to
achieve the conference goal of bring together researchers from the globe in the
fields of mechanical engineering (ME) and electrical engineering and computer
science (EECS), partial funding is requested from the National Science
Foundation to assist US researchers to contribute and present papers in the
AIM'03. It is expected that such a partial support will not only encourage the
active participation of US researchers in the conference to promote global
collaborations, but also advance the US mechatronics education and research in a
long run due to the following unique features of the conference: (i) the host
country, Japan, has been excelling in Mechatronics, (ii) the conference will
draw worldwide participation from 26 countries based on the accepted papers,
(iii) an innovative format of interactive sessions will be developed the first
time in demonstrating various real mechatronics systems, and (iv)unique
industrial visits have been arranged by the Japanese organizers for conference
participants in showing the practical applications of the discipline.