* 0337836
* SGER - Carbon cycle processes affected by ENSO and transitional SOI conditions: Development of a new geologic tool for using speleothems as a proxy for carbon cycle dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Dork Sahagian, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2005
* USD 16,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SGER - Carbon cycle processes affected by ENSO and
transitional SOI conditions:&lt;br/&gt;Development of a new geologic tool for
using speleothems as a proxy for carbon
cycle&lt;br/&gt;dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using high-resolution
microsampling techniques for stable isotope analysis of speleothems from Belize,
we found large fluctuations in stalagmite d13C values at inter-annual to sub-
seasonal time scales. These results reveal a remarkably strong correlation
between d13C values and recent El NiNo events. Discovery of this relation is
puzzling in light of the absence of significant weather anomalies during El NiNo
and La NiNa intervals for this area. d13C values of this stalagmite likely
reflect changes in the overlying forest ecosystem carbon budget that are
sensitive to subtle modifications of local weather related to ENSO. Preliminary
work suggests that the stalagmite d13C variations reflect changes in important
ecosystem processes such as soil pCO2 and/or soil-atmospheric CO2 flux. As such,
speleothems may be used as a tool for exploring carbon cycle dynamics and their
response to environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our discovery of the
correlation of SOI and the geologic record of C isotopes raises
a&lt;br/&gt;number of questions. Does this record reveal a new source of
interannual variability in the global carbon cycle due to ENSO through its
effects on terrestrial biogeochemical systems? Does El NiNo produce a stress on
the ecosystem that is reflected in isotopic fractionation? Is the source of the
fractionation difference in the vegetation, in the soil, or in the groundwater?
What process(es) within the ecosystem serve to amplify the magnitude of ENSO-
related environmental changes and leads to their being transmitted by
groundwater and recorded in stalagmites? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consequently, the
specific objectives of this SGER project are to capture carbon isotopic
composition of vegetation, litter, soil gas/moisture, ground water, and cave
drip water during a neutral phase of SOI, to complement the samples already
collected during the recent El NiNo. Compare the carbon isotopic analyses of El
NiNo and transitional samples to constrain location of differences in isotopic
fractionation (e.g. vegetation, soil respiration, etc.). This SGER project will
serve to capture the brief transition between El NiNo and La NiNa conditions
that is expected to occur during the summer of 2003. As such it is time-
sensitive, as the next transition through neutral conditions will not occur for
several years. We will collect samples from ambient air, vegetation, leaf
litter, soil, soil gas and water, groundwater, rainwater, cave air, and drip
water. U.S. import permits have been obtained as necessary for soil and
vegetation samples. Results from this project will provide a neutral baseline
that will enable us to explore how the cave carbon biogeochemical system
responds to ENSO events and identify the biogeochemical mechanisms responsible
for the ENSO signal preserved in the geologic record. Ultimately this proposed
project will provide the basis for new insights into the relationships between
terrestrial ecosystems, weather, the carbon cycle, and the geological
record.&lt;br/&gt;