* 0337687
* Upscaling of Reactive Transport Equations in Porous Media; Biologically Mediated Iron Reduction, and the Effect of Humic Materials on the Scaling Process
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Peter Jaffe, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2007
* USD 307,314.00

0337687 &lt;br/&gt;Jaffe&lt;br/&gt;Iron reduction affects many important porous
media processes (i.e., sorption of compounds such as phosphates or arsenate, or
the reduction of uranium, which occurs simultaneously with iron reduction)
therefore predictive capabilities of iron reduction dynamics are needed and are
the focus of this project. Iron reduction can be enhanced by the presence of
humic substances that can act as an electron schedule, allowing the reaction to
happen even when the iron reducer is not in direct contact with the iron
surface. By focusing on iron reduction in the presence and absence of dissolved
humic substances, this research will gain an insight on how humic substances
affect the overall iron reduction kinetics. It will also provide a unique
experimental system where (i) the reaction is dependent on the biomass of the
iron reducing bacteria directly in contact with the iron surface (no humics),
and (ii) all biomass of the iron reducing bacteria is involved in the reaction,
subject to the transport limitations of the electron schedule process (with
humics), and for which new scaling equations should apply. We will conduct a
series of column experiments in quartz sand with varying iron distributions, and
acetate as the carbon source. The columns will be seeded with an iron reducer
and will be run in duplicate, with AQDS (a humic substance analog) and without
AQDS. Bulk reaction rates will be obtained for all column experiments, and
compared to the rates obtained via the scaling procedure. &lt;br/&gt;Results of
this research can be transferred, for example, to model simulations of the
biogeochemical dynamics in wetlands, groundwater trace metal/radionuclide
remediation, arsenate and phosphate stability. This research will involve a
part-time postdoctoral fellow, as well as graduate and undergraduate students,
and will result in the development of an experimental module focused on
biogeochemical reactions in soils for high school biology and chemistry
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;