* 0337308
* Kinematics and Dynamics of Time-dependent Slip Along the Central Creeping Segment of the San Andreas Fault
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Roland Burgmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2008
* USD 361,350.00

The central, aseismically-slipping segment of the San Andreas fault (CSAF)
represents a unique natural laboratory allowing detailed investigations of the
kinematics and dynamics of aseismic fault slip. Geodetic and seismic data show
that the CSAF behaves in a strongly time-dependent fashion including the
occurrence of slow earthquakes, variations of slip rates over several years, and
a complex response to regional stress changes. This project (1) characterizes
the patterns of aseismic fault slip in space and time to better understand the
physics of the underlying fault zone processes, (2) utilizes the sensitivity of
slip variations from subtle changes in the regional stress field to better
constrain the fault's constitutive properties, and (3) benefits from the
sensitivity of aseismic fault slip to the nature of lower crustal deformation to
improve our understanding of the rheology of the lower crust. The effort
includes an observational program to resolve the kinematics of spatially
variable and time dependent fault slip on the CSAF and a theoretical modeling
program to allow for interpretation of the slip patterns in the context of fault
mechanical processes, fault interaction and rheology. The spatio-temporal
kinematics of aseismic fault slip are deduced from space geodetic data spanning
the CSAF, from observations of micro-earthquake distribution and activity along
the fault, and from analysis of historic deformation data. The kinematic
information forms the foundation of an analysis of the dynamics of the CSAF
using process-based modeling techniques to address a number of fundamental
research problems including (1) the range of behaviors of time dependent
aseismic slip, (2) the relationship of slip transients to subtle changes in
stress boundary conditions, (3) fault zone constitutive properties, and (4) the
rheology of the lower crust reflected in the shallow slip distribution and its
longer-term variation in time.

