* 0337352
* Insight into Mantle Melting and Crustal Differentiation of Ocean Island Volcanoes: An Isotopic and Trace Element Study of Waianae Volcano, Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* John Sinton, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2007
* USD 74,932.00

The primary goal of this project is to do an isotopic and trace element study of
samples from the Waianae Volcano in Hawaii. This study will take advantage of
the deep exposure, and previously determined detailed knowledge of internal
stratigraphy, and variations in magma supply and melting processes at different
stages of volcanic evolution that should be correlated to changing distance from
the Hawaiian plume center. This work will produce a high-quality, comprehensive
data set that will provide insight into the nature of compositional components
expressed when the volcano was above different portions of the plume, how these
components contribute to Hawaiian magmas at variable extents of partial melting,
and how variations in magma composition, partial melting and overall magma
supply affected the development and evolution of magma reservoirs within the
volcanic edifice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, the project
will contribute to the training of an undergraduate student in the acquisition
and interpretation of isotopic and high-precision trace element data, and
development of the early career of female post-doc Iris Van der Zander. Results
of this work will be published in easily accessible journals, incorporated into
classroom teaching and community lectures by the P.I.s, as well as into a
popular Web site, and thus disseminated to a wide audience, including non-
science majors.&lt;br/&gt;