* 0337509
* Kinematic Constraints on the Average Rheological Structure of Continental Lithosphere Using Deformation of Parts of the Tibetan Plateau
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Peter Molnar, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2007
* USD 142,776.00

Two series of numerical experiments are used to study the deformation of a thin
viscous sheet, an analogue for continental lithosphere, deformed by indentation
by a rigid die, analogous to India's penetration into the rest of Eurasia. The
experiments allow constraints to be placed on possible constitutive laws that
govern the deformation of continental lithosphere. The first is studying the
extent to which a strong inclusion with a thin viscous sheet localizes
deformation near it. The Altyn Tagh fault along the northern margin of Tibet
separates the deforming Tibetan Plateau from an essentially rigid Tarim Basin
north of Tibet. The experiments address how both (a) the power relating strain-
rate to stress in power-law creep and (b) the relative roles of strength and
gravity, the Argand number, in resisting deformation lead to localization. A
comparison with width of the zone of deformation near the Altyn Tagh fault
allows constraints to be placed on these quantities. The second is examining
strain and vorticity (which is a measure of rotation about a vertical axis) near
the eastern end of the Himalaya. Chinese GPS measurements show a flow around the
syntaxis in a clockwise sense, and from these vorticity is being determined.
Experiments are being carried out to study how the indented thin viscous sheet
deforms for different values of n and Ar. Bounds on these quantities are being
determined through comparisons of the spatial distributions of vorticity. The
ultimate project goal is to understand the processes that control strength
within continental lithosphere.