* 0337460
* An autonomous freshwater pH sensor: development and applications
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Johnnie Moore, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2008
* USD 300,239.00

DeGramdpre&lt;br/&gt;0337460&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the
proposed activity. pH is a commonly measured parameter in freshwater systems.
Continuous pH measurements are desired in many situations, yet present day
technology is incapable of providing good quality, long-term, operator-free
measurements. We propose to rigorously evaluate a novel spectrophotometric pH
sensor that offers the potential for drift-free freshwater pH measurements. The
design derives directly from the Submersible Autonomous Moored Sensor for CO2
(SAMI-CO2)(DeGrandpre et al. 1995, 1999). The SAMI-pH sensor utilizes the same
design as SAMI-CO2. The availability of the SAMI technology through Sunburst
Sensors (www.sunburstsensors.com) will greatly facilitate development, testing
and future commercialization of SAMI-pH. Spectrophotometric pH methods are
widely thought to be inadequate for analysis of weakly buffered waters such as
freshwater because the indicator alters the pH of the sample. The SAMI-pH design
utilizes a straightforward methodology to quantify the perturbation-free pH. The
objectives of this grant are to 1) rigorously test the design in the laboratory
using a series of weakly buffered samples, 2) quantify indicator equilibrium
constants through a range of temperature and ionic strength, and 3) rigorously
test the sensor performance in natural waters with a wide range of alkalinities,
humic content, and particle loading. SAMI-pH data from the field studies will be
compared to in situ pH electrode measurements and pH computed from pCO2 and
alkalinity. Long-term (weeks to months) pH accuracy, precision and dynamic range
will be assessed and design changes will be made based on these results. Field
studies of mine-impacted streams will utilize two SAMI-pH sensors to quantify
longitudinal gradients and pH rates of change (previously very difficult using
potentiometric electrodes). The pH data will be used to model geochemical
equilibria to predict metal loading. The combined models will enable metal
variability and loading to be attributed to specific in-stream
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of the proposed activity . There
are three broad impacts: 1) students trained in the area of chemical sensor
development will subsequently become the next generation of leaders in this
important research area; 2) an improved understanding of biogeochemical cycling
in aquatic ecosystems will allow better prediction of anthropogenic impacts and
hence management of our natural resources; and 3) advancements in autonomous
chemical sensing technology will benefit the environment, industry and national
security by making it possible to remotely and continuously monitor chemical
species in the environment.&lt;br/&gt;