* 0337496
* Collaborative Research: Forearc Extension in a Strongly Coupled Subduction System, Northern Chile
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Richard Allmendinger, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2007
* USD 193,686.00

Work on the extensional structures of the forearc of northern Chile is providing
new insight into the nature of coupling between the subducted Nazca oceanic
plate and the overriding South American continental plate. The nature of this
coupling is not only of scientific interest but of tremendous practical
importance as this plate boundary is responsible for some of the greatest
earthquakes on Earth. Every 100 to 150 years a magnitude 8+ earthquake occurs in
various segments. The area in which the research is being carried out last had a
major earthquake 130 years ago. Although the plate boundary appears to be
strongly locked between great earthquakes and is strongly elastically compressed
during that time, the geology of the Coastal Cordillera, which overlies the zone
of interplate coupling, displays only features associated with horizontal
extension parallel to the plate convergence direction. This extension is
manifest both as north-striking normal faults and as a spectacular suite of
tension fractures which, due to the uniquely dry environment can be mapped quite
completely. The extensional structures may be related to elastic rebound or
visco-elastic relaxation during or following great earthquakes, to shaking
during earthquakes, to subduction erosion at the plate boundary, or perhaps to
an overly steep continental slope going down to the oceanic trench at 8 km depth
just 75 km offshore. This project is assessing the relative contributions of
these factors by combining: (1) field work with geochronology to construct
kinematic models of normal faults to yield magnitude and age of extension as
well as depth to detachment; (2) study of the origin, distribution, and
magnitude of extension represented by the tension fractures; (3) differential
interferometric side aperture radar to document vertical motions in the forearc,
including, potentially, incipient coastal escarpment collapse and retreat; and
(4) finite element modeling to evaluate the role of the topography of the
Coastal Escarpment and the continental slope on the regional stress field.