* 0337456
* Collaborative Research: Crustal Thickening, Shortening, and Uplift in the Forearc of an Erosive, Convergent Margin, Pacific Coast, Costa Rica
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Donald Fisher, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2007
* USD 239,362.00

This project involves analysis of the onland geology of the upper plate along an
active convergent plate boundary, where the Cocos plate and associated seamounts
and ridges are underthrust beneath the Central American volcanic chain. In
general, convergent plate boundaries can be characterized by two end-members:
accretionary margins and erosive margins. The processes that occur along
accretionary margins (e.g., the Aleutian, Nankai, Barbados, and Oregon-
Washington margins) are well known from studies of onland and marine geology,
but there is no comparable knowledge for erosive margins (e.g.,. the Japan,
Peru, Middle America margins). Consequently, the principal investigators are
creating new maps and cross sections of bedrock geology and dating marine and
fluvial terraces along the Pacific Coast of Costa Rica to place constraints on
shortening, uplift rates, and surface erosion in such a tectonic setting.
Mapping of faults and determination of fault offsets from bedrock geology
provide an estimate of the amount of shortening over the last 2 million years.
Surveys of marine terraces along the coast are being combined with radiocarbon
and optical stimulated luminescence dating to determine rates of vertical motion
and slip rates on active faults. Analysis of river terraces and fission track
dating of apatite grains in both volcanics and sedimentary rocks are being used
to establish the rate and total amount of erosional unroofing. Moreover, on the
Osa and Nicoya Peninsulas, newly discovered deposits of Neogene and Quaternary
marine terraces and shallow marine deposits provide an unprecedented record of
vertical tectonism. Paleomagnetic analysis of these deposits should extend this
record back into the late Neogene. Recently, new volcanic rocks have been
discovered along the coast that can be dated by Ar40/Ar39 methods to better
constrain the age of initiation of active thrust faulting in the coastal
deformed belt. The methods that are used in this study are designed to quantify
the effects of incoming seamounts and ridges on active faulting and landscape
evolution of the upper plate. There is an apparent dichotomy between the
offshore response to these bathymetric features (tectonic erosion, subsidence)
and the onland response (crustal thickening and uplift). By collecting a dataset
that constrains timing, kinematics and rates of deformation, this study is
defining the fundamental attributes of erosive convergent plate boundaries and
the relationship between onland and offshore regimes.