* 0337598
* Designing Learning Environments for Teaching Scientific Argumentation and Mathematical Reasoning with Geographic Data
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Joshua Radinsky, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 12/31/2008
* USD 921,189.00

Geographic Information Systems (GIS) provide opportunities for teachers and
students to conduct scientific inquiry with large amounts of data, including
geographically referenced observational research in fields spanning the natural
and social sciences. The complexity of these investigations can provide
opportunities for deep learning in critical areas of science and mathematics
identified in national and state &lt;br/&gt;standards. However, these inquiry
projects can also confuse students and overwhelm teachers. Prior formative
design research with data-visualization inquiry environments suggests that
students' manipulation and annotation of the intermediate artifacts of inquiry
can promote student reflection on domain concepts, data interpretations, and
inquiry processes, as well as provide opportunities for teachers to assess,
engage, and further these understandings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
a three-year study that systematically investigates the claim that GIS inquiry
projects that have iterative designs will increase student reflection on data
artifacts, domain concepts, and inquiry processes, and help students relate data
to the world around them. Iterativity is the instructional strategy of building
later phases of an investigation on manipulation, annotation, and
reconsideration of artifacts generated from data analysis in earlier phases.
This building on earlier artifacts may also increase opportunities for teacher
assessment of student understandings. The project tests the hypotheses with four
inquiry projects using a GIS environment. Four learning outcomes are compared
for iterative and non-iterative versions of the same projects: (1) reflective
engagement in small-group inquiry activity with data, (2) scientific
argumentation with data, (3) conceptual understandings in the inquiry domain,
and (4) mathematical reasoning with multiple representations of data. The
prediction is that the effect of iterativity will be greatest for reflective
engagement and scientific argumentation, but that it will also impact science
concepts and mathematical reasoning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four GIS projects
(two in natural science and two in social science) build on existing curricula
developed by researchers and teachers in Chicago public schools, and are
grounded in research on reflective inquiry and scientific argumentation with
data. The specific natural and social science inquiry projects also differ in
terms of the immediacy of the geographies and topics studied (e.g., local school
garden versus global tectonic processes). A summative assessment for all
participating students, and a summative and process assessment for targeted
small groups of students in each classroom will be conducted. Student learning
will be documented within and across the four inquiry projects over the course
of the academic year, enabling comparisons across design conditions. &lt;br/&gt;