* 0337798
* Collaborative Research: Content and Behavior of Sulfur in Silicic Magma and Links to Generation of Sulfur-rich Ore-forming Fluids of Porphyry Cu-Mo-Au Deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2010
* John Dilles, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2010
* USD 234,959.00

This project will determine how silica-rich magmas release massive amounts of
sulfur during volcanic eruptions or in hydrothermal fluids that produce ore
deposits. These magmas should have low sulfur-carrying capacity. We will test
the hypotheses that they store sulfur in anhydrite (calcium-sulfate) phenocrysts
and vapor bubbles or merely transmit sulfur in aqueous bubbles derived from
deeper, silica-poor magmas. Magmas and ore deposits from several ancient
volcanic-dominated to plutonic-dominated systems will be studied including: San
Luis Caldera, Colorado; Yanacocha Volcanics, Peru, and related gold deposits;
and the Yerington batholith, Nevada, and its porphyry copper deposits. The
water, sulfur, chlorine and trace-metal contents of minerals such as apatite
(calcium-phosphate) and glass inclusions ("frozen" melt) will be determined by
secondary ion mass spectrometry and laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma
mass spectrometry and other methods. Isotopic ratios of sulfur and hydrogen will
also be measured. These data will allow estimation of the volatile and trace
metal contents of silicate melts, and show how these chemical components were
acquired and lost. &lt;br/&gt;The project will engage up to four graduate
students in thesis studies and up to four undergraduate students in field and
laboratory research. The societal relevance of the research includes
understanding how large silicic magmas contribute stratospheric sulfur with
global climatic impact and understanding how some copper and other mineral
resources are produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;