* 0337807
* Community Workshop On Computational Simulation and Visualization Environment for NEES
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* W. M. Kim Roddis, NEES Consortium, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2004
* USD 49,998.00

The NEES Consortium, Inc., will run a workshop in November 2003 to develop an
earthquake engineering community-based plan for computational modeling,
simulation, and visualization end-user software and hardware needs for the
George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES). This
workshop addresses a void in the current NEES Major Research Equipment and
Facilities Construction (MREFC) project underway during FY 2000 - FY 2004. The
NEES MREFC scope does not include the extensive software development needed to
make available specific NEES-user level applications for computer simulation nor
for processing and visualization of numerical data from tests and analyses or
video and other non-numerical information. NEES will open for ten-year operation
for research and education starting in FY 2005. The goal of this workshop is to
establish a plan for the Computational Simulation and Visualization Environment
for NEES during that ten-year operating period. This workshop will be held at
the University of Kansas in Lawrence, Kansas and host approximately 40
participants, with experts in structural, geotechnical, and tsunami engineering
as well as in high performance and network based computing, including databases.
The workshop will be held via the AccesGrid to enable remote participation.
Topics to be addressed at this workshop include the following: motivating
participation in the NEES collaboratory through high value added software
applications, integration of experimental and numerical simulation, how to build
upon enabling middleware and simulation resources provided under the NEES MREFC
as well as software in the public/government domain, and hardware (e.g.,
computer platform) requirements. Information about this workshop, as well as the
report from this workshop, will be available at www.nees.org and the second
annual meeting of the NEES Consortium, Inc.