* 0337345
* RUI: An Investigation of the Mauna Kea Magma Plumbing System: Insights From Mineral Composition From the HSDP Core
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Keith Putirka, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2005
* USD 105,652.00

Putirka&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0337345&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phenocrysts provide an
archive of the pressures and temperatures at which magmas stagnate and evolve
and the liquids from which they crystallized. Phenocryst compositions can thus
be used to create a cross section of a magma conduit system, and thereby test
hypotheses regarding magma transport and liquid evolution. Clinopyroxene
phenocrysts, in particular, are extremely useful in deciphering, for instance,
if the solubility of jadeite is sensitive to pressure. The funds provided by
this proposal will support a two-year study of clinopyroxene compositions from
the Hawaii Scientific Drilling Project (HSDP2), with the goal of understanding
magma transport and liquid evolution at Mauna Kea, Hawaii. Since the HSDP core
provides a unique time-integrated view of the Mauna Kea magma plumbing system,
the PI and his students will examine whether the conditions of crystallization
exhibit temporal patterns. Not only will this view potentially shed light on the
evolution of a magma conduit system, but phenocryst compositions might also
allow a test of the extent to which the upwelling plume is compositionally or
thermally zoned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both undergraduate and graduate students
at California State University, Fresno, will perform much of the data analysis
for this project. The role of undergraduates is very important, as experience
has shown that students are particularly motivated when they are part of a
larger research program. For the present study, a graduate and several
undergraduate students will take the lead in the collection and analysis of the
mineral chemistry data. The graduate student will be assigned the somewhat more
challenging task of reconstructing liquid compositions, while a team of
undergraduates will conduct the estimation of P-T conditions. All students will
share in the construction of a model for the Mauna Kea magma plumbing system and
with the oral presentation and publication efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;