* 0337351
* Collaborative Research: Are Plutons Assembled Over Long Periods of Time Through Amalgamation of Small Ephemeral Magma Chambers?
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* John Bartley, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2006
* USD 25,001.00

Plutons are basic building blocks of the continental crust. They are widely
regarded to reflect ancient magma chambers, yet their true relationship to magma
chambers is obscure and controversial. Resolving the relationship bears on
questions such as mechanisms of magma transport in the crust, the pluton "room"
problem, relations between plutonism and regional deformation, the longevity of
magmatic systems, why some magma erupts and some is trapped to form plutons, and
relationships between magma budget, recharge, and eruption in igneous systems.
Answers to these questions depend on precisely measuring the longevity and
intrusive histories of plutonic systems. There are two end-member concepts of
what plutons represent. At one end is the long-held notion that plutons
represent large magma bodies (hundreds or thousands of cubic kilometers)
emplaced in single events on a time scale of 10,000-1,000,000 years.
Alternatively, plutons may grow incrementally by amalgamation of small episodic
intrusions over durations in excess of 10 million years. In the latter view,
large volumes of magma never were present during growth of the pluton and the
pluton may be highly, perhaps cryptically, composite, and fundamentally
diachronous.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines two nested plutonic
complexes in the Sierra Nevada, the Tuolumne and Whitney Intrusive Suites. Each
of these Late Cretaceous systems has been magnificently exposed by glaciation
and is relatively undeformed. New data from the Tuolumne indicate that it was
emplaced over roughly 10 million years, and at least one constituent intrusion
(the Half Dome pluton) was emplaced over greater than 3 m.y. These results favor
incremental emplacement and cryptically composite intrusions. However, the
general applicability of the results is uncertain, and the history of the
similar (but larger) Whitney system is poorly known. Using U/Pb geochronology,
the lifetimes of each magmatic system, and whether individual plutons were
emplaced in single batches or in many small increments is being determined. In
the Half Dome pluton that requires a cryptically composite emplacement
mechanism, unconventional mapping techniques (e.g., magnetic susceptibility) are
being explored in an attempt to distinguish composite from noncomposite plutons,
and thus to map in the field the internal structures of cryptically composite
plutons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in
testing prevailing hypotheses for pluton emplacement and crustal growth. If our
hypothesis is correct then pluton emplacement processes are markedly different
from the current paradigm. Assessing the rates and mechanisms of pluton
emplacement bears on basic research questions spanning the disciplines of
structural geology, petrology, tectonics, and geologic hazards. Additionally,
analytical techniques at the UNC geochronology lab will be improved and new
techniques for recognizing cryptic intrusive contacts in plutons are being
established. Results from our work will be useful to scientists and naturalists
at Yosemite, Sequoia, and Kings Canyon National Parks as they work to increase
public understanding of science.&lt;br/&gt;