* 0337393
* Analysis of River Restoration Hydrologic Function: Meadows as Macro-Hyporheic Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Steven Gorelick, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2008
* USD 296,824.00

Gorelick&lt;br/&gt;0337393&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emerging effort to rebuild
spoiled ecosystems often involves river restoration. Such hydroecological
intervention aims to return each degraded terrestrial environment to a more
natural state. Although river restoration has been initiated in various
environments in recent years, there are few tools to track, quantifying, and
evaluate hydrologic changes over space and time. This proposal involves a
comparative analysis of degraded meadows and those in which river restoration
has been conducted to mimic the natural environment in the Feather River
watershed in northern California. The Feather River watershed was targeted
because it is accessible and contains single-river meadows where the channels
have been relocated as part of restoration efforts. The remaining degraded
meadows have deeply incised river channels and dry grassland vegetation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our goal is to develop an approach to quantitatively
assess river restoration in small meadows. We plan to conduct fieldwork and
collect remote sensing data to characterize the key aspects of the state of each
meadow in our comparison set. We will focus on the riparian-zone interface where
mass and energy exchanges occur between the river and aquifer as well as between
vegetation and the connected vadose-phreatic zone. Our analysis will rely on
physically-based simulation models that describe water and energy fluxes. Our
intended contribution is to develop and test a set of transferable measures that
might be used to 1) assess river-restoration projects, 2) gain an understanding
of the key changes in hydrologic processes in restored and degraded meadow
environments, and 3) provide at least some of the hydrological-science basis for
successful hydroecological restoration. To enhance outreach, we have initiated
interaction with the Feather River Coordinated Resource Management Group
(FRCRM), a non-profit public interest group consisting of 23 watershed
stakeholders that was formed in 1985. &lt;br/&gt;