* 0337948
* A 45-Y Hindcast of Antarctic Surface Mass Balance Using Polar MM5
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* David Bromwich, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2007
* USD 402,080.00

This award supports a comprehensive investigation of the spatial and temporal
characteristics of the surface mass balance of the Antarctic ice sheet and the
governing mechanisms that affect it. A mesoscale atmospheric model, adapted for
Antarctic conditions (Polar MM5), will be used in conjunction with the newly
available reanalysis from the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts
(ECMWF) to resolve the surface mass balance of Antarctica at a time resolution
of 3 hours and a spatial resolution of 60 km from 1957 to 2001. Polar MM5 will
be upgraded to account for key processes in the simulation, including explicit
consideration of blowing snow transport and sublimation as well as surface
melting/runoff. The proposed 45-y hindcast of all Antarctic surface mass balance
components with a limited area model has not previously been attempted and will
provide a dataset of unprecedented scope to complement existing ice core
measurements of recent climate, especially those collected by the International
Transantarctic Scientific Expedition (ITASE). The trends and variability in
space and time over 4.5 decades will be resolved and the impact of the dominant
modes of atmospheric variability (Antarctic Oscillation, El Nino-Southern
Oscillation, etc.) will be isolated. Hypotheses concerning the Antarctic surface
mass balance response to climate change will be tested. The research will
provide a sound basis for evaluating the impact of future climate change on
Antarctic surface mass balance and its contribution to global sea level change
as well as providing an important perspective for the interpretation of
Antarctic ice core records. The broader impacts include the education of a Ph.D.
student, the development of material for use in university classes, and
construction of an interactive educational webpage on Antarctic surface mass
balance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;