* 0337829
* Templated Molecular Recognition Materials: Theory and Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Paul Van Tassel, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/2006
* USD 385,502.00

Paul R. Van Tassel&lt;br/&gt;Wayne State University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Templated Molecular Recognition Materials: Theory and
Simulation"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular recognition (MR) is a term used to
describe the strong and highly specific binding&lt;br/&gt;between complementary
patterns of weakly interacting sites. In living systems, MR is at the origin of
many biological functions, including signal transduction and assembly guidance.
Fully synthetic materials capable of MR are potentially useful as bio-mimics,
sensors, tissue engineering substrates, and separation/purification agents and
offer clear advantages in terms of cost and robustness compared to conventional
materials into which true biological structures (proteins, peptides, nucleic
acids) are incorporated. A universal strategy for preparing synthetic MR
materials is through the nanoscale assembly of functionalized, polymerizable
monomers in the presence of molecular or supramolecular templates. Following
polymerization and template removal, the material will (ideally) possess a shape
and pattern, on a nanometer length scale, that complements those of the
template.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea behind templated molecular recognition
(TMR) is straightforward and some applications have appeared (most notably, the
molecularly imprinted polymers). However, progress is limited by the current
poor quantitative understanding of elemental issues like the influence of
template morphology on the material's structure and recognition ability. In
particular, no theoretical description is currently available to predict
recognition from template and monomer structures and synthesis variables (e.g.
precursor composition, temperature, etc.). It is the overall goal of this work
to develop such a description. A molecular-based model inspired by the TMR
formation process is proposed whose starting point is a functional monomer /
template / solvent mixture in equilibrium with respect to a molecular force
field. Polymerization of the monomers is accounted for by an instantaneous
quench, or freezing, of the molecular positions. The template and solvent are
then removed, and the remaining (quenched) monomers serve as the initial model
material into which is immersed a new solution containing molecules identical or
structurally related to the original template. Post-polymerization structural
alterations are also possible through expansion/contraction or de-densification.
Of particular significance is our proposed equilibrium based theoretical
approach, exploiting the replica method originally developed to study
spin&lt;br/&gt;glasses, to determine the binding thermodynamics of the model
system. Complementary molecular computer simulations are also
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective is to establish this
theoretical description for simple model systems capable of&lt;br/&gt;TMR. An
integral equation theory will be developed to calculate the thermodynamics of
chain molecule and cluster adsorption in this model material. The significance
will be the first theoretical description of TMR. The second objective is to
apply the theoretical description to carefully chosen model monomer, template,
and adsorbate structures in order to answer to important fundamental questions
on TMR. The significance will be the first fundamental, molecular-level
understanding of TMR. The third objective is to use the theoretical description
to predict TMR in a system reported in the literature. The significance will be
the first predictive model of TMR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Industrial and Societal
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed theoretical description of TMR will be a valuable
tool in the development of&lt;br/&gt;nanostructured materials capable of high
affinity binding. Examples of materials whose rational design will be enabled
include molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs), directed surface assembled
monolayers, template functionalized inorganics, and protein templated biomimics
- these may find important application as sensors, selective adsorbents, and
tissue engineering substrates and offer significant advantages in cost,
robustness, and biocompatibility over conventional materials into which true
biological structures (proteins, peptides, nucleic acids) are incorporated.
Using this description, current practical problems such as low density, poor
accessibility, and heterogeneous binding strength of the recognition sites may
be overcome. Additionally, the ability of these organically formed materials to
function in an aqueous environment will be enhanced. One can envision a future
where nanostructural modification by templating is routinely used to tailor
materials for specific binding applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Also,
minorities and women will be encouraged to participate at this large, urban
university. Finally, a seminar series is planned in which the students will be
required to make presentations relating to their part of the research.
&lt;br/&gt;