* 0337413
* Acomplishment Based Renewal (ABR): Trace Element Distribution Within, Between, and Among Metamorphic Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Frank Spear, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2007
* USD 279,464.00

Spear&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0337413&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The distribution of certain
trace elements among minerals in metamorphic rocks has been shown by the P.I.
and co-workers under prior NSF grants to be a sensitive monitor of metamorphic
P-T conditions and reaction history. The strongest trace element signature was
found in rocks of low to medium metamorphic grade where estimates of temperature
changes during crystallization of garnet of only a few degrees could be
discerned. At higher metamorphic grades, trace element concentrations become
significantly lower in garnet, requiring more sensitive analytical instruments
to make the concentration measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
to extend this work to more extreme crustal conditions by examining high-grade
rocks from the Adirondack Mountains, New York, the Cordillera Darwin, southern
Chile, and the Valhalla Complex, eastern British Columbia using trace-element
sensitive analytical techniques (LA-ICP-MS and SIMS). A major goal will be to
extend the empirical thermometers developed under the prior grant to these
higher conditions. A second goal will be to decipher the paragenesis and
stability range of the accessory mineral monazite, so that meaningful
interpretations of U-Th-Pb ages of this mineral can be made. The results of this
study will be widely applicable to research by petrologists and geochemists that
use geochronology on accessory minerals in orogenic terranes worldwide.
Ultimately, these results should provide significantly deeper and more detailed
insights into the processes that operate during orogenesis. The PI will support
a female graduate student in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;