* 0338981
* Computational, Physiological and Behavioral Analysis of Cortical Adaptation in Olfaction
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Donald Wilson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 07/31/2008
* USD 402,895.00

This proposal presents a multidisciplinary, collaborative approach to
understanding a basic function of all neuronal sensory systems, namely,
modification by experience and filtering of background or biologically
irrelevant stimuli. The proposal specifically focuses on odor habituation in rat
olfactory bulb and cortex. The olfactory system represents an ideal system for
such studies for several reasons, each of which is taken advantage of by the
proposed studies. First, the mammalian olfactory system is anatomically
relatively simple, with the olfactory cortex one of the evolutionarily oldest
mammalian sensory cortices. Second, this relative simplicity has resulted in
extensive knowledge of synaptic connections and physiology of both afferent and
intracortical fiber systems and their regulation by neuromodulatory systems.
Third, this knowledge has allowed development of computational models which
include both olfactory bulb and piriform cortical neurons. Specifically the
project will determine the synaptic mehcnaisms of odor habituation and odor-
specificity of habituation in cortical neurons and then incorporate the
electrophysiological results into a computational model of the cortex which will
be used to make and test predictions about odor habituation and stimulus-
background segmentation in an odor environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project combines the expertise of two active research groups specializing in
sensory physiology and computational modeling. This research environment will be
used to expose students, high school through graduate from diverse backgrounds
to new research techniques and conceptual approaches.&lt;br/&gt;