* 0338549
* Isospectrality: Length vs. Laplace Spectra and Isospectral Families
* MPS,DMS
* 03/19/2003,05/31/2008
* Ruth Gornet, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2008
* USD 60,197.00

Project Abstract - Ruth Gornet - DMS-0204648&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
addresses several topics in inverse spectral&lt;br/&gt;geometry. In the first
project, the Principal Investigator will&lt;br/&gt;show that the classical trace
formula, which relates the Laplace&lt;br/&gt;and length spectra for generic
manifolds, provides less&lt;br/&gt;information about isospectral manifolds than
was previously&lt;br/&gt;speculated. In joint work with P. Perry, the wave trace
on&lt;br/&gt;Heisenberg manifolds will be explicitly calculated in order
to&lt;br/&gt;understand the behavior of the length vs. Laplace
spectra.&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, a new notion of length spectrum will be studied
in&lt;br/&gt;order to prove a necessary condition that lengths of
closed&lt;br/&gt;geodesics on isospectral manifolds must satisfy. A further
project&lt;br/&gt;(joint with J. McGowan) studies the p-form spectrum on
lens&lt;br/&gt;spaces. The Principal Investigator has constructed examples
of&lt;br/&gt;lens spaces whose p-form spectra are equal for certain p but
with&lt;br/&gt;unequal spectra on functions. This behavior will be
further&lt;br/&gt;studied toward constructing p-isospectral lens spaces with
unequal&lt;br/&gt;absolute length spectrum; i.e., different lengths of
closed&lt;br/&gt;geodesics. In the final project (joint with R. Brooks) tools
from&lt;br/&gt;representation theory of the symmetric groups will be used
to&lt;br/&gt;construct an explicit upper bound on the number of
isospectral&lt;br/&gt;Riemann surfaces of a fixed genus that can be constructed
from the&lt;br/&gt;Sunada method. When this final project is completed, an
explicit&lt;br/&gt;upper bound on the number of nonisomorphic number fields with
a&lt;br/&gt;given zeta function will result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 1966, Mark
Kac popularized the question, "Can one hear the&lt;br/&gt;shape of a drum?" The
mathematical formulation of this question&lt;br/&gt;is: ``What geometric
information is contained in the spectrum of a&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian manifold?''
Isospectrality, i.e., the study of&lt;br/&gt;isospectral families and/or the
geometric properties they may or&lt;br/&gt;may not share, impacts areas outside
of spectral geometry; the&lt;br/&gt;research funded by this proposal thus
supports the&lt;br/&gt;pure-mathematical foundations of these areas. The first
examples&lt;br/&gt;of closed isospectral manifolds, Milnor's flat tori, have
appeared&lt;br/&gt;in string theory in physics (related to mirror symmetry).
The&lt;br/&gt;empirical science of spectroscopy has studied frequencies of
atoms&lt;br/&gt;and molecules to provide information about vibrating
objects.&lt;br/&gt;Inverse spectral problems also arise in medical
imaging,&lt;br/&gt;geophysical prospection, and non-destructive
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;