* 0338357
* The Collaborative Classroom-Based Inquiry and Fellows Program
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Cynthia Passmore, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,568,390.00

Title of Project: The Collaborative Classroom-based Inquiry Project Institution:
University of California, Davis PI/Co-PI: PI: Evelyn Silvia; Co-PI: Wendell
Potter Number of fellows per year: 7 graduate; 7 undergraduate School District
Partners: Dixon; Folsom-Cordova; Natomas; Vacaville Unified Target audience of
the project: K-12 Setting: 1 Rural; 3 Suburban NSF supported disciplines
involved: Chemistry, Earth Sciences, Geology, Life Sciences, Mathematics, and
Physics

Narrative Summary: The Collaborative Classroom Based Inquiry (CCBI) project
connects University of California-Davis (UCD) graduate and undergraduate
students with K-12 grade mathematics and science teachers who are conducting
classroom-based inquiry. The fellows deepen their understanding of the issues of
teaching and learning by working side-by-side with expert teachers who research
their own pedagogy.. The subject matter expertise of the fellows contributes to
the teacher-researchers' work by adding a different lens to their analysis of
student learning. The K-12 grade students benefit from the collaboration as they
receive research-based instruction, informed by systematic data collection on
student learning as well as the latest results of research in the disciplines of
mathematics and science. Fellows and teachers work together in the summer to
explore teacher-research techniques, the State Standards in their subject matter
area, and curriculum design. During the school year they collect data in the
K-12 classrooms about what K-12 students know and understand in specific
mathematics or science content areas and design curriculum that reflect that
data. Fellows apprentice with the mentor teacher-researcher taking up various
instructional tasks such as facilitating group work or class discussions,
presenting class demonstrations, teaching specially designed curriculum units
using large group guided-inquiry techniques, and leading the students in lab
work. Evaluation of the project includes analysis of student learning, case
studies of teacher-research groups as well as surveys of all participants on
beliefs about the nature of science and mathematics as well as perceptions of
sound pedagogical practices.

The intellectual merits of this project include, for the Fellows, opportunities
to experience an inquiry stance toward their teaching so that they strive to
constantly improve their practice by focusing on student learning; K-12 teacher-
researchers gain a deeper understanding of science or mathematics content areas;
and the K-12 students gain an enriched understanding of mathematics and science.
Through their research on the project, UCD faculty better understand how
teacher-research contributes to teachers' learning and in particular how a
subject matter focus enhances the teacher-research process.

The program has broad implications. The research-based curriculum will reach
approximately 3000 K- 12 students with whom participating teacher -researchers
work. The Fellows' pedagogical knowledge and orientation to attend to student
learning will impact the university students they will eventually teach.
Findings from the teacher-research project will be shared with other teachers at
conferences and through the CCBI website and the curriculum developed will be
made available through the CCBI website. This project is partially supported by
funds from the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.