* 0338335
* Collaborative Research: Next Generation CMB Polarization Measurements withthe QUEST Experiment on DASI
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Andrew Lange, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 03/31/2007
* USD 380,611.00

The proposal is to deploy the QUEST experiment to the South Pole Station and to
operate it over two austral winter seasons. The receiver and optics are already
separately funded and under construction. The telescope will be mounted on the
existing DASI platform, covering most of the cost of doing so using existing
funds, and re-using large parts of the DASI infrastructure and control system,
making this a highly leveraged proposal. QUEST is a 2.6-m Cassegrain telescope
equipped with a next generation polarization-sensitive bolometer array, which
will be aimed on obtaining maps of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB)
polarization with unprecedented sensitivity and angular resolution. The
polarization of the CMB results from bulk motions of material at the time of the
plasma-neutral transition and the polarization measurements are the next
frontier of CMB research, offering both the opportunity to make crucial tests of
the standard cosmological model, and fresh insights which will lead beyond it.
Angular scale in CMB studies is customarily referred to by spherical multipole
number l, and the polarization pattern decomposed into so-called E-modes and
B-modes. DASI was the first experiment to detect E-mode polarization at l ~ 300.
More recently WMAP has released results on the T-E cross-correlation extending
down to low multipoles and providing important new information on the
reionization of the Universe. At this time a battery of experiments are either
running or under construction to improve CMB polarization measurements. The
experiment proposed here (which is referred below as "QUEST and DASI", or QUaD)
will go well beyond these and is a true "next generation" instrument. QUaD has
raw sensitivity similar to the planned Planck space mission, and in fact shares
much of the same technology. However, while Planck plans to survey the whole
sky, QUaD will go extremely deep on small patches selected for extremely low
foreground contamination. This is the crucial difference between the two
experiments - not simply that QUaD will come first by at least several years.
QuaD's maps will have dramatically higher signal to noise per pixel. As the
sensitivity is pushed down to microkelvin level and the multipoles up to 2000
and beyond, such maps will prove crucial to disentangling the cosmic signal from
instrumental and foreground effects. In this way, it is expected that the QUaD
maps will be relevant for extending through the Planck era to that of a possible
polarimeter on the South Pole (8-m) Telescope and the CMBpol space mission
currently under discussion. In the same way that DASI and CBI make complementary
temperature measurements over different ranges in l space, BICEP and QUaD will
make complementary polarization measurements. B-mode polarization at higher
multipoles is confidently expected from lensing of the E-mode pattern by
intervening large-scale structure. QUaD is optimized to detect this signal,
making a further crucial test of the standard paradigm and constraining the
neutrino mass. Inflationary gravitational waves (IGW) would generate a B-mode
signal at lower l, where QUaD begins to lose sensitivity, but where BICEP is
optimized to probe for this potentially very important signature of fundamental
physics. The ultimate sensitivity to IGW that can be reached will depend on the
extent to which the lensing signal can be removed - QUaD will demonstrate the
feasibility of this proposed technique. With respect of the broader impact, the
enterprise of modern cosmology is one with which almost everybody can identify.
The idea that through science humans can understand the origin, nature and fate
of our Universe is fascinating, and frequently featured in newspapers and
general magazines. QUaD collaborators work hard to communicate this excitement
by interacting with the public in both formal and informal settings. Outreach
and education related to the project will be disseminated through established
structures and mechanisms such as those implemented by the Center for
Cosmological Physics (CfCP) at U. Chicago. These programs, which reach out to
local and distant K-12 school teachers and students, will use the excitement of
exploring our universe to help attract women and minorities to science. Graduate
and undergraduate education and research will be integrated in the construction
of the instrumentation as well as in the analysis of the data. Students will
play a major role in the project, exposing them to all aspects of scientific and
engineering research. They will learn valuable skills, which will aid them in
pursuing their careers, whether in industry or academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;