* 0338631
* Culture, Social Support, and Managing Stress
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Shelley Taylor, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 03/31/2008
* USD 311,491.00

Social support is a resource that allows people to live healthier and more
productive lives; it becomes especially important in times of rapid change.
Change creates stress with which people need to cope, and they often turn to
others for advice, information, and understanding. Social support has long been
known to promote psychological health and to protect against the adverse health
effects of stress. Yet, in conceptualizing social support, researchers have
inadvertently adopted a Western definition that emphasizes explicit efforts to
extract or provide help or comfort. The proposed research builds on several
preliminary studies showing that Asians and Asian-Americans are significantly
less likely than European-Americans to seek such explicit social support for
coping with stress, because their social relations may be disrupted by so doing.
Using multiple methodologies, such as survey and physiological measures, the
proposed studies will examine the use of explicit versus implicit social support
(which we define as drawing on the awareness and/or company of supportive others
without explicitly requesting or receiving support vis-a-vis a specific
stressful event) and explore cultural differences in their use and
physiological/psychological impact on managing stress. The intellectual merit of
the proposed research stems from its ability to 1) broaden our conceptual
understanding of social support by exploring the stress-reducing benefits of
implicit as well as explicit social support and 2) broaden our understanding of
cultural differences in how social support is extracted, experienced, and
utilized to reduce adverse physiological and emotional responses to stress. The
broader impact of the work stems from its challenge to existing Western
conceptualizations of social support and its potential to enlighten the social
support experiences of currently under-represented populations. As such, it has
the ability to inform social support interventions with multicultural
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;