* 0338149
* Wide-Field Imaging Spectroscopy in the Submillimeter:  SPIFI on AST/RO
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Gordon Stacey, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 06/30/2006
* USD 300,173.00

This proposal is to map the Milky Way Galactic Center and nearby galaxies in
their bright CO, CI, and NII emission lines using the SPIFI (South Pole Fabry-
Perot Interferometer) on the AST/RO telescope at the South Pole Station. SPIFI
was deployed for the first time on AST/RO during the 2003-04 summer season and
is now observing (through winter of 2004) the [NII] and high-J CO lines using
the current 5 x 5 pixel array of thermister-sensed (TES) bolometers. Meanwhile,
the Cornell group is developing a 16 x 32 pixel array of TES bolometers, which
will be installed on SPIFI during the austral summer of 2004-05. Thus, during
the 2005 and 2006 winters, SPIFI will be able to image Galactic and
extragalactic sources in these spectral lines using the larger format array. The
project's objectives are the following: (1) To map the Large Magellanic Cloud in
the [CI] 370 microns, CO(7-6), and [NII] lines. The low metalicity environment
in this dwarf galaxy may mimic that of protogalaxies, so that investigating the
interaction between star formation and the interstellar medium (ISM) in these
galaxies is key to understanding the star formation process in the early
Universe. (2) Characterize the physical conditions of the ISM in nearby galaxies
with the first fully sampled maps in the [CI], CO(7-6), and [NII] 205microns
lines. These data are unique -- large-scale spatial and velocity information in
transitions that are energetically important -- and will be key to understanding
the relationships between density waves, bar potentials, and galaxy-wide star
formation. (3) Image the inner 1.5 x 5.0 degrees regions of the Milky Way Galaxy
(108,000 spectra/map) in the [CI] 370 microns, CO(7-6) 372 microns, and [NII]
205 microns lines, and smaller regions in the high J CO lines, thereby
characterizing the excitation of the molecular, photodissociated, and ionized
ISM in the "Central Molecular Zone" (CMZ) and tracing the gas dynamics.
Comparing to SPIFI, the "state-of-the-art" heterodyne systems would take ~300
times longer (~1 day of SPIFI observations translates to ~1 year of heterodyne
observations) to reach the same sensitivity over the same size maps. The results
will be promptly published in scientific journals, and the large maps will be
released within a year of data verification. Students (both undergraduate, and
graduate), and post-docs are vitally important to the research presented in the
proposal. Along the way, they design and develop many pieces of SPIFI's
equipment, and learn how to use scientific and engineering software packages,
including IDL, Mechanical Desktop, Adobe Photoshop, and Zeemax. Three Cornell
graduate students and two post-docs have already worked on SPIFI.