* 0338251
* Tomographic Imaging of the Velocity and Magnetic Fields in the Sun's Atmosphere
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Stuart Jefferies, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,099,701.00

The proposal is to develop an instrument that can simultaneously measure the
sound speed and magnetic fields at three heights in the solar atmosphere. The
instrument will use magneto-optical filters tuned to the solar absorption lines
at 422 nm (Ca I), 589 nm (Na D2), and 770 nm (K) to make measurements of Doppler
velocities and longitudinal magnetic field. These lines form in the mid- and
low-chromosphere and photosphere, respectively. In addition, the instrument will
also use a Fabry-Perot etalon as a narrowband filter to measure the intensity
variations of the 1083 nm (He I) line that is formed high in the chromosphere
and which shows the location of the "foot points" of coronal holes. Together,
the four lines will allow studying wave motions throughout the solar atmosphere.
The instrument will record images of the Sun every 10 seconds with a spatial
resolution of 1 arc-second. Thus, the project will be fostering the development
of existing magneto-optical filter technology to a new level. Upon construction,
the telescope will be tested at South Pole for a long period of uninterrupted
observations. Both the local and global helioseismic analysis procedures will be
utilized to identify and to characterize different types of waves present in the
solar atmosphere. These observations will allow determining the structure and
dynamics of the Sun's atmosphere through seismic measurements and, thus, improve
the atmosphere models, assess the role of waves in heating the
chromosphere/corona and driving the solar wind, and better understand how the
Sun's atmosphere couples to the interior. The broader impact of the proposed
project is two fold. First, there is a potential benefit to the science and to
the society because it is believed that the solar atmosphere is a "home" to many
phenomena that can have a direct effect on the solar activity, including flares,
coronal mass ejections, and the solar wind. Understanding the structure and
dynamics of the solar atmosphere will therefore lead to a better understanding
of the Sun-Earth connection. The collected data will be made available to other
researchers at DVDs. The broader audience of general public will be reached
through presentations at high schools, libraries, and community events, and news
articles in the general press. Most of the research materials will also be
placed in the Web.

