* 0338475
* Carbon Dioxide Near Infrared Absorption Line Shapes for Atmospheric Remote Sensing
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* D. Chris Benner, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2006
* USD 350,099.00

This award supports measurements of spectroscopic properties of carbon dioxide
(CO2), the principal anthropogenic greenhouse gas. The results of this work will
improve the precision of remote sensing techniques for CO2, which will be used
in the near future to quantify its spatial and temporal variations. Our ability
to forecast long-term climate changes depends on a detailed understanding of the
carbon budget and accurate predictions of future atmospheric concentrations of
CO2. &lt;br/&gt; Near infrared spectroscopic techniques provide excellent
opportunities for measuring CO2 with the required precision; however,
measurements at this level of precision require knowledge of the temperature-
dependent spectroscopic line shape and pressure shift parameters with
unprecedented accuracy. These parameters will be determined from a multi-
spectrum analysis of high-resolution spectra recorded at the Kitt Peak National
Solar Observatory. Investigators from the College of William and Mary, in
collaboration with the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and the Kitt Peak
National Solar Observatory, will carry out this work. They will demonstrate the
retrieval of column CO2 with a precision of 0.3% using high-resolution solar
spectra from the Table Mountain Facility Fourier-Transform Ultraviolet
Spectrometer (FTUVS), combined with a new parameterization of CO2 near infrared
line shapes and pressure shifts. &lt;br/&gt; This award will support
undergraduate students at the College of William and Mary and provide them with
training in state-of-the-art spectroscopic techniques, as well as an
appreciation of issues in global climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;