* 0338805
* SP:  Collaborative Research:MAMA (Multiple Antennas Multiple Appliances) Wideband Wireless Networks:  A Pervasive Technology for the Home and Workplace
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Roy Yates, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2006
* USD 676,595.00

Two rather different forms of wireless communications, one already established
and showing dramatic growth and the other only on the horizon, have the
potential to impact dramatically the nature of wireless communications in the
home and workplace. One is the increasingly high-speed information link typified
by 802.11x/802.15, first applied to broadband internet access but moving toward
video and audio entertainment distribution as well, and the other is the sensor
network, which can offer security, medical monitoring, and a variety of other
important services. Unfortunately these usages are largely incompatible. High-
rate applications will generally have adequate power sources for both
transmission and processing purposes. Service interruptions have the potential
to be annoying, but they are not, in general, threatening to health or safety.
Sensor networks, on the other hand, involve messages which are generally short
and infrequent, but which may have a high level of importance (consider
intrusion or fire alarms, or child&lt;br/&gt;monitors). Moreover, such sensors
(and less critical environmental sensors) often require placement that is
independent of permanent power sources, and thus require energy efficient
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Normally, such disparate requirements would
suggest the separation of these applications into different frequency bands, but
the emergence of unlicensed bands suggests that designers will not have the
option of such comfortable isolation. It is therefore important to consider how
such applications may coexist within the same frequency space. In particular,
one may speculate that the potential for such coexistence would be enhanced
within the private space that we find in homes and businesses - a volume in
which radio transmission may be beneficially controlled by a single entity, and
in which intra-system interference dominates. It is the premise of this proposal
that solutions exist that can allow a wide variety of disparate applications to
coexist efficiently within such a constrained, but controlled space. In
particular, the researchers believe that coordinated usage characterized by
multiple antennas and multiple appliances (MAMA) represents a new type of
network, and offers significant opportunities to interwork such disparate
systems efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accommodate this mixed set of bit-
rate and energy requirements, the researchers propose a comprehensive approach
that encompasses link layer, MAC layer and cross-layer techniques. At the link
layer, the research proposes:&lt;br/&gt;-Flexible bandwidth modulation formats
and spatial multiplexing and diversity. With the device transmission rate set by
the application, the signaling bandwidth of a device is optimized versus a power
level determined either by interference avoidance considerations or by energy
constraints. We will argue that this leads to ultra-wideband (UWB) modulation
characterized by low-signal-to-noise-ratio (low-SNR).&lt;br/&gt;-Multiple
transmit and receive antennas to be utilized in several modes: (1) in multi-
input multi-output (MIMO) mode, the channel is harnessed to increase bit-rate;
(2) in diversity mode, spatial diversity enhances power efficiency; (3) in
beamforming mode, transmitter antennas direct energy away from other devices and
networks. Consistent with UWB signaling, our research will focus on the low-SNR
regime for MIMO systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since link layer techniques cannot
address all the complex requirements of MAMA networks, the researchers propose a
cross-layer approach that takes into account the distributed, non-cooperative
nature of the networks to achieve a more efficient use of the network power and
bandwidth resources. The cross-layer approach consists of two
components:&lt;br/&gt;-Game theoretic methods: based on utility functions that
depend on transmitted power and throughput, users&lt;br/&gt;adapt their
transmitters and receivers to maximize their individual
utilities.&lt;br/&gt;-"Thin" MAC layer protocols: for given physical layer
transmitters and receivers, incremental redundancy hybrid ARQ provides non-
collaborative rate adaptation and spectrum resource
sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed space-frequency-cross-layer approach
to designing wireless networks is distinctly different from conventional network
design where data rate is maximized for a given bandwidth and power, generally
ignoring intra- and inter-network interference. The juxtaposition of UWB, MIMO
and cross-layer techniques in MAMA networks spans a multidimensional signal
space that will create a rich set of research problems and network
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The work proposed here (if
successful) will make possible the coexistence of new high-
speed&lt;br/&gt;wireless applications with emerging sensor networks at home and
in the workplace. Although the discussion focuses on the home and work
environments, it should be understood that the applications are more widespread
- to hospitals, factories, and some robotic scenarios. MAMA networks also
provide an exciting platform for the educational goals of the academic
institutions, including activities for both undergraduates and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research institutions involved in this
proposal are Princeton University, the New Jersey Institute of Technology, and
Rutgers University, and The Wireless Communications Dept., Bell Labs, Lucent.
The work will be done under the auspices of the N.J. Center for Wireless
Telecommunications (NJCWT). The NJCWT is an inter-institutional research and
educational organization sponsored and funded by the N.J. Commission on Science
and Technology.