* 0338089
* Effect of Electro-osmotic Forces on the Behavior of a Colloidal Particle Near an Electrode During ac Excitation
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Paul Sides, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 02/28/2007
* USD 369,676.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0338089&lt;br/&gt;Paul Sides, Carnegie Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of this research is
electrochemically stimulated self-assembly. A hypothesis about the mechanism
behind an experimentally observed anomalous motion of a colloidal particle near
an electrode will be tested. The experimental observation is that a colloidal
particle resides on average closer to an electrode than its equilibrium position
during ac polarization when the electrolyte is KOH; conversely, the particle
resides on average farther away from its equilibrium position when the
electrolyte is NaHCO3. The reason for this solution dependent behavior remains
unknown. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three possible candidate forces due to
electrically stimulated flow arise from&lt;br/&gt;electrokinetic,
electrohydrodynamic, and electroosmotic effects. Electrokinetic effects are
defined as arising from the interaction of electric fields with the charge on
the particle. Electrohydrodynamic effects are defined as arising from the
interaction of electric fields with unbalanced charge in a diffusion layer
generated by the passage of faradaic current. Electroosmotic effects are defined
as arising from the interaction of electric fields with the diffuse charge of
the double layer of the electrode. Preliminary calculations have shown that
electrokinetic effects are present but cannot account for the observations.
Electrohydrodynamic effects can in principle account move the particle downward
or upward on average but are not strong enough to account for the observation.
Electroosmotic effects are strong enough and under some circumstances can
account for the experimentally observed results; therefore the hypothesis to be
tested involves modeling and experimentation related to this effect.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will consist of four thrusts. The first thrust is
thorough modeling of the electroosmotic effect with a finite element analysis.
The second thrust is introduction of rigorous techniques of electrochemistry
into the Total Internal Reflection Microscopy experiments by which we observe
the behavior of the particle. The third thrust is a novel experiment by which
the diffuse layer potential, i.e. the zeta potential of the electrode, will be
measured. A disk electrode oscillating (not rotating) at several kilohertz
produces a quasi-superconducted sheet of alternating current due to the mobile
charge of the diffuse layer. This sheet of current will be detected by its
induced electromotance in a surrounding coil. This design allows the measurement
of the zeta potential of a single surface of an electrode pair even during
passage of faradaic current. The fourth thrust is elaboration of a model for the
dependence of the diffuse layer potential on faradaic
current.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will improve knowledge of forces
important in the formation of ordered layers of particles on surfaces. The
potential application areas are sensor and optical
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;