* 0338740
* EHP: Understanding the Interactions Between Starting Values and Early Interventions that Explain Children's Academic Performance
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Jeffrey Roth, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2009
* USD 331,082.00

ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NO: 0338740 INSTITUTION: University of Florida NSF PROGRAM: ENHANCING
HUMAN PERFORMANCE PI: Figlio, David N TITLE: Understanding the Interactions
Between Starting Values and Early Interventions that Explain Children's Academic
Performance

At entrance to public school, there exist very large average performance gaps
across students of different races, ethnicities, and socio-economic groups.
Moreover, the within-group variation in performance far exceeds the differences
among normatively measured groups. This suggests that race, ethnicity, and
poverty, and school-specific factors, explain only a small portion of the
differences in subsequent academic performance. Policymakers have for decades
designed health, education, and social welfare policies to help level the
playing field for children from disadvantaged backgrounds.

This research investigates the determinants and evolution of performance gaps
across and within groups during elementary and middle school, focusing on the
roles of educational, medical, and social welfare policy interventions
experienced during early childhood. Earlier studies of early childhood
interventions have several data problems that may impede our understanding of
the role of public policy in explaining early and mid-run educational outcomes.
This research will overcome the major weaknesses in previous studies on the
subject; it merges cohorts of birth vital statistics to elementary school
records, and administrative records on early childhood intervention
participation drawn from multiple sources. A wide array of early intervention
programs, ranging from follow-up programs serving neonatal intensive care
graduates to Head Start and Even Start will be considered. The data sets are
extremely large and very detailed, and the analysis data set will be constructed
using every student in the state of Florida whose birth records can be matched
with education data, including special education placement, attendance,
behavioral referrals and scores on the state's mandated comprehensive assessment
test. The use of large administrative data sets reduces measurement problems,
and also facilitates the study of heterogeneous policy effects.

The large and rich data allows a study of a wide variety of interrelated
problems, including: (i) whether school-based pre-kindergarten programs improve
the performance of children from low-income families and (ii) the effects of
social service program participation on children's performance. The statistical
techniques are straightforward and appropriate. Some of the variables are
endogenous but the data is rich enough for the PI to provide credible
identification strategies to determine causal effects. The results of this
research will have important educational policy implications, not only in the US
but probably throughout the world.

