* 0338951
* SBIR Phase I:     3D Modeling Facial Aging Effect for Enhancing Facial Recognition Performance
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Pan Gao, GENEX TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project will develop a
novel three-dimensional facial modeling approach to simulate the facial aging
effect of human subjects for enhancing facial recognition performance. Despite
many advances made in facial recognition technologies, existing system
performance is still very sensitive to certain changes between the enrollment
image and probe images. These factors include pose, lighting, and expression.
The recent Facial Recognition Vendor Tests (FRVT) 2002 performed by 16 US
Government agencies quantitatively document another important factor: It shows a
5% drop of performance per year due to the facial changes between the time when
a subject's image is taken and the time when the system captures a new image and
performs recognition. The SBIR proposal will develop a unique 3D face modeling
and computerized age progression/regression technique to solve this problem.
This unique technology, when fully developed, is able to eliminate performance
deterioration due to aged images in the database and enable robust, field
deployments of facial recognition systems in real-world applications.

The proposed product could have a big impact with Homeland Security as well
other security related applications. Local, federal and international law
enforcement groups will benefit from being able to identify people they have not
"seen" in a long period of time.