* 0338663
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of 802.11 Asset Tag
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* David Lee, Caveo Technology LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 98,260.00

Project Summary:

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will result in the
development and testing of an 802.11 asset tag, which is a new concept in asset
management and tracking. The innovation is to create a wireless asset tracking
tag that will communicate in any wireless network and in particular will work in
802.11 wireless LANs. Tracking assets such as PCs and other office equipment,
warehoused inventory pallets and containers, strategic assets, and manufacturing
materials can be accomplished by affixing the tag to the pallet/container/object
in any facility that has a WLAN. This concept overcomes the power and cost
barriers inherent in designing a small battery-powered long-range wireless tag
compatible with conventional WLAN access points. The research will demonstrate
overcoming the power management challenge as well as the positioning technique.
It will use a MEMS accelerometer to both manage the power as well as provide a
novel positioning approach based upon motion and signal strength detection. A
breadboard asset tag system will be built using a conventional 802.11 chip set,
a motion sensor, and a power management module. Software for the tracking
function will be built and tested in a typical office, manufacturing and
warehouse setting. Positional accuracy versus tag characteristics, calibration
effort, and site map detail will be determined. An estimate of the installed
cost versus positional accuracy will be made. The results are expected to define
a new asset tracking technology.

Broader Impact:

The results of this project will be important, as they should yield an approach
that will produce an order of magnitude reduction in cost and complexity over
existing RF tracking systems currently used in tracking pallets in warehouses,
equipment in hospitals/offices/schools and material in manufacturing processes.
By eliminating the complexity and cost of current RF asset tracking systems and
creating a tag and server software technology that will work within minutes of
being affixed to an object in any WLAN, the proposed technology will move asset
tracking/security from a few highly specialized applications to an affordable
WLAN appliance in offices, hospitals, warehouses, etc. More broadly, it will
demonstrate that motion-sensing technology can enhance the effectiveness of
asset management, tracking and positioning opening new approaches for monitoring
the location of objects and people.

