* 0338333
* Ice Nucleation by Marine Psychrophiles
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2004,11/30/2007
* Brian Swanson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 11/30/2007
* USD 335,676.00

The primary objective of this research is to investigate polar marine
psychrophilic bacteria for their potential to nucleate ice using a combination
of microbiological, molecular biological and atmospheric science approaches in
the laboratory. Very little is known about how psychrophiles interact and cope
with ice or their adaptations to conditions of extreme cold and salinity. This
work will involve a series of laboratory experiments using a novel freeze-tube
technique for assaying freezing spectra which will provide quantitative
information on: (i) the temperature-dependent freezing rates for heterogeneously
frozen droplets containing sea-ice bacteria, (ii) the proportional occurrence of
ice-nucleation activity versus anti-freeze activity among sea-ice bacterial
isolates and (iii) the temperature-dependent freezing rates of bacteria with
ice-nucleation activity grown at a range of temperatures and salinities. The
compound(s) responsible for the observed activity will be identified, which is
an essential step towards the development of an in-situ bacterial ice-nucleation
detection assay that can be applied in the field to Antarctic water and cloud
samples.&lt;br/&gt; One of the goals of this work is to better understand
survival and cold adaptation processes of polar marine bacteria confronted with
freezing conditions in sea ice. Since sea ice strongly impacts polar, as well as
the global climates, this research is of significant interest because it will
also provide data for accessing the importance of bacterial ice nucleation in
the formation of sea ice. These measurements of ice-nucleation rates will be the
first high-resolution measurements for psychrophilic marine bacteria. Another
goal is to better understand the impact of bacterial ice initiation processes in
polar clouds by making high-resolution measurements of nucleation rates for
cloud bacteria found over Arctic and Antarctic regions. Initial measurements
indicate these bacteria nucleate ice at warmer temperatures and the effect in
polar regions may be quite important, since ice can strongly impact cloud
dynamics, cloud radiative properties, precipitation formation, and cloud
chemistry. If these initial measurements are confirmed, the data collected here
will be important for improving the understanding of polar cloud processes and
models. A third goal is to better understand the molecular basis of marine
bacterial ice nucleation by characterizing the ice-nucleation compound and
comparing it with those of known plant-derived ice-nucleating bacteria, which
are the only ice-nucleating bacteria examined in detail to date. The proposed
activity will support the beginning academic career of a post-doctoral
researcher and will serve as the basis for several undergraduate student
laboratory projects. Results from this research will be widely published in
various scientific journals and outreach venues. &lt;br/&gt;