* 0338151
* Glaciological Characteristics of the Ross/Amundsen Sea Ice-flow Divide Deduced by a New Analysis of Ice-penetrating Radar Data
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Kenichi Matsuoka, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 04/30/2010
* USD 226,274.00

This award supports an investigation of spatial variations of ice temperature
and subglacial conditions using available ice-penetrating radar data around a
future deep ice coring site near the Ross and Amundsen flow divide of West
Antarctic Ice Sheet. Besides geometry of reflection layers the focus will be on
intensities of radar echoes from within ice deeper than several hundred meters
and will also examine echoes from the bed. Preliminary studies on theory and
comparison with Japanese radar data from East Antarctica suggest that large
spatial variations of the vertical gradient of radar echoes from within ice
exist and are caused primarily by ice temperature and secondarily by crystal-
orientation fabric. The hypothesis that the vertical gradient is a proxy of ice
temperature will be tested. The project will utilize an existing data set from
the Support Office for Aerogeophysical Research in Antarctica (SOAR) and will
complement work already underway at University of Texas to analyze the radar
data. The project will provide undergraduate research experience with an
emphasis on computer analysis of time series and large data sets as well as
development of web-based resource of results and methods and will support an
international collaboration between US and Japan through discussions on the
preliminary results from their study sites. Practical procedures developed
through this study will be downloadable from the project's web site in the third
year and will allow investigation of other ice sheets using existing radar data
sets. This project will contribute to the interpretation of the future inland
West Antarctic ice core and will help in the understanding of ice sheet history
and climate change.