* 0338278
* Collaborative Research: Calculation of Antarctic Gravity Field from GRACE satellite data and comparison with independent measurements
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Robin Bell, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 06/30/2009
* USD 245,847.00

This is a proposal to process the GRACE satellite range, range-rate, and range-
acceleration data with a goal to obtain a map of the geoid over the Antarctic
with spatial resolution between 35 and 100 km. The free-air gravity derived from
this geoid should fundamentally change our view on geological structure and
history of the Antarctic continent in much the same way that the GEOSAT mission
impacted our understanding of plate tectonics in the world's oceans. Due to
resource limitations, however, the GRACE project team will not use the range and
its derivatives to generate high spatial resolution estimates of the gravity
field along the satellite ground track. The new geoid and derived free-air
gravity field will require development of an algorithm to process the range,
range-rate and range acceleration data and convert them to a self-consistent
geoid. The GRACE-derived gravity field will be compared with marine, airborne
gravity and land-based surveys as well as with major geological features of the
Antarctic continent to assess wavelength resolution. This comparison will
require the integration of the airborne and marine data sets and determination
of the subglacial topography for some of the airborne surveys. Once the new
geoid and derived fee-air gravity have been generated, the continent-wide
subglacial topography could be estimated via an optimal co-kriging interpolation
of the available bedrock measurements and the geoid, joint with the statistical
relationships describing the spatial variation of topography, and the spatial
correlation of the geoid and topography. The subglacial topography will be also
determined using an alternative approach, the Parker inversion method. These
products will be made available to the ice sheet modeling community. The new
continent-wide subglacial topography will be used in combination with altimetric
ice surface elevations to calculate a new estimate of Antarctic ice sheet
volume, which can be used to calibrate the eustatic sea-level curve from oxygen
isotope data for the present and maximum possible variations of the global sea
level curve. The new subglacial topography estimates will also be used to
interpret geologic structures of the Antarctic and the processes responsible for
their formation. This research will have several areas of broader impact and
intellectual merit: (a) the map of subglacial topography, together with an
improved estimate of the Antarctic ice volume, will be an important contribution
to the science goals of the Antarctic Climate Evolution initiative (ACE).
Modeling the nucleation of the East Antarctic ice sheet relies on high-quality
subglacial topography models, as well as modeling the drainage of the entire ice
sheet. (b) The proposed GRACE-derived gravity approach, if proven to be
successful, can be applied to the Arctic region and indeed to the entire world.
While the Arctic gravity field is of high quality south of 82 N (ERS-1 orbit
coverage), a large polar gap remains. Mapping the main geological features in
these hard-to-reach parts of the world from satellite measurements would be a
significant step forward in understanding the plate tectonic features of the
Artic and Antarctic and should extend significantly recent marine geological and
tectonic studies of the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;