* 0338262
* Track 2, GK-12 MUSIC: Math Understanding through Science Integrated with Curriculum
* EDU,DGE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2010
* Martha Absher, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2010
* USD 1,479,744.00

MUSIC (Math Understanding through Science Integrated with Curriculum) is an
academic enhancement program designed to build on and refine an existing GK-12
program partnering the Duke University Pratt School of Engineering with four
N.C. elementary and middle schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this project lies in its contribution to the inquiry-based instruction
knowledge base through comparison of four types of training/models of
implementing inquiry-based instruction (contrasting impact of teachers trained
in inquiry-based instruction with and without NSF sponsored curriculum kits, and
with and without inquiry-trained teaching fellows) on student achievement and
teacher competence in inquiry-based instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this program includes dissemination of this curriculum through
TeachEngineering.com, an NSF-funded searchable national digital library created
by a consortium of first-cohort GK-12 recipients. In addition, mappings from the
North Carolina Standard Course of Study to the National Standards will enable
teachers in other states to use these lesson plans effectively.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of Prior Project: The initial GK-12 Engineering
Teaching Fellows Program placed GK-12 Fellows with teachers in 7 elementary
schools in 4 counties and served 1,700 students. Fellows provided assistance and
expertise for teachers designing and delivering hands-on activities that teach
the science and engineering competencies described in the North Carolina
Standard Course of Study; and hosted "Science Nights," Discovery Days," and "Win
a Day at Duke" contests. School superintendents, partner school principals,
teachers, faculty and the Fellows jointly designed workshops for the Fellows on
the delivery of grade appropriate information. Elementary school teachers
conducted the workshops. Dr. Ybarra and the Fellows offered teachers monthly
sessions, for Duke University Continuing Educational credit, on integrating
technology into classrooms. Student impact included an increased confidence in
science abilities in classrooms regularly employing Engineering Teaching
Fellows, increased student rating of experiencing science as fun, and improved
retention of science knowledge as evidenced on classroom tests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is receiving partial support from the
Directorate for Engineering. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Title: Track 2, GK-12 MUSIC:
Math Understanding through Science Integrated with Curriculum
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Duke University &lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI: Gary A. Ybarra,
Martha Absher, and Michael Gustafson&lt;br/&gt;Partner School Districts: Durham
County, Orange County and Orange Charter School&lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows per
Year: 6 Graduate and 12 Undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;Target Audience:
K-8&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Inner City Urban and Rural&lt;br/&gt;NSF Supported
Disciplines: Math, Science, Engineering and Technology&lt;br/&gt;