* 0338340
* GK-12 Project WEST (Water, the Environment, Science and Teaching)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* David Chapman, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2009
* USD 1,823,884.00

Title: GK-12 Project WEST (Water, the Environment, Science and Teaching)
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Utah &lt;br/&gt;P.I.: David S. Chapman,
Department of Geology and Geophysics &lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows: 11 graduate
fellows; 3 undergraduate fellows &lt;br/&gt;School District Partners: Salt Lake
City School District first year &lt;br/&gt;Target Audience: Grades 4, 8, and 9
&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban with rural outreach &lt;br/&gt;NSF disciplines:
Geosciences &lt;br/&gt;Track: Track 1 GK-12 &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Project WEST
(Water, the Environment, Science, and Teaching) links the University of Utah,
the Utah Museum of Natural History, and the Salt Lake City school district in
enhancing inquiry based science teaching in grades 4, 8, and 9 and the
interdisciplinary training of university graduate and undergraduate students in
the geosciences. The unifying theme of WEST (water and the environment) is
significant is the west because of its obvious importance for human survival and
livelihood in this arid region. National standards and Utah standards for
teaching science in this grade range focus on this theme. Every school and
university student and every resident in the State of Utah is impacted by the
local hydrological cycle: our mountain ranges receive ten times the
precipitation of valley floors, water runs off in streams or percolates into the
ground supporting the many ecosystems found between 12,000 ft and 3,000 ft
elevation, water provides for both agriculture and urban consumption, and flows
ultimately to the unique ecosystem of the Great Salt Lake. Water affects
recreation, the economy, and settlement. By gaining an enhanced understanding of
the role of water in the environment, particularly in this time of severe
drought, students will contemplate their place in nature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seven specific activities are designed to accomplish WEST
and GK-12 goals: (1) teacher-fellow workshops, (2) a graduate fellow
interdisciplinary research project/seminar, (3) a graduate fellow
teaching/learning seminar, (4) classroom teaching activities and preparation of
teaching resources, (5) K-12 student field trips, (6) development of a WEST web
site, and (7) an annual WEST retreat that will link research discovery with
effective teaching practice. Project WEST facilitates integrative and inquiry
based learning among elementary, middle, and high school students within a
framework of core curriculum requirements and state standards. It provides
professional development tools to K-12 teachers in the form of materials,
observatories, workshops, and field trips that promote more effective science
teaching. The multidisciplinary nature of WEST (geology, geophysics,
meteorology, ecology) provides intellectual stimulation &lt;br/&gt;and enhanced
learning opportunities for graduate students and undergraduates selected as
&lt;br/&gt;GK-12 Fellows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF intellectual merit of
this project is found within the conceptual theme and activities 2,3, and 7
above. The broader impacts include the diversity of the schools participating in
WEST. Evaluation of the project at every stage ensures that best practices are
discovered and followed. This project is partially supported by funds from the
Directorate for Geological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;