* 0338658
* SBIR Phase I: Dynamic 2D Depth Oriented Y-Z (X-Z) Opto-electronic Position Detector Using Photo Sensitive Semiconductor and Laser Light
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,10/31/2004
* Svend Strandbygaard, Sensordyne LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 10/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to verify
the concept of the innovation and clarify the systems and critical component
requirements for building a single instrument to detect the position of an
object in motion in a depth oriented 2D space. The instrument will have output
signals that identify the position of the object in the different directions
from a base location. The instrument will use a laser light to illuminate the
object with and photosensitive semiconductor to translate the reflected image
into a signal. Measuring the distance with a laser beam and digitizing images
are examples of two uses of similar technologies. However, they are limited to
flat digital pictures or flat x-y coordinate systems. Detecting the position of
an object in a depth oriented two-dimensional Y-Z field of view requires
multiple instruments and complex and expensive systems. The application of this
research is primarily in the area of automated manufacturing process control but
may also apply to architecture for digitizing art and other stationary
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology available to detect and locate
objects in a two-dimensional depth oriented Y-Z (or X-Z) field of view is still
in its infancy. This research aims to improve the understanding of the methods
with which to detect and monitor the 2D depth oriented position of objects that
are of non-metallic materials such as plastic, paper, rubber, fabrics, as well
as rocks.