* 0339112
* Water Rock Interaction - 11
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Susan Brantley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2005
* USD 26,229.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During June 27 to July 2, 2004, the 11th
International Symposium on Water-Rock Interaction (WRI-11) will be held in
Saratoga Springs, NY, USA. The meeting, sponsored by the Working Group on Water-
Rock Interaction of the International Association of Geochemistry and
Cosmochemistry, represents one of the best opportunities for students in the
fields of aqueous geochemistry, biogeochemistry, hydrogeo-chemistry, organic
aqueous geochemistry, geothermal chemistry, metamorphic fluid chemistry,
sedimentary diagenesis, and environmental geochemistry to mix with an
international group of scientists and engineers in similar fields. The
conference brings together international scientists in a formal scientific
setting but also provides an informal social program in which students and
scientists mingle and learn from one another in a dynamic setting. In this
regard, the meeting represents the best setting for students interested in the
chemistry of water interaction with rocks to meet junior and senior scientists
from around the world. The international focus allows students to learn about
water problems and solutions, as well as to learn about geochemical settings
from around the world. The cross-disciplinary nature of the meeting, wherein
low-temperature geochemists rub shoulders with high-temperature geochemists,
also fertilizes new approaches to science as high-temperature geochemists
interact with environmental geochemists in a moderate sized meeting in
discussing problems of mutual interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal we
request support to subsidize the cost of the meeting for students. The broader
impacts of this subsidy are the following: 1) Improved understanding on the part
of attending graduate students of the current field of water-rock interaction;
2) An opportunity for graduate students to make strong connections to
international colleagues from around the world at an early point in their
careers; 3) An opportunity for graduate students to present their work in oral
or poster format to a collection of 500 or so of the top scientists in their
field; and 4) An opportunity for graduate students to participate in field trips
around the Adirondacks and the Saratoga Springs area, led by local
experts&lt;br/&gt;