* 0339412
* SBIR Phase I:     Development of Applique Propagation Measurement Circuits for Enhanced Non-Line-of-Sight Broadband Wireless
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Donald Arnstein, Saraband Wireless, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to lead
to development of embedded propagation measurement circuits that will be used as
an applique in conjunction with broadband wireless networks. It is predicated on
the principle that it is better to learn about signal strength, path distortion,
etc., of non-line-of-sight transmission channels ahead of time rather than
placing queries into data packets. Current systems over-compensates for this
lack of foreknowledge through redundant transmissions, repeat requests,
oversizing transmit power, or by placing limitations on useful range of
operations. Research will emphasize performance of trade studies and analyses to
optimize algorithms so that they work to the highest possible levels of channel
stress including, but not limited to lowest signal-to-noise ratio, highest rates
of Doppler, worst multipath, longest range, and highest number of redundancy
antennas.

Wireless non-line-of-sight techniques such as multiple input multiple output
(MIMO), smart antennas, turbo coding, and diversity combining, will benefit
equipment suppliers because now they will be able to reuse most of their
internal modem designs and still take advantage of the applique nature of this
product. This technology will benefit the following groups of users: 1) rural
communities, 2) first response groups such as Fire and Rescue, Police, Ambulance
services, and Airport Security, 3) people working in groups that require
mobility, outdoor work, and 4) close cooperative communications over large
distances such as Agriculture, Maritime Trades, Forestry, Oil Drilling,
Utilities Operations, Construction and Military personnel.

