* 0339988
* STTR Phase I:  Advanced Control of Electron-Beam Deposition for High Precision Optical Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Douglas Smith, Vacuum Process Technology,Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,958.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project is focused on developing
an advanced control system for improving the manufacturing capability of
electron-beam deposited optical coatings. The objective is to develop a system
that reduces growth rate variations, resulting in higher yield and production
rates, thereby reducing manufacturing costs. The system will also enable more
precise manufacturing of coating geometry and structure which are required for
more advanced applications. Examination of the current control practices and
process characteristics reveals significant opportunities for improved
performance. Preliminary experiments with silica have shown that deposition rate
variations can be reduced by a factor of 4-10 which is shown to significantly
improve the optical coating quality. This Phase I research is directed at
answering several unresolved technical challenges as well as obtaining a more
formal quantification of the performance characteristics of the proposed control
system in order to determine its commercial potential. The specific objectives
for Phase I include: a) reduction of concept to a general algorithm that is
robust on a run-to-run basis; b) development of a control strategy that
eliminates problems associated with long deposition runs; c) performance
evaluation for other important but difficult to deposit materials; and d)
quantifying critical production performance characteristics to better determine
the commercial significance to end users. To insure that the control concepts
are commercially viable, the research experiments will be conducted on a
production scale system and will be focused on commercially important
manufacturing objectives and designs.

The commercial application of this project is in optical coatings for many
important applications in telecommunications, defense, satellites, and high
energy lasers. These advanced applications require improvements in manufacturing
capabilities in terms of achieving greater precision over a greater number of
coating layers while being produced in large volumes and at high rates. Although
electron-beam vacuum deposition has been used to manufacture the majority of
these coatings due to its economics and processing capabilities, more stringent
coating requirements are needed in advanced applications.

