* 0339761
* SBIR Phase I:     A Flexible "Human-in-the-Loop" Microsystem Assembly Platform
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Richard Casler, PICOSYS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,700.00

This Small Business Innovation (SBIR) Phase I research project addresses
fundamental issues in the development of human-in-the-loop (HIL) systems for the
manufacture of precision microsystem components. Invenios Incorporated, in
conjunction with faculty at Johns Hopkins University, proposes to leverage
existing NSF-funded research on human-machine collaborative systems (HMCS) in
the microsurgical arena to create a generic, yet flexible, microsystem assembly
platform (Platform). Invenios/JHU collaboration will build a versatile, HMCS-
based microassembly platform and evaluate its performance on three distinctly
different micromanipulation tasks: Sub-Micron Optical Alignment, Micro-
Mechanical Assembly, and Microsurgery. The goal is to show that a single, common
abstract task representation and related graphical user interface can be used to
provide significant productivity improvements on all three tasks. If successful,
this innovation will lead to the commercialization of a simple and cost-
effective Platform that will stimulate on-shore production of components
requiring meso- and nanoscale precision and dexterity.

The project directly broadens and extends the impact of the work already done in
the microsurgical arena at JHU within the NSF-sponsored Engineering Center for
Computer-Integrated Surgical Systems and Technology (CISST). In additional, the
JHU/Invenios HMCS platform will be donated to JHU at the conclusion of the Phase
I research, enabling this platform to be used by students and researchers to
promote education and to extend the research and discoveries into new areas.
Through this association with the ERC-CISST, the proposed project will have
broad exposure to underrepresented groups and will enhance the educational
infrastructure. Finally, by improving the productivity of entry-level workers,
the research will ultimately mitigate the need for manufacturers to move
operations offshore-again promoting participation of recent immigrants who, in
large part, are the labor supply for the microsystem component manufacturers.