* 0339959
* SBIR Phase I:  Expanding the Reach of Cognitive Tutors with a Software Development Kit
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Steven Ritter, Carnegie Learning
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2004
* USD 0.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
difficulties of authoring intelligent tutoring systems. Intelligent Tutoring
Systems have proven to be highly effective in delivering computer-based
instruction, but have historically been expensive and difficult to build,
requiring specialized skill in Artificial Intelligence and production systems
programming. This proposal describes a Software Development Kit (SDK) composed
of four components: Cognitive Model Authoring, Problem Authoring, Tool
Authoring, and Curriculum Authoring. The proposed research activity centers
around the first of these components: Cognitive Model Authoring. Cognitive Model
Authoring is comprised of three separate steps: defining an object hierarchy,
defining the goal structure of the problem task, and representing the behavior
of the instructional system. The proposal seeks to define an object-oriented
visualization of these steps, so that non-cognitive scientists can create
cognitive tutors. This tool will decrease the amount of time it an experienced
cognitive modeler to author the cognitive model portion of a tutor, and it will
also decrease the amount of time it takes to enable a person with no cognitive
modeling experience to create cognitive models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the Cognitive Tutor SDK is two-fold: (1) the easier production of new
Cognitive Tutors, and hence the ability to bring them to market more quickly;
and (2) the development of a Software Development Kit that could be
independently marketed, so that other companies can produce intelligent tutors
in other domains, languages, countries and markets.&lt;br/&gt;