* 0339366
* SBIR Phase I:     Advanced Ultra Violet (UV) Light Source for High-Precision, High-Resolution Photomask Metrology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Andrew Merriam, ACTINIX
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is for the
construction of an ultra-high-resolution, high-precision phase-shift measurement
tool suitable for metrology of advanced phase-shifting photomasks. A number of
semiconductor manufacturers now expect to progress from the 90 nm through the 45
nm nodes using an exposure wavelength of 193 nm. Advanced photolithographic
techniques are necessary to print these sub-wavelength features. Phase-shift
photomasks, i.e., those in which the optical thickness, as well as the opacity
is controlled, are a key reticle enhancement technology. Fast and accurate
metrology of critical-layer phase-shift masks is becoming necessary, both for
process control and repair validation, but the enabling tools do not yet exist.
The goal of this SBIR Phase I project is to develop a new, solid-state, high-
repetition-rate actinic 193.4 nm laser with high spatial coherence and
stability. This illumination source will be integrated into an existing
prototype microscope tool to demonstrate high-speed, highly precise phase
metrology suitable for use in the 90, 65, and 45 nm node device generations. The
project involves the design and construction of a novel optical-parametric-
oscillator and a number of associated nonlinear frequency conversion
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial application of this project will
be in the semiconductor lithography industry. The semiconductor industry roadmap
for the 90 nm mode and beyond requires measurements of photomask optical path
difference with sub-0.4 degrees precision. This metrology must be performed at
resolution scales consistent with feature sizes of the respective technology
nodes, and for both isolated and densely packed structures. No commercial
devices yet exist which satisfy these demands. The high-repetition-rate actinic
laser source described in this proposal is a key enabling technology for a new
high-precision metrology tool. Further, as a high-power stand-alone source, the
ultra-violet (UV) laser will meet the associated optical demands of advanced
photolithography, including imaging, bulk material and coating analyses, and
damage tests.