* 0339887
* SBIR Phase I:  Fabrication of Single-Crystal-Like PMNPT
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Jing Zhao, Agiltron Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,950.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses a low
cost technology for the mass production of high performance piezoelectric single
crystals. The approach will potentially lead to a new generation of engineered
piezocrystals exhibiting attributes of low cost, high quality and volume not
previously attainable. The proposed technology uses a novel sintering process to
overcome conventional limitations to the mechanical strength, size and
homogeneity inherent in pure single crystal forms. The approach incorporates a
templated grain growth mechanism within the matrix recrystallization process.
The plan is to demonstrate highly grain-oriented piezocrystal ceramics with
single-crystal-like properties during this program. The success of this
technological development will dramatically expedite the transition of new
generation piezoelectric devices from laboratory prototypes to their practical
deployment in the market.

The commercial application of this project is in piezoelectric devices. The
technology makes possible new piezoelectric devices with improved performance
that is beyond current technology. The anticipated targets for these materials
include medical ultrasonic diagnostics and therapeutics, active machine tool
control, and vibration suppression in HVAC systems. A recent report by the
National Science Foundation estimates the U.S. market piezoelectric ceramic
materials at ca. $1.5B. The global market is estimated at over $11B.

