* 0339954
* STTR Phase I:     Packaging of MEMS Inertial Sensors for Mechanically Harsh Environments
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Michael Kranz, MORGAN RESEARCH CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,998.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I Project will investigate the
feasibility of integrating advanced vibration isolation packaging technology
with Micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) inertial (translational and
rotational hybrid) sensors to yield packaged MEMS inertial sensors suitable for
mechanically harsh environments, such as automotive and space. To date, many
MEMS inertial sensors have been precluded from such applications due to their
susceptibility to high frequency vibrations present in these environments. The
patent pending vibration isolation packaging technology developed will consist
of semi-active mechanical low-pass filters fabricated using MEMS fabrication
techniques. This design will be utilized inside microelectronic packaging as
high frequency vibration isolation platforms. This effort will combine those two
technologies to demonstrate feasibility of the vibration filtering system for
MEMS inertial sensors. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary commercial
applications envisioned are in the automotive and industry sector requiring
sensor operation in harsh environments. The technologies developed in this work
will target those markets that require MEMS sensor performance, in the face of
vibrations, above what is currently available. The use of semi-active mechanical
damping can improve sensor performance, and hence overall system performance,
without large increases in size or cost. Companies who are developing MEMS-based
sensors for a variety of applications would be potential customers. These
companies would benefit from the availability of an active filtering package for
MEMS sensors and could easily integrate &lt;br/&gt;The package with their
sensor. &lt;br/&gt;