* 0339934
* SBIR Phase I:  Enabling Pedagogical Choice and Cost-Efficiency in the Development of Web-based Curricula
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Linda Chaput, AGILE MIND INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,561.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will answer the
following question: Is it feasible to build an efficient methodology and
computer-based systems for content authoring and Web-based delivery that truly
support multiple approaches to pedagogical practices? Specifically, is it
feasible to design an online authoring system and a complementary classroom
management system, where the features and benefits of both systems are
immediately available to innovative instructional designers? The goal is to
research an innovation that will empower content providers to use principled
learning theories and associated pedagogical practices for creating new online
curricula that support technology-mediated instruction. Specifically, the
research will produce a new type of authoring and delivery system where the
functionality available--creating course structure, managing multi-media content
development, translating course specification into reliable production delivery,
accessing course-related activities for students and their teachers, including
dynamic learning interactions, and real-time behavior tracking and reporting--
reflects the authors' preferred learning theories and
pedagogies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Agile Mind proffers a set of enabling tools
that support the development of technology-mediated instruction through cost-
effective means for producing new curriculum, doing so with a focus on
supporting instructional design innovation without compromising the capabilities
of the technology. The systems to be produced will address a major problem in
education, i.e., the consolidation of content development and dissemination in
the hands of a small number of publishing conglomerates and the resulting
consequent lack of quality and diversity of choice.