* 0339336
* SBIR Phase I: Vertical EML Source for High-Speed Interconnects
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Majid Riaziat, OEPIC SEMICONDUCTORS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,367.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
demonstrate technical feasibility of a high-speed Vertical Electro-absorptive
Modulated Laser (V-EML) for high-speed interconnects. This novel technology is
built on the VCSEL (Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Laser) concept and has all
of its nominal advantages such as low-power consumption, on-wafer testability,
and possibility of two-dimensional arrays. This technology should eliminate the
complications associated with direct modulation of the VCSEL at high speeds.
Modulation will be done externally by an electro-absorptive modulator that is
integrated with the VCSEL either in a hybrid fashion or monolithically. This
approach allows clean modulation without overshoot at speeds higher than 10 Gbps
and easily reaching 40 Gbps. Furthermore, by decoupling the modulation issues
from VCSEL emission, it provides additional design freedom for achieving extra
stability, lower noise and higher reliability. This concept is expected to
strongly impact the chip to chip and board to board interconnect industry by
virtually removing modulation speed limit and minimizing signal distortion of
the optical transmitter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vertical laser sources
in general have cost and size advantages over horizontal emitters in low to
medium-power single-device applications. They also lend themselves more easily
to two-dimensional array fabrication. The V-EML concept further removes the
limitations of direct modulation from these devices. With external modulation,
the V-EML can be driven by simpler electronics and at higher speeds. The
application that this work is intended for is high-speed interconnects. This can
either be in the form of backplane connections, distributed board-to-board
connections or chip-to-chip optical interconnects (C2OI). VCSEL arrays known as
"smart pixels" have been proposed and tested for such applications. A major
impact of this technology is that it will help to remove the chip and board
boundaries as significant obstacles to data transport, and will make possible
truly distributed and scalable systems of the future. The high-speed
interconnects optical communications market size is estimated to be more than $9
billion in 2010. &lt;br/&gt;