* 0339024
* STTR Phase I:     Advanced Virtual Manufacturing Lab for Research, Training, and Education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Tamer Wasfy, ADVANCED SCIENCE AND AUTOMATION CORP
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project aims to create an
Advanced Virtual Manufacturing Lab (AVML). The AVML will be driven by an object-
oriented scene-graph virtual reality toolkit. The key elements of the AVML are
as follows: (1) textured photo-realistic geometric solid models of the machines
and lab; (2) digital model of the machine which includes the machines controls
and moving parts; (3) physics-based model of the machining operation; and (4)
natural-language human-like intelligent agents which can be used as tutors.
Applications of AVML include the following: allowing students and researchers to
view and interact with a physically accurate simulation of the manufacturing
machine, training students to operate the manufacturing machines in a sage
environment, optimization of the manufacturing process plan by testing various
plans on the virtual machine before machining on the physical machine, and
remote viewing and control of the physical manufacturing machines.

The AVML will enhance the quality, accessibility, and productivity of
manufacturing education and training and will advance scientific discovery and
engineering analysis of next generation manufacturing processes. Also, the AVML
will enhance experimentation and learning, increase student creativity and
problem-solving capability, enhance collaboration among students, teachers, and
industry experts, and promote participation and equal access of underrepresented
groups to manufacturing technology training.