* 0339834
* EITM: An Investigation of Intermediation in the Mutual Fund Industry
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Jonathan Berk, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 02/29/2008
* USD 232,130.00

The purpose of this research is to derive and test a model of money management
that can simultaneously explain the salient features of the industry. There are
a number of economic regularities that characterize this industry,
specifically,&lt;br/&gt;oActive mutual fund managers do not appear to outperform
passive benchmarks, indeed the evidence is that they under
perform.&lt;br/&gt;oManagers that do outperform cannot seem to do so
consistently --- performance in one period has little predictability for future
periods.&lt;br/&gt;oYet investors appear to chase performance --- when a manager
does well (badly) investment in the fund flows in (out).&lt;br/&gt;oClosed end
mutual funds generally trade below their net asset
values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These facts are widely interpreted as evidence that
managerial out-performance is attributable to luck rather than skill. Yet mutual
fund managers are richly rewarded.&lt;br/&gt;Why then do intermediaries with
apparently little talent earn such high rents?&lt;br/&gt;Another puzzling aspect
of the industry is the existence of two different managerial compensation
contracts. That is, mutual fund managers are generally paid a fixed percentage
of the amount of assets under management. However, hedge fund mangers get an
additional incentive fee --- they get a percentage of any positive return they
generate. Given that the mutual fund contract is not incentive based, and that
hedge fund managers generally do better than mutual fund managers, one might be
tempted to conclude that the explanation might be that the mutual fund labor
contract is inefficient. At the very least, the existence of two different types
of contracts for essentially the same service is
puzzling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the face of this evidence many researchers
have concluded that a consistent explanation of these regularities is impossible
without appealing to behavioral arguments that depend on irrationality, or to
elaborate theories based on asymmetric information or moral hazard. Before
appealing to these additional effects it makes sense to first establish which
behaviors in the data are qualitatively and quantitatively consistent with more
direct explanations. That is the primary objective of this research
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will offer a parsimonious explanation of
why the industry is characterized by the above regularities by showing that they
can all be derived within with a fully rational economic model that features
competitive capital and labor markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Although understanding the role of mutual fund managers in the
economy has important economic implications, this research also addresses the
role of intermediaries in society in general. Much of what is learned from this
research is not specific to mutual funds --- it applies broadly to other areas
of intermediation. The model itself uses four distinct branches of economic
theory (financial asset pricing, information economics, contracting and labor
economics) to provide a general theory of intermediation rather than just mutual
fund management. The ideas developed can potentially help economists understand
more generally the role of intermediation in the economy.&lt;br/&gt;