* 0339031
* The Information for Learning to Act
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Claire Michaels, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Vincent R. Brown
* 11/30/2008
* USD 402,419.00

Practice makes perfect, as the saying goes. With practice, we better judge our
driving speed or where a fly ball will land. Similarly, practice improves bodily
coordination. A baseball player learns to run in the right direction at the
right speed to catch a ball. Likewise a driver learns to apply the brakes at
just the right time with the just the right pressure to stop smoothly at a stop
sign. Success in both tasks requires first that one can tune into the right
information about the world and the body. But how a person tunes into the right
information to enhance their performance is not well
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the National Science
Foundation, Dr. Claire Michaels and Dr. Bruce Kay will conduct basic research to
understand learning in the human perception and action. Their previous work
suggests that people explore a definable "information space" to discover the
right information. The funded research further tests this innovative idea. Close
examination of hand movements when learning a simple interception task reveals
general principles of how people discover the information to best control their
movements. How the hand responds to disturbances such as brief temporary
restraints illuminates other dimensions of the information space whether and how
it concludes patterns of action, for instance as well as perceptual
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowing how the complex coupling of perception
and action is learned and can be trained is increasingly important. Modern
science and technology have created new problems of complex remote control. For
instance, doctors and soldiers both navigate complex artificial displays of
remote and sometimes dangerous environments. To best teach necessary skills
requires a basic understanding of how skills are learned in the first
place.&lt;br/&gt;