* 0339510
* SBIR Phase I:  Ensuring Food Safety - A Predictive Modeling Tool for Process Design and Validation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Keith Driscoll, Biokinetic Controls, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I project project proposes
to determine the feasibility of a software-modeling tool for the food industry
to ensure safety of ready-to-eat (RTE) foods. Contamination of RTE foods has
caused severe illnesses and major product recalls in recent years. Current
methods used by equipment manufacturers and food producers to set parameters for
thermal processing rely heavily on testing, which is expensive, time-consuming,
and often results in conservative processes that sacrifice product quality and
yield. The objective of this project is to demonstrate that an innovative
software tool, combining mathematical models of heat and mass transfer to and
from the product with pathogen kinetics, can be used to design food production
processes and validate their effectiveness in pathogen reduction. The models
will be based on extensive studies that have established important parameters
affecting product properties and temperatures and thus the rate of pathogen
destruction.

The proposed research and commercialization of the software tool will provide
significant societal benefit by helping to reduce food-borne illness and product
recalls among ready-to-eat foods. Also, it is well recognized in the industry
that there is enormous potential to improve economics of food production through
design of optimized processes that improve yield while maintaining safety. The
proposed software tool promises to help producers realize this goal. Finally,
there will be significant benefit in terms of the interaction between industry
and Government and compliance with new regulations intended to improve food
safety. The research will contribute valuable knowledge of thermal and
biokinetic processes involved in RTE food production and advance the state of
the art in modeling of thermal and biokinetic processes.