* 0339809
* SBIR Phase I:   Mission:   Planet Y--A Game-based Tool for Middle School Science Learning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Linda Wurzbach, Resources for Learning
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,757.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to create a
video game, which uses contemporary 3D game engine technology, and will
incorporate capabilities for embedded, performance-based student skills
assessment, teacher reporting, and teacher administration tools. The game will
simulate real-world, complex problem-solving contexts, and offer students the
ability to assume the role of a scientist performing investigations within
virtual simulations of ecosystems, gathering data from a variety of sources,
analyzing the data, and developing a plan for solving the complex problem.
Science and gaming experts, educators, parents, and students will inform the
Phase I research. The game will be a significant innovation in terms of the
content of the educational software currently available and its learning and
assessment design. Using the best of what is known from cognitive science
research as a basis, the game will maximize student engagement in learning.
Current educational software uses assessments that interrupt game play; in the
proposed software, assessment will occur continuously in stealth mode. In other
words, students will be unaware of ongoing assessment and remain focused on the
science activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requirements of the No Child Left
Behind Act of 2001 will drive national demand for tools to teach students
science skills, including research and problem solving. Mission: Planet Y will
provide a model for electronic curricular resources that create a high level of
student interest, motivation, and learning in middle school science. Middle
school students using Mission: Planet Y--males and females, those with special
needs, and the gifted and talented--will enhance their science skills, content
knowledge, and interest in ways that will be reflected on state and national
tests and in science class participation. The game engine technology developed
for middle school science can be modified to create software for other subject
areas and grade levels. Phase I research will consider the marketability to
individual households, as well as to schools.&lt;br/&gt;