* 0339177
* Informal Insurance and the Extent of the Market
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Ethan Ligon, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2008
* USD 296,367.00

ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NO: 0339177 INSTITUTION: University of California, Berkeley NSF
PROGRAM: ENHANCING HUMAN PERFORMANCE PI: Ligon, Ethan TITLE: Informal Insurance
and the Extent of the Market

This research extends dynamic models of limited commitment to account for
observed limitations in (possibly informal) risk-sharing arrangements in both
rural and urban China. It will make four major contributions to economists'
understanding of how households perform in the face of shocks: 1) how well
markets for credit and insurance have helped Chinese households deal with the
shocks associated with transition to a market economy over the period 1987-2001,
and how existing mechanisms for insurance provision have encouraged greater
specialization in production. 2) Extension of dynamic models with limited
commitment to allow any finite number of heterogeneous households to make non-
trivial household-level decisions over investment and production technology. 3)
The research will employ extensive household panel data to measure the risk
faced by Chinese households, conditional on whatever formal or informal
mechanisms may exist for mitigating these risks, thus permitting a richer
understanding of the variation over both time and space in household welfare. 4)
This project will construct and test models capable of explaining variation in
the extent of risk-sharing across both time and space, so that we can learn
something about what features of the environment are necessary to generate the
observed patterns of spatial risk-sharing. These theoretical extensions are
substantial improvements over currently existing models of dynamic models with
limited commitment. The data to be used for this project is unique and will
allow the PI to answer several questions. Making the data available to other
researcher will aid in understanding, not only the Chinese economy, but Chinese
society at large.

This research will have several impacts beyond advances in economic science. The
development of the methods for measuring household risk and vulnerability is of
interest to analysts interested in welfare measurements which take into account
the risk faced by households; this is of particular importance in understanding
how households cope with the kinds of shocks associated with economic
transition. Second, Chinese entry into the World Trade Organization will have
differential effects on households in different regions and in different sectors
of the economy; measurement of household vulnerability can provide useful
estimates of heterogeneous impacts on different kinds of households. This
project will train researchers at Peking University and the National Bureau of
Statistics in the theoretical and empirical tools pertinent to these kinds of
welfare measurements. Finally, a clearer understanding of the limits on informal
mechanisms for credit and insurance is of practical importance to NGOs and
policymakers interested in developing mechanisms (e.g., microcredit) to needy
households.