* 0339243
* National Science Foundation/United States Department of Transportation AutoNet
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Wilfred Recker, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2005
* USD 96,373.00

This research will develop and evaluate the use of vehicle-to-vehicle and
vehicle-to-infrastructure communications to leverage cooperative, vehicle-
centric pervasive computing as a platform for transportation management. At its
core, we conceive of the resulting system as a bundle of services supporting an
arbitrary collection of transportation management applications. We intend to
explore the use of inter-vehicle communication (IVC) and roadside to vehicle
communication (RVC) for traffic management and control applications by: 1)
developing a comprehensive simulation environment that can simultaneously model
implementation details of IVC/RVC and the full suite of traffic management and
operations common to state-of-the-art research in Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 2) testing a prototype system within a real transportation network
specifically instrumented for research purposes, and 3) running simultaneous
real-time experiments on the simulated and real transportation networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activity will develop a full-fledged Autonet
(cooperative IVC/RVC systems) simulator that can be used to evaluate the new
traffic management applications arising from the set of inter-vehicle-related
services (information sharing, distributed computation, cooperative driving,
etc.). This research will begin by identifying a set of candidate applications
to target. This application set will identify a core bundle of services that
will be required to support these applications. These service specifications
will, in turn, define a set of application programming interfaces (APIs) for an
Autonet simulator that couples a microscopic traffic simulation model with a
model of wireless communications services. The functionality of the API will
then be implemented using models of any of a variety of candidate techniques and
technologies allowing the exploration of functional requirements those services
place on the underlying information technology and communications
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the research is potentially
important both for the users as well as for traffic managers. Results of the
research will contribute to better planning, management, and evaluation of
transportation networks by integrating recent advances in wireless
communications and mobile ad-hoc networking research into state-of-the-art
network and traffic simulation models to analyze traffic information propagation
in a distributed environment. From the users' point of view, real-time traffic
information means more predictable travel times. Better predictable travel times
imply improved scheduling matches since travel time can be predicted more
precisely. From the traffic managers' point of view, the "intelligence" imparted
to the driver can be exploited to help ensure stability of the quality of
service. This directly contributes to less fuel consumption and emissions since
there are fewer vehicles undergoing acceleration/deceleration cycles. In
addition, through the efforts of cooperating software, networking and device
researchers within the California Institute of Telecommunications and
Information Technology, the application could provide a living laboratory for
the investigation of mobile ad-hoc networking research issues.&lt;br/&gt;