* 0339023
* EITM: The Structure, Evolution, and Function of Large-Scale Social Networks: Theory, Data, and Experiment.
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Duncan Watts, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2006
* USD 211,842.00

Social scientists have long recognized that networks are central to a wide
variety of social processes, for example, carrying information, transmitting
disease, exerting influence, and providing access to resources. They have,
however, been hampered in their study of networks by limited availability of
large data sets and the intractability of complex network models. Consequently,
network analysts have historically-focused their analytical attention on small-
scale networks, and relied on their resulting intuitions to understand larger-
scale processes. In the past five years, physicists, biologists, mathematicians,
and computer scientists have brought to the study of very large-scale networks
valuable computational and analytical tools in their attempts to understand the
behavior of networked dynamical systems. This study will advance network
analysis by integrating theory, simulation, data, and experiment. In contrast to
traditional methods, where links are self-reported or inferred from affiliation
data, the study will examine networks that are generated by recorded information
exchange between social actors with specific demographic and activity- based
characteristics. Specifically, the PI will complete the following distinct, but
highly complementary, projects: (1) develop a parsimonious yet sociologically
plausible, mathematical model of network evolution; (2) analyze data drawn from
a real-time observational study of a university e-mail network; and (3) complete
a large-scale Internet experiment that explores global network structure and
utility through the lens of social search.

In addition, to its intellectual contribution both to the field of social
network analysis and also to the network research literature that now extends
well beyond sociology, the project will contribute to the development of more
realistic social network models, along with a better empirical picture of the
relevant phenomena. These have the potential to contribute to predictions and
policy recommendations pertaining to a range of social problems such as the
spread of cultural influence and infectious disease, social mobilization, and
the distribution and utilization of social capital. Finally, the project will
train graduate and undergraduate students at the cutting edge of mathematical
sociology and network-related research and will make available online both
empirical data sets and simulation/analysis software. This has the potential to
generate significant spillover benefits to the broader scientific community,
especially those researchers interested in further developing the field of
network analysis.