* 0339050
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Hormones and Body Size Evolution in Old World Monkeys
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Steven Leigh, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 02/28/2005
* USD 9,207.00

This study investigates the hormonal causes of differences in body size in Old
World monkeys, with an emphasis on baboons and their close relatives. Body size
is an extremely important variable in biology and in biological anthropology.
Analyses of why size differs in Old World monkeys can shed light on a number of
important scientific questions regarding patterns of growth and development. In
addition, recent advances in endocrinology have challenged longstanding ideas
about the role of hormones in growth control, and ultimately in resulting adult
size.

This research project addresses hypotheses that make predictions about hormonal
control of growth in primates, with direct application to human growth and
development. Specifically, the research addresses three primary hypotheses.
First, it is expected that serum levels of growth-regulatory hormones during
development are independent of adult body size, both inter- and
intraspecifically. Second, it is expected that tissue expression of hormones and
receptor number and affinity covary with size change and adult size, both inter-
and intraspecifically. Third, the research evaluates the hypothesis that
hormones involved in body mass development provide reliable information about
phylogeny, and are therefore mechanisms by which developmental homology may
occur or be recognized. These hypotheses are tested in the context of emerging
models of hormone action that prioritize processes at the tissue level, and
suggest a secondary role for endocrine axes. Analyses are conducted using a
large set of serum samples from captive primates. Data will be analyzed
quantitatively through a variety of sophisticated statistical techniques. These
analyses will help determine the relations of growth hormones to growth,
development, as well as to adult size and shape.

In addition, the research has direct applications to human biomedical contexts
because the primates analyzed may serve as extremely important models of human
hormonal growth and development. Implications for ageing research will also be
considered.