* 0339738
* SBIR Phase I:      A Sign Parameter-to-Text Input Software for People Who Are Deaf
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Daniel Roush, VCOM3D, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop assistive technology software that provides an accessible input
interface for people who are Deaf. Many Deaf individuals have difficulty with
reading and writing English text. Although text is within the visual modality,
it is not always accessible from a language perspective. The objective of this
project will be to develop Sign Parameter-to-Text technology, which will allow
Deaf individuals, who are fluent in American Sign Language, the ability to
search for signs based on linguistic parameters such as handshake, location, and
movement. Once the user finds the sign, semantically equivalent English words
will be displayed for selection as the text input. This research will be done by
preparing a corpus of signs using a phonological notation system and performing
statistical analysis on the data to discover the discriminatory features which
can optimize the search capabilities. Based on these features, this project will
develop search algorithms, a proposed graphical user interface and exploration
of hardware input devices which correspond intuitively with the interface. The
proposed interface features and functionality will be discussed with a focus
group for design feedback. Design requirements and feasibility studies will be
documented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercialization of this technology will
result in a product that provides an accessible input interface to off-the-
shelf-software such as word processing, email and instant messaging programs and
will complement other writing supports such as automated spelling and grammar
checking and word prediction as well as English writing tutorials. Additionally,
this technology has educational value and may increase the English literacy and
writing skills of Deaf individuals. This research will add a distinct input
component to VCom3D's current Text-to-Sign Animation output system. This
research will also contribute to corpus analysis and search engine algorithms
based on sign language phonological parameters. &lt;br/&gt;