* 0339721
* SBIR Phase I:     Packaging of Integrated Advanced Power Electronics Through the Development of Silicon-Carbide (SiC) Based High-Temperature Multichip Power Modules (MCPMs)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,08/31/2004
* Alexander Lostetter, Arkansas Power Electronics International, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,802.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to
investigate and prove the feasibility of creating high-temperature multichip
power modules that utilize silicon-carbide (SiC) power switches at temperatures
in the range of 300- 600 deg C. By taking advantage of the key benefits of this
emerging semiconductor (which includes high-temperature operation, low switching
losses, very high switching frequencies, and high power densities) the entire
field of power electronics has the potential to become completely revolutionized
on multiple fronts. SiC power switches, with reduced switching losses, would
improve the overall electrical efficiencies of power electronic systems. The
ability to operate at high-temperatures would greatly reduce the size and weight
of heat sinking strategies (perhaps by as much as an order of magnitude) and
possibly remove the requirement for power module heat sinks all together. The
project involves developing high-temperature (300-600 deg C) multichip power
modules (MCPMs) that integrate control and SiC power electronics into a single
compact module. Feasibility of such an approach to power electronics will be
proven at the conclusion of the Phase I grant with the demonstration of a 3kW
MCPM half-bridge power converter utilizing experimental prototype SiC power
switches and operating at temperatures of 300 deg C. Since current silicon
electronics are typically limited to approximately 150 deg C maximum temperature
of operation, the high-temperature research in this SBIR Phase I project has the
potential to greatly enhance scientific understanding of high-temperature
failure mechanisms, thermal induced electronic packaging stresses, and long-term
interconnect reliability issues in addition to technical advancement of state-
of-the-art power electronics systems.

The commercialization of SiC based MCPMs has the potential to find benefit in
nearly every electric motor drive, power supply, and power converter
conceivable. The application of such MCPMs could save electrical energy
consumption worldwide, due to the improved electrical efficiency of SiC power
switches alone. Furthermore, an immediate commercialization application is
possible in the development of high-temperature geological petroleum exploration
instrumentation.