* 0339160
* ADVANCE Fellows Award: Effects of Early Experience on Parental Behavior in Voles
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2004,08/31/2004
* Karen Bales, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Poston Muriel
* 08/31/2004
* USD 453,690.00

This project will examine the effects of early social experience
on&lt;br/&gt;male parental care in prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster). Prairie
voles are a&lt;br/&gt;monogamous, cooperatively breeding species in which males
display high levels&lt;br/&gt;of spontaneous parental and alloparental behavior
(taking care of infants not their own). However, the principal investigator has
previously observed marked differences in paternal behavior as a function of
differential handling during the postnatal period. Experiences during the
postnatal period and the availability of neuropeptide hormones, including
oxytocin (OT) and arginine vasopressin (AVP), may contribute to the expression
of positive behaviors toward pups as well. In this project the researcher will
study the neurobiology underlying the effects of varying levels of early
experience on male alloparental care. Pups will receive different levels of
handling during the first week of life. Later variables measured will include
alloparental care and anxiety, as well as long-term changes in peptide receptor
systems (OT, AVP, and CRH, corticotropin-releasing hormone), mRNA expression for
these receptors, and short-term peptide changes in the brain and blood when
exposed to a pup. This project will help us to understand the biology of male
parenting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prairie voles are a monogamous species of
rodent in which males participate in infant care. This project will investigate
the effects of early experiences on later male parental care and its underlying
neurobiology. &lt;br/&gt;