* 0340828
* Putting Ecology in Restoration: The Role of Mycorhizae in the Maintenance of Grassland Diversity
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Peggy Schultz, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2010
* USD 300,325.00

A grant has been awarded to Indiana University under the direction of Dr. Peggy
Schultz to investigate the role of the soil community in the restoration of the
prairie plant community. &lt;br/&gt;The project involves the investigation of
the relationship between prairie plants and one group of soil organisms,
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF). AMF are an ancient lineage of fungi that
associate with the roots of most land plants. Typically they form mutualistic
relationships with their host plants. AMF take up soil nutrients and transport
them back to the host plant roots. In exchange host plants transport
carbohydrates to the AMF. Through this project, soil organisms that are likely
to facilitate the establishment of prairie plant species in restorations will be
identified and grown. These organisms will then be tested to determine their
benefit to a variety of prairie plant species and their growth in association
with plants. The project will also test the growth response of plants associated
with AMF species isolated from undisturbed prairie as well as nearby disturbed
plant communities. In addition, she will develop molecular markers to identify
AMF species within the roots of host plants. Through these studies inferences
into the role of the AMF community in plant community dynamics will be made.
This research will contribute to basic knowledge of a ubiquitous group of soil
organisms and may suggest practical approaches to accelerate the restoration of
the diversity of prairie plant communities and perhaps other native plant
communities. &lt;br/&gt;This research will provide a framework to understand the
role of the soil community in prairie restoration. She anticipates that this
work will aid restoration practitioners and shed light on the ecology of the
soil community in tall grass prairie communities. Moreover, this project will
allow the principle investigator to develop research and educational programs
that promote an understanding of ecology, highlighting the ecological
restoration of native lands. In addition, Dr. Schultz is currently developing an
outreach program to primary and secondary schools to supplement the science
curriculum by developing interactive research experiences for students. She
envisions establishing native plant communities at schools that students will
help establish, monitor, and use for experimentation. Dr. Schultz will be
working with undergraduate and graduate students as well and faculty and staff
at Indiana University to facilitate this outreach program. &lt;br/&gt;