* 0340622
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Transcriptional and Posttranscriptional Regulation of the Sodium Pump
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* David Towle, Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 05/31/2007
* USD 129,993.00

Many coastal habitats include estuaries in which the mixing of fresh water and
seawater establishes a salinity gradient affected by tidal cycles and rainfall.
A few species of plants and animals have evolved physiological mechanisms that
permit reproductive success in such stressful environments. Among these are
aquatic crustaceans like the shore crab Pachygrapsus marmoratus and others such
as the green crab Carcinus maenas and the Asian crab Hemigrapsus sanguineus that
are highly invasive in ecosystems where they lack natural predators. We
hypothesize that these animals resist changes in salinity by regulating (1) the
expression of specific genes and (2) the function of proteins encoded by those
genes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; We propose to examine this hypothesis in the shore
crab Pachygrapsus marmoratus, a highly successful species in intertidal
estuarine environments. Like many euryhaline crabs, this species is capable of
taking up salt from dilute salinities, using the sodium pump to energize the
process. However, P. marmoratus is also capable of salt excretion in
environments more concentrated than normal seawater. Our aim is to delineate the
steps leading to differences in sodium pump gene expression, with emphasis on
neurohormonal factors and cell signaling pathways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
proposed research will lead to enhanced training opportunities for both the host
(Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory) and counterpart (Universite
Montpellier II, France). The French lab will learn additional molecular
techniques while the host lab will gain expertise in electrophysiology and gill
perfusion. An important part of the proposed research is the involvement of
undergraduates, to be recruited from Maine colleges, who will collaborate in the
proposed research in both countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;