* 0340856
* ADVANCE Fellows Award: Exploring Genome Plasticity During Speciation in Hybrid Yeasts
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Barbara Dunn, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2007
* USD 450,000.00

Genome rearrangements have been implicated as a driving mechanism in the
speciation of many organisms. Using microarray-based Comparative Genomic
Hybridization (array-CGH), this investigator will track, on a whole-genome
scale, the chromosomal rearrangements that occur during each step of de novo
speciation in hybrid yeasts formed between Saccharomyces cerevisiae and each of
the four other sequenced Saccharomyces species. Array-CGH techniques will also
be used to similarly investigate whether the nascent hybrid yeast species, when
grown in chemostats under differing conditions, exhibit characteristic sets of
genome rearrangements that can be correlated with specific environmental
pressures, and to determine the stability of these genome rearrangements during
long-term growth. Finally, a "genomic survey" of industrial yeast strains (such
as beer, wine, and baking yeasts) will be performed, using array-CGH to
inventory strain-specific chromosomal composition and genomic
rearrangements.&lt;br/&gt;These studies will represent the first genome-wide
assessment of the extent and types of genome rearrangements that occur during
real-time speciation and adaptation. They will allow elucidation of not only
potential mechanisms of genome rearrangement, but also potential mechanisms of
speciation. By establishing whether specific large-scale genome rearrangements
are associated with specific selective pressures, the role that genome
plasticity plays in adaptive evolution can be assessed. Finally, by
retrospectively examining the genomes of contemporary industrial yeast strains
and comparing the results to those obtained from the lab studies described
above, it may be possible to identify the historical events, in the form of
selective pressures or hybrid formation, that led to particular genome
structures for particular industrial uses.&lt;br/&gt;