* 0340740
* SGER:     Evaluating Reliability of Defect Tolerant Architectures for Nanotechnology using Probabilistic Model Checking
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Sandeep Shukla, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2005
* USD 50,000.00

With the advances in silicon technology as predicted by Moore's law, we are
already in deep sub-micron era of device feature size. Currently 90 nanometer
(90 nm) is a reality, and very soon we will be in the tens of microns. The
technology will then change drastically, with single electron transistors and
such artifacts of nano-technology era. As a result, uncertainties about the
device behaviors will be a common problem that engineers will have to deal with,
in such miniscule quantum level of technology. Currently, while designing
computer architecture components, engineers safely assume that the transistors
and logic gates will behave as predicted by the theory. However, with
uncertainties being rampant in nano-technology, one can only rely on the
measures of the probability that a transistor will behave correctly, or a logic
gate will function correctly. As a result, in order to implement a logic
function and to depend on it with high degree of reliability, engineers will
have to build redundancy in the design, such that if some of the gates fail,
even then, the functional block will provide the correct functionality with very
high degree of reliability. However, how to build redundancy for particular
logic functions, and how much redundancy is enough, and at what level of
redundancy, the reliability actually decreases, are questions to be answered by
an engineering tool, before such redundancy is built into the system. Von
Neumann looked at similar problems for logic gates since during his time, logic
gates were built with valves which were quite unreliable. Information theorists
also look at similar problems in terms of noise tolerance by logic functions.
However, no tool exists for such evaluations, nor does a precise engineering
methodology exist. This project aims at bringing in the novel technology of
probabilistic model checking and create a methodology and tool set for
evaluation of reliability for different alternate redundant architectures and
compute reliability measures before the design is built to steer the engineers
in the right directions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will help
prepare computer engineers in building reliable functionalities on unreliable
nano-substrates, given that material scientists can calibrate nano-materials for
probability of failures. This work therefore will have great impact in the
future computer engineering and logic design. Also it will help educate future
engineers to face the nano era and build reliable computing infrastructures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;