* 0340530
* ADVANCE Fellows Award:  Inverse Problems for Anisotropic Elastic Media
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Lizabeth Rachele, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2008
* USD 348,942.00

The purpose of this project is to study uniqueness for the dynamic inverse
problem for bounded, three-dimensional, anisotropic elastic media, that is, to
address the question: do displacement-traction measurements at the surface of an
elastic object uniquely determine the density and elastic properties of the
interior? In particular, the aim is to study whether the theory predicts any
ambiguities in the sensing of the internal properties from surface measurements,
and, if so, if it is possible to characterize features of the elastic media that
are ``hidden'' from the surface. The PI plans (in joint work with Anna
Mazzucato) to present such an ambiguity, an obstruction to uniqueness, by
transforming the medium via diffeomorphisms that fix the boundary to first
order. That is, the plan is to show that elastic media have the same Dirichlet-
to-Neumann map if they lie in the same orbit under the action of pullback via
these diffeomorphisms. A consequence of the obstruction to uniqueness is that
the parameter identification problem for large classes of anisotropic elastic
media may be solved, in part, if it has been solved for simpler classes. In
particular, the PI plans to extend uniqueness results for isotropic
elastodynamics to classes of (possibly composite) anisotropic elastic media. To
apply the partial uniqueness result, it is important to develop tools to
identify whether a given elastic medium is in the orbit of a certain class of
elastic media (for example, isotropic). The PI plans to begin addressing this
problem by giving a pointwise characterization of the orbits of general
anisotropic elastic media under this action.

Imaging technologies aid physicians in detecting and diagnosing abnormal tissue.
Techniques using ultrasound, for example, have been developed recently for
sensing how the interior points of biological tissues respond when movement is
initiated at the surface. Information about how the tissue moves can be used to
identify regions that are stiffer than their surroundings, and since tumors are
often encapsulated in tissue which is stiffer than normal, this tool can have
important medical applications. Since stiffness is an elastic feature,
mathematicians can apply methods from the field of differential equations to
contribute to this study of this inverse problem. The PI plans to work with
undergraduate and graduate students from the host institution to present
graphical results and instructive text on the internet for this inverse problem.
This award is supported by the NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of the
ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of women in the scientific and
engineering workforce through the increased representation and advancement of
women in academic science and engineering careers.