* 0340912
* CAREER:  Spectroelectrochemical Studies of the Novel PutA Flavoprotein and its Macromolecular Associations
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2001,04/30/2006
* Donald Becker, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 04/30/2006
* USD 314,250.00

0091664&lt;br/&gt;Becker&lt;br/&gt;The intriguing flavoprotein, PutA, performs
two mutually exclusive functions in Escherichia coli. First, in the cytoplasm,
PutA autorepresses transcription of the putA and putP (a proline transporter)
genes of the proline utilization (put) regulon. Secondly, PutA associates
peripherally with the cytoplasmic membrane where it performs the two-step
oxidation of proline to glutamate. The overall goal of this research is to
define the mechanism by which PutA switches from a transcriptional regulator to
a membrane-associated proline dehydrogenase. The working hypothesis is that the
flavin redox state governs PutA macromolecular associations and thus the
intracellular location and function of PutA. The objective of this project is to
establish the relationship between the flavin redox state and the macromolecular
associations of PutA. The first two aims are to investigate the influence of the
flavin redox state on the transcriptional regulatory function of PutA and PutA-
membrane interactions. The final aim is to correlate conformational changes in
PutA with flavin reduction and establish primary structure-function
relationships. Experimental approaches will combine spectroelectrochemistry and
biophysical methods to provide unique and critical insights into the regulation
of PutA. This project will clearly define the influence of the flavin redox
state on PutA functions and contribute pivotal understanding into the regulatory
mechanism of the multifunctional PutA protein. Studies of proteins that have
multiple functions such as PutA are important because they will provide
knowledge of a how a particular structural scaffold is used for different
purposes. The overall educational goal is to establish an interdisciplinary
biochemistry degree program at the University of Missouri-St. Louis. The first
step toward this goal is to augment biochemistry curriculum with advanced
courses and new laboratory techniques and to broaden research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students. The study of PutA will promote
incorporation of research discoveries and applications into the curriculum.