* 0340733
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  Corrosion of Silicate Glass Ceramics by Oxide Melts and Impacts on Glass Recycling
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Scott Misture, Alfred University NY State College of Ceramics
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2005
* USD 17,650.00

0340733 Misture This award supports Scott Misture, Christopher Sinton, and a
student from Alfred University in a collaboration with Joachim Deubener and
Lothar Wondraczek of the Institute for Non-metallic Materials at the Technical
University of Clausthal, Germany. The overall goals of the collaboration are to
foster new professional links between the glass science and ceramic engineering
programs at the two universities, and to obtain preliminary data describing the
interactions between glass-ceramics and oxide glass melts that is critical to
support improved industrial glass recycling. The research team will undertake a
set of experiments to gather preliminary data and establish models of the
corrosion of silicate glass ceramics in direct contact with melts of oxide
glasses. The data will be used to create models to describe the corrosion
mechanism between the two materials. The outcome of the project will be
significant from two perspectives: glass recycling, where the dissolution of the
glass-ceramic is favorable; and, conversely, for applications such as crucibles
and stirrers for advanced melting techniques where the durability of the
materials is critical. In glass recycling, ceramic and glass-ceramic
contamination is a continuing problem that can lead to flaws in the glass and
sometimes damage the furnace, orifices, and forming equipment. In Germany, the
problem of glass-ceramic contamination in cullet used in fiberglass manufacture
is so great that the industry is considering discontinuing the use of recycled
material. For advanced glass melting, glass-ceramic materials have the potential
to be used as critical long-life melting and forming tools. The two PI teams and
the two institutions have complementary expertise and facilities that will
ensure a fruitful interaction