* 0340736
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Monolayer Structure on Interfacial Hydrodynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Juan Lopez, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 06/30/2007
* USD 134,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0340768 AND
0340736&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: AMIR H. HIRSA AND JUAN M.
LOPEZ&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: RENSSELAER POLYTECHNIC INST./ARIZONA STATE
UNIVERSITY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;THE ROLE OF MONOLAYER STRUCTURE ON INTERFACIAL
HYDRODYNAMICS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research program is to
advance fundamental understanding of surfactant monolayer hydrodynamics.
Applications of monolayer hydrodynamics are numerous. Technology examples
include material and food processing, liquid atomization, and coating systems.
An example of a natural system dominated by monolayer hydrodynamics is the lung.
In the absence of surfactant monolayers, the surface tension of the aqueous film
covering the lung tissue would close the passages and make respiration
impossible. This research is intended to provide fundamental insight into the
nature of interfacial hydrodynamics by developing new theories, and numerical
and experimental techniques to test these theories. In particular, the role of
monolayer mesoscale structure on interfacial transport processes will be
elucidated, as will the effect of flow on the monolayer structure. Use of simple
constitutive relations in interpreting experimental data in the past has led to
the conclusion that many monolayers have an apparent negative surface
dilatational viscosity. This is not physically consistent with the second law of
thermodynamics. In this project, contributions from non-equilibrium monolayer
concentration and phase morphology will be considered, and these may provide an
explanation for the observed enigma of apparent negative surface dilatational
viscosity. This issue is of fundamental significance and will have a broad
impact on a wide range of fields as the drive to miniaturization leads to small-
scale open fluidic systems in which the viscous contributions to the interfacial
stresses dominate over the elastic contributions. Better understanding of
monolayers is expected to have a significant impact on the industrial and
biomedical communities working on designer surfactant monolayers. Also, the
multidisciplinary nature of this project will provide an excellent opportunity
to educate graduate and undergraduate students in both science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*co-funded jointly by the Fluid Dynamics &amp;
Hydraulics, and Interfacial, Transport and Thermodynamics programs, and Math
Sciences Priority Area.&lt;br/&gt;