* 0340670
* Late Cenozoic and Active Uplift of a Restraining Bend along a Continental Transform -- the Dead Sea Fault in Lebanon
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Francisco Gomez, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 04/30/2006
* USD 17,967.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Lebanese Restraining Bend (LRB) constitutes a
200-km long section of the left lateral Dead Sea fault system (DSFS), and,
hence, represents a significant segment of this&lt;br/&gt;continental transforms
system. Despite the tectonic prominence of the DSFS, the northern 500 km of this
plate boundary (including the LRB) have, until the past decade, been the subject
of relatively few field-based, neotectonic studies. Almost all previous studies,
including research by the PI, have focused on the strike-slip tectonics of the
region; yet, the uplift is a significant component of the neotectonic
picture&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;Key scientific questions to be addressed include
how many distinct episodes of uplift&lt;br/&gt;have occurred in the Lebanese
mountains, and how do these correspond with the timing of different tectonic
episodes along the DSFS? This can help address the question of whether the
African-Arabian plate boundary has migrated over time. Other issues pertain to
the spatial distribution of present and past uplift, as well as the possible
influence of inherited crystal structures (e.g., the Mesozoic Palmyride rift
system or the Neo-Tethyan passive margin) on the kinematics of the
LRB.&lt;br/&gt;This proposed work would assess the feasibility of documenting
Late Cenozoic and active&lt;br/&gt;uplift of the LRB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;