* 0340675
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Landscape Structure, Macroregional Interaction, and Variation among Mississippian Chiefdoms of the Interior Coastal Plain, Georgia
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Paul Fish, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Paul R. Fish, John F. Chamblee will conduct an
archaeological survey in the Chickasawhatchee Swamp of southwestern Georgia.
From approximately A.D. 1000 - 1600, the area was home to one or more chiefdoms.
Chiefdoms are societies whose members are ruled by a person or group with
inherited leadership rights. Such inheritances are often seen as being divinely
sanctioned. Unlike kingdoms or states, chiefdoms are generally organized without
standing armies, formal literacy, or a bureaucracy. Chiefs instead govern
through the strength of their personalities as well as through their ability to
attract followers using a combination of exotic gifts, surplus food, and limited
physical force. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chiefdoms were prevalent throughout the
southeastern United States during the first half of the last millennium, but the
Chickasawhatchee chiefdoms are unusual among them in terms of their geographic
location. These societies are not located in a coastal region or along a major
river, as are most other chiefdoms in southeastern United States. In addition,
the Chickasawhatchee Swamp is located between no less than nine other
contemporaneous societies in neighboring regions - some of which were chiefdoms
and some of which were not. Analysis of survey data will allow for a greater
understanding of the ways in which the natural environment and interactions
between neighboring societies contribute to variation among
chiefdoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on chiefdoms is important because it
allows us to understand political power at the level of face-to-face interaction
and in the absence of the more complex institutions common in states. While
archaeologists cannot document interactions the way ethnographers might, we can
see the long-term consequences of strategies used repeatedly by chiefs as they
attempted to consolidate and maintain power. Monuments like earthen mounds are
indicators of the ability to mobilize labor in public projects. The dispersed
swamp resources discouraged compact villages, making labor mobilization by
chiefs more difficult. Documentation of mound size and surrounding villages, as
well as nearby small family settlements, will provide a basis for understanding
the kinds of opportunities available to chiefs in such a natural
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Items like coastal shell, stone tools made from
non-local materials, and decorated pottery are all evidence that chiefs traded
with outsiders in order to provide rewards for loyal followers. By analyzing
these items, one can gain insights into the relationships between the chiefdoms
of the Chickasawhatchee and their neighbors in other regions. The artifact
chronology developed during data analysis will be used to trace the growth,
maintenance, and eventual decline of the Chickasawhatchee chiefdoms. Comparing
this history to that of neighboring regions will provide clues as to the
possibility of inter-regional trade, warfare, and other kinds of social
interaction.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; This project will have an impact outside the
scientific community. Undergraduate volunteers will be trained in fieldwork
techniques, as will local volunteers. In addition, very little archaeological
research has occurred in southwestern Georgia, while commercial artifact
prospecting is on the rise. As a result, the general public in not aware of
either of the importance of archaeological site preservation, or the history
these sites represent. Lectures are planned at civic organizations, schools, and
relevant government agencies. Outreach to local collectors will encourage them
to share information with archaeologists. Since much of the research is being
conducted on private land, reports on the excavations will be provided to
landowners.&lt;br/&gt;