* 0340171
* SBIR Phase I: Environmental Risk Management and Quantification Using Real Options
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* R. David Espinoza, Geosyntec Consultants
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,813.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project is proposed
for developing a methodology and tools for assessing the redevelopment value of
environmentally impaired properties. The purpose of this research is to develop
a methodology and software to quantify the risk and cost associated with
redeveloping such properties. The proposed project involves: (i) identifying and
evaluating data for calibrating a valuation model; (ii) developing a valuation
model that accurately accounts for uncertainty and the value of management
flexibility than other available models); (iii) identifying commercially
available products that can support the model; and (iv) developing a working
prototype of the model, using the data collected in the first task to check the
viability of the prototype. The application of these methodologies represents a
unique aspect of this research; this approach reflects the state-of-the-art in
research of property valuation, and the proposed project is expected to advance
the state-of-the-art in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project offers
numerous commercial and societal benefits related to redevelopment of
environmentally impaired properties. There are tens of thousands of
environmentally impaired properties in the United States, many of which are
located near business centers and in areas targeted for redevelopment.
Developers can purchase insurance products to mitigate some of this risk, but
the costs of currently available insurance products are not based on an accurate
evaluation of the true risk. Using the product of this research, developers will
be able to more accurately quantify the value of their investment in an
environmentally impaired property, will be able to more competitively obtain
insurance against unforeseen circumstances, develop better contingency plans in
the event that unexpected conditions are encountered, and will be able to
identify key management decision points in a proposed redevelopment project. The
product of this research will also provide, in some cases, a competitive
advantage to redevelopment of environmentally impaired properties over
development of undeveloped land.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;