* 0340787
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Electronic Spectroscopy and Photochemistry of Transition Metal Complexes Studied via Coupled-Cluster Calculations and Wavepacket Propagation
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Rodney Bartlett, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2007
* USD 20,200.00

0340787&lt;br/&gt;Bartlett&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this three-year U.S.-France
cooperative research project, photodissociation dynamics of a series of small
transition metal carbonyls and transition metal-carbene ions observed in
femtosecond laser experiments will be investigated using quantum chemical
calculations supplemented by wave packet dynamics. The main objective is to
analyze the mechanism underlying concurrent fragmentation schemes observed in
transition metal molecules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves U.S.
researchers led by Rodney Bartlett at the University of Florida and French
researchers led by Chantal Daniel and Alain Strich at the Institut Louis Pasteur
in Strasbourg, France and takes advantage of their combined expertise and
complementary theoretical methods. The Strasbourg group will apply to
spectroscopy and photoreactivity of transition metal complexes highly correlated
variational/perturbational methods and wave packet propagations. The University
of Florida will implement coupled cluster methods applied to spectroscopy and
molecular properties of small molecules. Most recently this group has applied
their methods to subunits in extended organic systems. The investigators will
solve fundamental questions concerning the differentiation between chemically
active electronic states that lead to selective bond breaking and the
determination of time scales and branching ratios of concurrent fragmentation
processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The international effort will advance our
understanding of photochemistry of transition metal compounds. This work is
relevant for physical, inorganic and organometallic chemistry and catalysis. In
addition, U.S. graduate students in chemistry will benefit from training with an
excellent international team in chemistry research at the
frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is jointly supported by the National
Science Foundation (NSF) and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
(CNRS). NSF will provide support for visits by the U.S. investigators and
graduate students to France. The CNRS provides similar funding for visits to the
United States by the French team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;