* 0340889
* CCLI-EMD:  Development of a Finite Element Method Learning Environment for Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Joseph Rencis, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Lee Gentili
* 04/30/2005
* USD 74,999.00

"ABSTRACT"&lt;br/&gt;DUE-0340889&lt;br/&gt;Development of a Finite Element
Method Learning Environment for Undergraduates&lt;br/&gt;Worcester Polytechnic
Institute&lt;br/&gt;Joseph Rencis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering-NEC (59) This
CCLI-EMD proof-of-concept project is designing and developing a prototype open
access finite element method learning (FEML)environment. Educational outcomes
for FEML are based upon the criteria recommended by the Accreditation Board for
Engineering and Technology (ABET). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The materials being
created include one full-scale engineering case study in structural engineering
and one mini-scale engineering case study. Both case studies use a holistic
approach so that students will gain an understanding of the limitations of
finite analysis methods. The e-learning objects being designed will support
synchronous and asynchronous e-learning environments. The modules target
students in mechanical, civil, aerospace and nuclear engineering programs. The
project incorporates a full evaluation plan to determine the effectiveness of
the curriculum as it is piloted in the Mechanical Engineering Department at
Worcester Polytechnic Institute. A faculty development and teacher preparation
component provides faculty with an understanding of how to effectively use this
methodology to create learner centered e-learning objects, and how to deliver
the technology by creating and developing rich e-learning environments.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project is adapting Extensible Markup Language to
conform to the IMS/SCORM specifications for e-learning to create the e-content
for the e-learning objects. The e-learning objects being developed conform to
national and international standards for e-learning in order for the material to
become part of the National Science Digital Library through the projects
website.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;