* 0340609
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  Combined Imaging of Plant Growth and Photosynthesis from the Cellular to the Ecosystem Level
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Uwe Rascher, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2006
* USD 14,968.00

0340609&lt;br/&gt;Rascher&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Uwe Rascher and students
from Columbia University in a collaboration with Achim Walter of the Institute
of Phytosphere Research at the Foschungszentrum Juelich, Germany. The research
will focus on photosynthesis and growth as key processes in determining the
overall performance of plants and ecosystems. Both processes are dynamic,
heterogeneous in space and time, and depend on a spectrum of environmental
factors. Currently empirical connections between growth processes of different
organs are established and can be used for scaling between different levels of
plant organization. The central aims of this project are to evaluate the range
of dynamic growth distributions within the canopy of different model species; to
analyze leaf growth distributions as a function of various environmental
factors; to test the correlations between fluctuations of growth, photosynthesis
and environmental parameters; and to identify molecular and physiological
mechanisms that mediate between photosynthetic energy acquisition and plant
growth. A second aim of this project is to facilitate the exchange of young
researchers within an established international cooperation between a research
institute in Germany and Columbia University's Biosphere 2 Center. Presently,
the group investigates interactions between growth and photosynthesis of plants
and plant communities as quantified by non-destructive, novel imaging techniques
and determines the underlying physiological processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;