* 0340059
* SBIR Phase I:    Low Temperature Synthesis for Device Quality Semiconductor Films
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Shalini Menezes, InterPhases Solar, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop an
integrated method to produce semiconductor devices without heat treatment. It
targets an urgent industry need for low temperature deposition of commercially
important copper indium diselenide (CIS) thin-films for lightweight photovoltaic
modules. Present technology uses expensive vapor phase methods that are
unsuitable for large-scale manufacturing or for deposition on plastic
substrates. This research will develop a new molecular level concept to deposit
electronic grade CIS films at room temperature. Phase I research will
demonstrate the proof-of-concept for CIS film with a precisely designed
electrochemical approach. Characterization of film properties will validate the
approach. Phase II will extend the concepts to produce an innovative device
configuration with fewer and safer materials than the state-of-the-art. Project
success will lead to a totally new photovoltaic device made with cheaper
materials and simpler methods. Its scale-up will use inexpensive commercial
equipment. Method implementation will raise specific power ratings and lower
manufacturing cost. These factors will translate into a wider spectrum of
commercial markets for remote, mobile, or grid-tied power generation, building
integration, spacecraft and satellite applications.

The initial commercial application of this project will be in the production of
solar cells. Broader application to other photovoltaic devices is likely.
Project success will greatly impact solar cell production, semiconductor
synthesis and nanoscale deposition. The low-temperature, low-cost features will
introduce an enormous competitive advantage for any material synthesized with
the molecular layer deposition method. The versatile method presents an exciting
range of possibilities for novel nanostructures and superlattices, with
applications ranging from quantum well lasers to solar cells and high strength
structural materials. The immediate product will be a solar cell. Lower cost and
mass production will allow this cell to compete with electricity prices for
terrestrial power. Deposition on polymer substrates will extend its use for
space applications.

