* 0340283
* SBIR Phase I:     New Algorithms for PTZ Camera Based Object Tracking
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Laura Drake, JunTech, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project will
investigate and evaluate a new class of moving object-tracking algorithms for
PTZ (pan-tilt-zoom) cameras in video surveillance systems. In most of today's
video surveillance systems, real-time object tracking is performed manually by
human operators using PTZ cameras. This is often stressful and inefficient (an
operator can only control one PTZ camera at a time) and causes inconsistent
results. The proposed project will investigate a new class of algorithms to
direct a PTZ camera to track an object of interest automatically. This is done
by using an optimal filter with new object and observation models. The project
outcome will be software modules that can be integrated into standard video
surveillance systems to improve their capabilities.

Video surveillance systems are important tools in the fight against crime and
terrorism. Most of the systems on the market today are relatively standard DVR's
(digital video recorders) with few smart features. The proposed innovation
(automatic object tracking) is a smart feature that can significantly improve a
standard system's capabilities by allowing it to get better and more useful
images. Since this feature is demanded by many end-users, it is highly
attractive to equipment vendors and integrators. Hence, it has commercial
potential. Finally, by introducing new models for object tracking (detailed in
the Project Description), the proposed innovation also advances the state-of-
the-art in image processing and computer vision research.

