* 0340662
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  Development of Silicon-on-Diamond Wafer Technology
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Zlatko Sitar, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2006
* USD 13,700.00

0340662&lt;br/&gt;Sitar&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Zlatko Sitar and students
from North Carolina State University in a collaboration with Erhard Kohn of the
Department of Electron Devices and Circuits at the University of Ulm, Germany.
The objective is to establish collaborative research on Silicon-on-Diamond
technology. Microfabrication facilities (electronics and micro-electrical and
-magnetic systems) at the University of Ulm established especially for wide band
gap semiconductors would greatly benefit the Silicon-on-Diamond technology
currently developed at North Carolina State, while the characterization and
materials processing facilities of the US group would greatly aid the German
group's effort on the integration of diamond with silicon electronics. Silicon-
on-Diamond technology extends the limits of silicon-based electronics to much
higher powers and frequencies through advanced thermal management and, at the
same time, enables vertical integration schemes that are not possible on the
silicon alone. This is achieved by the incorporation of a high quality diamond
layer immediately under the active silicon device layer, which has more than an
order of magnitude higher thermal conductivity than silicon wafers alone. The
collaboration will fabricate a range of electronic devices, making it possible
to study the heat-spreading ability of the Silicon-on-Diamond wafers, the
electrical properties of the silicon device layer, and the influence of the
silicon-diamond interface on device performance. The analysis will allow further
optimization of the Silicon-on-Diamond fabrication process and the structure of
Silicon-on-Diamond wafers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal management in the
silicon-based power devices and integrated circuits is crucial for surpassing
present limitations. The proposed Silicon-on-Diamond wafer technology relaxes
thermal handling limitations in silicon electronics and enables development of
future silicon-based power devices, high-density integrated circuits, and three-
dimensional integration. In this way, standard silicon technology will be
expanded with the best heat conductor in nature that at the same time enables
the confinement of the current flow to the device layer. This technology has a
potential to fully integrate high frequency silicon-based power electronics with
digital logic on one three-dimensional chip.&lt;br/&gt;