* 0340306
* SBIR Phase I:      High Performance Thin Film Transistors on Plastic Fabricated From Dense Thin-Films of Oriented Semiconductor Nanowires
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* David Stumbo, NANOSYS INC
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,976.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a new, high-performance thin-film-on-plastic technology that will
provide single-crystal silicon thin-film transistors (TFTs). The project will
focus on the challenge of fabricating films and forming high quality electrical
contacts (both ohmic for source and drain electrodes, and insulated for gate
electrodes) on low-temperature plastic substrates. This project focuses on the
basic proof of principle, fabricating individual TFTs on plastic by: (1) the
creation of a dense and oriented layer of nanowires adhered to plastic; (2)
lithographic patterning of source and drain openings using traditional
infrastructure; (3) the creation of high quality ohmic contacts under low
temperature conditions; and (4) creation of insulated gate-electrode contacts
under low temperature conditions.

The commercial applications of this technology will be in the electronics and
photonics industries. The unique characteristics of nanowires will enable high-
performance macroelectronics on plastic that can be processed using established
commercial infrastructure. The research will greatly impact the development of
devices for commercial, military, and homeland security markets. Flexible
semiconducting films have the potential for replacing amorphous and
polycrystalline silicon in important large-area electronics applications such as
displays and radio-frequency identification tags. In addition, this fundamental
technology can be applied to nanowire materials other than silicon, allowing
broader use with materials currently impossible to process onto large area
substrates such as gallium arsenide.