* 0340669
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  Understanding Molecular Electronics from Spectroscopy - A Step Towards Rational Design
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Xiaoyang Zhu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 06/30/2005
* USD 8,500.00

0340669&lt;br/&gt;Zhu&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Xiaoyang Zhu and students
from the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities in a collaboration with Martin Wolf
of the Department of Experimental Physics at the Free University of Berlin,
Germany. The overarching goal of this collaboration is to develop model
molecule-silicon interfaces and to carry out dynamic measurements on interfacial
electron transport using femtosecond two-photon photoemission and sum-frequency
generation spectroscopies. Building electronic devices from single or a small
group of molecules has taken the center stage in diverse research fields,
including chemistry, physics, and engineering. While it is exciting to note the
increasing number of demonstrations of molecular electronic devices, our present
understanding of molecular electronics remains at a phenomenological and
qualitative level. This award supports a spectroscopic approach to probe the
fundamental mechanisms underlying molecular electronics using model system.
While the German group is expert on ultrafast dynamics, particularly electron
dynamics, at molecule-solid interfaces, the US group has expertise in
characterizing electronic structure at metal-molecular junctions and in
developing chemical processes for the synthesis of molecule-silicon interfaces.
The two groups will combine their expertise and address fundamental questions
relevant to molecular electronics using model molecule-silicon interfaces.
Currently, Zhu is funded by an NSF grant (DMR-0238307) to address electronic
structure and dynamics in organic semiconductors and at organic-metal
interfaces. Adding an international dimension to this project will significantly
enhance the research capabilities of Zhu's group and extend the exploration to
include organic silicon interfaces. The attractiveness of integrating molecular
electronic components to silicon surfaces can be realized from the prominent
status of silicon in electronics technology and the availability of vast
knowledge on the physics and chemistry of silicon
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As in many fields of modern science/technology,
molecular electronics is inherently multidisciplinary. This collaborative
project will allow Chemistry graduate students in Zhu's group to obtain training
in cutting edge experimental methodology and techniques in the Physics
laboratory of Prof. Wolf. Similarly, Physics students/posdocs from the Wolf
group will gain experience in designing and synthesizing model chemical systems.
In addition, these students will also gain valuable experience in cultural
aspects of scientific research. Thus, the synergy from such collaborative effort
goes well beyond scientific output.&lt;br/&gt;