* 0340035
* SBIR Phase I:  Wavelength-Division-Multiplexed Grating-Outcoupled Surface-Emitting Lasers with Quantum-Dot Active Layers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Steve Patterson, PHOTODIGM, INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,848.00

DMI-0340035&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I Project proposes to demonstrate a monolithic Wavelength
Division Multiplexed (WDM) Grating-Outcoupled Suface-Emitting semiconductor
(GSE) laser emitting at 1310 nm using quantum-dot (QD) active layers. The QD
active layers provide a broad gain bandwidth, reduced temperature sensitivity,
narrower linewidths lower chirp compared to conventional quantum well lasers. In
addition, QD active layers allow the use of low-cost GaAs substrates. Two-
wavelength WDM GSE lasers in a cross-grating configuration emit at different
wavelengths from a common aperture that can be efficiently coupled to a single
mode fiber. The number of independently controlled wavelengths emitting from a
single aperture can be extended to four (Phase II). The knowledge required to
develop these lasers requires expertise in materials, optics, gratings,
nanostructures, semiconductor processing, thermal transfer, high speed
electronics, packaging, systems and telecommunications. Combining the desirable
traits of both edge emitting lasers (high power, reliable material, low voltage,
use of proven) and vertical cavity surface-emitting lasers (low cost, wafer
level testing, simple packaging, high integration ability), the advanced
research proposed is an innovative photonics technology that has broad
applications in telecommunications, information processing, data communications,
fiber to the business and home, instrumentation and
computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This technology would hope too
lead to the eventual realization of very high data rates (5 Gbps up to 160 Gbps)
at very low cost, and the elimination of barriers to deploying fiber to the
desktop and to (or closer to) the home. This should also enable ultra high
bandwidth connections for business and entertainment. This proposed project hope
to provide an enhanced educational experience for students working on this
research since it is performed in close collaboration with science and
engineering department of a local university.&lt;br/&gt;