* 0341510
* Developing and Disseminating New Laboratories in RNAi and Functional Genomics
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2004,12/31/2006
* David Micklos, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 12/31/2006
* USD 295,611.00

Over the past 15 years, many laboratories have been implemented that illustrate
basic concepts of microbial and molecular genetics. The completion of the Human
Genome Project challenges teachers to move laboratory instruction to a higher
level of biological integration, the functional analysis of genes and proteins
in eukaryotic organisms. This project is developing a module of investigative
laboratories and bioinformatics exercises that engage students in the new
technologies of RNA-mediated genetic interference (RNAi) and computer-based
genome analysis. Although RNAi experiments in the model organism Caenorhabditis
elegans (C. elegans) offer a powerful means to examine gene function at the
organismal level, the experimental system is simple and robust enough to join
bacterial transformation and gel electrophoresis as a mainstay of the college
teaching laboratory. Most importantly, after learning basic RNAi techniques,
students can make use of freely available resources to design their own
experiments to explore the function of virtually any of the predicted 19,427
genes of C. elegans. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal represents a
collaboration among staff at the Dolan DNA Learning Center (DNALC), faculty at
2- and 4-year colleges, and scientists at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (CSHL)
who have pioneered RNAi technology and bioinformatics resources. An Advisory
Panel of college faculty from diverse geographic locations will be involved in
all aspects of the project, including development and testing. Newly developed
modules will be introduced to and critiqued by biology faculty and high school
biology teachers at workshops held at a variety of sites around the nation.
Instructional and bioinformatics resources developed in this project will be
disseminated via the DNALC.s WWW site, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, and
Carolina Biological Supply Company. &lt;br/&gt;