* 0341207
* Collaborative Project:  Investigating Past, Present and Future Natural Hazards with GIS
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Michelle Hall, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey G. Ryan
* 07/31/2005
* USD 143,910.00

Earth Systems Science (40) This project is creating and testing three modules
that use a Geographic Information System (GIS) to investigate socially relevant
Earth and environmental hazards. These resources fill a pressing need for data-
rich student investigations that use contemporary technology in a pedagogically
sound manner. The modules being developed will have students investigate the
1994 Northridge, California earthquake, the 1999 and 2003 tornado outbreaks in
the US mid-continent, as well as the tsunami, earthquake and volcanic hazards
threatening Seattle, Washington. Instructors at institutions currently using the
NSF-funded SAGUARO investigations are field-testing these new materials. In
addition, workshops are being offered at national meetings to introduce more
instructors to the resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design philosophy of
teaching with GIS-not about GIS-reflects PI research results on how students
learn with GIS technology. As students use GIS to investigate and visualize data
they develop critical problem solving and GIS specific skills. These case
studies are being used successfully in large and small enrollment lecture or
laboratory courses and in distance learning environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: We have created new instructional
resources and models of how to effectively integrate technology-based inquiry
exercises in introductory Earth and environmental science courses. We are also
providing data on how students learn with GIS technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project helps in developing and
maintaining a scientifically literate society and competitive workforce,
actively contributes to the professional development of college-level Earth and
environmental science faculty, and enhances the use of research-based
educational materials in the classroom. Dissemination through the DLESE and in
professional development workshops targeting community colleges and smaller
universities is broadening the use of technology by underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;