* 0341261
* Continued Development of Interactive Examples for Concept-Based Problem-Solving in Introductory Undergraduate Physics Curricula
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Timothy Stelzer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 03/31/2008
* USD 342,596.00

This project extends the development of "Interactive Examples" (IEs), web-based
exercises that promote concept-based problem solving, to include an initial
course for under-prepared students and the calculus-based thermal physics and
quantum physics courses. This extension compliments the already produced modules
that include complete sets of IEs for calculus-based mechanics and electricity &
magnetism courses. In addition to already demonstrated statistically significant
improvements in student performance after IEs were introduced into these
courses, the project is also engaged in an ongoing evaluation process to
understand the mechanisms responsible for this improvement. Guided by the
principles learned from this evaluation process, we are refining our existing
IEs, and creating new IEs for the remaining components of the introductory
sequence.

All IEs are maintained on a website
(http://wug.physics.uiuc.edu/courses/ie.html) and freely available to the
general public. Fourteen institutions, ranging from community colleges to
research universities, are adopting IEs for credit use in their courses.
Dissemination beyond the web site is available through a publishing agreement
and the results of our investigations into the effectiveness of IEs on enhancing
learning gains are presented at national meetings and in peer-reviewed journals.