* 0341152
* US- Nigeria Planning Visit: Synthesis and Characterization of Some Reactive Sulfur-Containing Intermediates
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Reuben Simoyi, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 07/31/2004
* USD 15,999.00

In this planning grant, Dr. Simoyi will work with his Nigerian collaborator, Dr.
Jonathan Ojo, to study sulfur-containing compounds and oxyhalogens that are very
important species in chemistry, environmental and biological chemistry. Despite
their importance, very little work has been done towards the elucidation of
their basic chemistry and reaction mechanisms of these compounds. The oxidation
of sulfur proceeds through many intermediate species, and the purpose of this
international cooperative planning grant is to synthesize some of these
postulated reactive intermediates to gain an insight into the complete oxidation
mechanisms of these organosulfur compounds.&lt;br/&gt;Humans are exposed to
organosulfur compounds everyday in the workplace (e.g, in paints and
agrochemicals), and ingestion of these compounds can sometimes result in
inadvertent toxicity (e.g. diisocyanates are ashtmatogens). These compounds are
metabolically disposed of by the human body through oxidation; the resultant
metabolites can be studied to assess the toxicities of the organosulfur. We
postulate that these metabolites should be the series of sulfur oxo-acids that
are formed as the sulfur center is successively oxidized to the sulfate, which
is then eluted out of the physiological environment. The studies undertaken in
this planning activity will help in framing research on predicting the
toxicities of several previously uncharacterized organosulfur compounds. This
award is co-funded by the Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;