* 0341067
* SGER:  Construction of a Timely, Powerful, and Public GIS Database to Resolve the Landscape Evolution of the Interior Western US
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Joel Pederson, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2005
* USD 29,140.00

Construction of a timely, powerful, and public GIS database to resolve the
landscape evolution of the interior western U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Joel
Pederson, EAR-0341067&lt;br/&gt;Utah State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Colorado
Plateau and adjacent Rocky Mountains form one of the great orogenic plateaus of
the world. The study of the balance and interaction between erosion, rock
uplift, and surface elevation in this region has been a fundamental issue in the
geosciences for over a century, and the region is currently undergoing a
rejuvenation of multidisciplinary research into these longstanding problems.
Different conceptual models for the landscape evolution of the region predict
different amounts and timing of uplift and erosion, and existing hypotheses are
actually not testable because essential data about erosion, rock uplift, and
surface uplift are not available. This proposed research will complete
successful initial work on a novel scientific approach to provide the key data
needed to solve these classic problems. As important, it will result in an
expandable, publicly available, GIS-database framework that will be a much-
needed catalyst for research advances. &lt;br/&gt; The goals of this project
include mapping post-Laramide rock uplift and erosional exhumation from
stratigraphic and geomorphic evidence preserved in the landscape, and then
compiling these data into a GIS. The Colorado Plateau and middle Rocky Mountain
region is ideal for such an effort because its stratigraphy is well documented,
key markers of exhumation are present, and because of the large amount of
interest and ongoing research into these problems. Based on feedback from, and
the actual use of, the published initial data by other researchers, the
completion of this project will be of great utility to the geomorphic, tectonic,
and geophysical modeling communities for testing scenarios of landscape
evolution of the western interior U.S. This work should therefore be a timely
catalyst for innovative advances in the understanding the Cenozoic landscape of
the western U.S. &lt;br/&gt;