* 0341789
* Imperial Strategies and State Formation in Sudanese Nubia
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Stuart Smith, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2004
* USD 25,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Stuart Smith and colleagues will
conduct an archaeological survey at the fourth cataract of the Nile in Sudanese
Nubia in order to examine the impact of Egyptian imperialism on the rise of the
Nubian Napatan state. There is considerable debate concerning the effect of the
New Kingdom Egyptian conquest on the Nubian Kerma culture, with some arguing
that they assimilated to Egyptian norms, as did their northern Nubian neighbors,
the C-Group, and others that they retained their native culture in spite of
their absorption into the Egyptian New Kingdom empire (c. 1500-1050 BC). This
question bears on the origins of the Napatan Kingdom of Kush, whose rulers
became Pharaohs as the 25th Dynasty of Egypt (c. 750-600 BC), forging a state
that lasted a thousand years (c. 750 BC - AD 350). The transition between New
Kingdom rule and the emergence of Napata is poorly known and the available
archaeological evidence is insufficient to resolve these debates. In order to
understand the rise of one of Africa's oldest states, we must know more about
the impact of Egyptian imperialism on the Kerma culture and the processes by
which the seemingly Egyptianized Napatan state emerged 300 years after the
collapse of the New Kingdom empire. Although the region has never been properly
investigated, the fourth cataract was potentially an area of considerable
importance to the Egyptian empire, and thus a likely area to document Egyptian-
Nubian interactions and the impact of Egyptian imperialism on the Kerma culture.
Archaeological survey will identify the basic settlement pattern and more
specifically establish patterns of Egyptian-Nubian interaction through surface
collected ceramics, other diagnostic artifacts, and architectural style where
appropriate. A limited number of cemetery and settlement sites will be selected
on the basis of this preliminary information for test excavation. The analysis
of these artifacts will give a greater precision to the date, function and
cultural affiliations of the sites, as well as providing information about site
stratigraphy and preservation that will assist in the development of a future
strategy for larger scale excavation. Long term plans will incorporate a two
pronged investigation, collecting evidence for architecture, material culture
and burial practice, combined with the physical anthropological analysis of
human remains to be led by Co-PI Walker. Physical anthropology provides a unique
opportunity to assess the genetic ties, Egyptian or Nubian, and investigate the
diets, health status, and gender roles of the people who lived in the
communities identified in the survey. The use of an anthropological approach in
Egyptian and especially Nubian archaeology is still rare. An examination of the
interaction between Egypt and Nubia at the fourth cataract has the potential to
provide an example of cross-cultural contact that can enliven and extend debates
within Anthropological Archaeology as well as Egyptology and Nubian Studies.

The project will also provide graduate student training and a valuable cultural
and intellectual exchange for the project's staff, which will include a
colleague from the Sudanese National Corporation for Antiquities and Museums.
Finally, the archaeological heritage of this important northeast African region
is endangered by the construction of a new dam at the fourth cataract, making
archaeological documentation of this area imperative. If this work is not
undertaken today, we may lose forever the opportunity to address these
compelling questions about the nature of Egyptian-Nubian interaction in this
area.

