* 0341410
* Behavioral Sciences Curriculum Enhanced with Mathematical Modeling
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Ronald Hoy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 12/31/2006
* USD 159,937.00

The Bio2010 report of the National Research Council identifies integration of
mathematics into biology as an important part of modernizing the undergraduate
curriculum. We propose to advance this goal in the behavioral sciences by
producing a CD of interactive simulations and experiments in mathematical
modeling. The behavioral sciences rely on mathematics not only for data
analysis, but for models that explain behavior and its origins. However,
undergraduate texts typically gloss over modeling, and there are few resources
for those who would teach it. We are developing prototypes of modules covering a
range of topics. They are intended to be used together in a course on behavior
or singly in introductory biology, ecology, and evolution. Each starts with a
video of a behavior and prompts students to consider the questions it raises.
Next, students are led (both verbally and mathematically) through development of
a model. Students then form hypotheses about the behavior and test their
predictions with a graphical simulation of the model. While the mathematics
behind these models does not go beyond algebra, the effect of varying parameters
is often not obvious. Interactive simulations allow students to explore on their
own as they develop understanding of modeling and a feel for the link between
model parameters and behavior. The intellectual merits of this project are the
improvement of the undergraduate biology curriculum by introducing mathematical
modeling in a context that is accessible and interesting to students and the use
of technology to advance teaching goals that cannot otherwise be met. This
project is having an immediate impact in Cornell's large animal behavior course,
where we are doing initial testing. Broader impact will come from publication of
the material and use nationwide in other colleges and universities. Faculty from
departments of biology, psychology, anthropology, and mathematics at a variety
of other institutions have indicated need for this material and willingness to
test it in their classes as part of our evaluation plan. Several publishers,
including that of the most widely used animal behavior text, have shown
interest, making nationwide dissemination certain.