* 0341068
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Location and Patterning of Mississippian Mounds in the Central Arkansas River Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2004
* Marvin Kay, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2004
* USD 11,660.00

Under the direction of Dr. Marin Kay, Gregory A. Vogel will use geographic
information systems (GIS) to evaluate environmental relations among late
prehistoric civic-ceremonial centers. These were public ritual areas having one
or more earthen constructions usually including a flat-topped pyramidal mound.
They dot stream terraces of the Arkansas and White river basins in present-day
Oklahoma, Arkansas and Missouri. Most famous is Spiro, a World Heritage site in
eastern Oklahoma that produced the greatest concentration anywhere of
Southeastern Ceremonial Complex artifacts. Although described as northern
Caddoan, ethnic identity and linguistic affiliation of these mound complexes are
yet to be determined. These sites represent agrarian communities which had
interregional ties to other Mississippi period complex societies of the North
American Southeast, Great Plains and Southwest. They provide a natural
laboratory to evaluate competing models about social complexity and the nature
of agrarian society in pre-Columbian North America. Applicable models may form a
continuum that ranges from hierarchical chiefdoms to largely autonomous farming
communities. These polarities or somewhere in between must encompass the reality
of late prehistoric settlement and community structure observable in the central
Arkansas River Valley region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is important
because it provides an empirical test of hypotheses about the structure of
agrarian communities in relation to their natural, social, and ritual
environments. GIS is the most practical way to organize and integrate regional
scale data about landscapes, stream capacity and seasonal flow, arable lands
suitable for the prehistoric farming of flood plains, drought and weather
extremes that limit the size and capability of farmers to stay on their land or
cause them to move. Adding to these parameter are ones of demography,
perception, and competition that further affect settlement choices and their
long-term stability. By using GIS, this study will simulate minimum conditions
that limit settlement, define community territories and borders, or apply to the
placement and ritual viewshed of civic-ceremonial centers; and then will test
the simulations against the environmental and archaeological
evidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond research questions of interest to the
natural and social sciences, this project's broader impact will advance public
knowledge of the inextricable connection between people, environment, and
climate. It will also showcase technologies appropriate to understanding the
social realm of past society and that provide a baseline to assess land use
today. Publication and the preparation of a website about the project will be
designed to make the project's finding available to the public in a non-
technical way, and to link the study of the past to understand the present and
future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;