* 0341924
* SGER:     Functionally Graded Polymer Matrix Nano-Composites by Solid Freeform Fabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Pierre Lucas, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 99,832.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) will investigate a technology
for combining nanosized particulate or fiber reinforcements with a photocurable
thermoset matrix resin in order to produce functionally graded composites. The
investigation will focus on optical components filled with nano-phase ceramic
particles that form gradient refractive index lenses. The technology involves
using a Solid Freeform Fabrication ink-jet deposition process to form the
composites, with a goal of demonstrating the fabrication of flat lenses. The
ink-jet deposition process to be developed has the advantage of incorporating
nano-reinforcements into a low viscosity matrix resin that is relatively easy to
process and rapidly photocures to produce functional polymeric parts. It also
has the advantage that major modifications in the basic processing methodology
are not necessary. Part of the research will be devoted to the development of
advanced computer design procedures that specify the exact material deposition
patterns that need to be employed in order to optimize the performance of the
lens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will demonstrate a new
technology for the fabrication of optical lenses at possibly much lower costs
than afforded by conventional technologies. This will demonstrate a new level of
control over the production of functionally graded materials, and it will
contribute to the technology of computer aided design.