* 0341688
* Nonlinear Optical Spectroscopic Studies of Polymers and Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Yuen Shen, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 12/31/2007
* USD 332,874.00

This research project focuses on development and applications of nonlinear
optical techniques to study polymers and liquid crystals. Sum-frequency
vibrational spectroscopy will be developed as a powerful tool to characterize
polymer surfaces and interfaces. It will yield unique information on surface
structures of various polymers in different environments at the molecular level.
Since polymer surfaces play an important role in many applications, our results
will have lasting impact on polymer science and technology. The same
spectroscopic technique can be applied to many other interfaces and will have
broad influences on many surface-related disciplines of physical and biological
sciences. Applying this technique to liquid crystal interfaces will provide a
better understanding and control of the effects of surfaces on liquid crystal
devices. Nonlinear optical spectroscopic techniques are also being developed as
sensitive tools to probe molecular chirality and guest/host interactions in
organic thin films, both being of great importance in chemistry and bioscience.
%%% This research project focuses on nonlinear optical studies of polymers and
liquid crystals. A powerful laser spectroscopic technique is being developed as
a unique tool to characterize structures of polymer surfaces and interfaces at
the molecular level. Such characterization makes control of polymer surface
properties by material design possible. Our results will therefore have very
strong impact on polymer science and technology since polymer surfaces play an
important role in many applications. More generally, surfaces and interfaces are
of great importance in almost all areas of science and technology, and this
technique is applicable to most of them. Study of liquid crystal interfaces, for
example, enables one to learn how specially designed surfaces of a liquid
crystal display device can be used to control the device characteristics. Other
laser techniques are being developed as sensitive tools to probe molecular
chirality, an important characteristic property of bio-molecules, and to study
how a small amount of foreign molecules can control the behavior of a large
number of host molecules. Students find unique opportunities in this laboratory
to learn ideas and skills for high-quality research in interdisciplinary areas
and to obtain know-how on development of novel laser spectroscopic techniques.
This project is attracts top students, especially those in under-represented
groups. These students receive rigorous training on cutting-edge laser
spectroscopic techniques and research skills in a broad interdisciplinary area.
The students are well prepared for future careers in many possible disciplines.
***