* 0341709
* US-India Cooperative Reserach:  High Speed Laser Synthesis of Amorphous Surface Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Narendra Dahotre, University of Tennessee Space Institute
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 03/31/2008
* USD 29,938.00

0341709&lt;br/&gt;Dahotre&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
US-India cooperative research entitled "High Speed &lt;br/&gt;Laser Synthesis of
Amorphous Surface Structures." Professors Narendra Dahotre, University of
Tennessee Space Institute (UTK) and Indranil Manna, Indian Institute of
Technology, Kharagpur (IITK) will attempt to develop a new laser based
technology to produce amorphous metallic alloys or glasses. They will conduct
both experimental and fundamental studies of microstructures, properties of
corrosion/wear resistance, and heat/mass transfer analysis. If successful, this
research will contribute to fundamental knowledge about the stability and use of
metastable mircrostructures and, possibly, new laser technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This collaboration will exploit complementary
strengths of the UTK and IITK engineering colleges in advanced materials and
processing. The uniquely diverse expertise and knowledge base of those involved
in this research (surface engineering, laser materials processing and structure-
materials) will benefit students at both institutions. The IITK is one of
India's premier technological institutions. The UTK has a strong track record of
faculty participation in outreach programs to recruit minority and under-
represented student groups and high-school students to enhance interest in
science and engineering. The Government of India's Department of Science and
Technology (DST) jointly supports this project under the NSF/DST program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;