* 0341793
* SGER: Novel Devices for Controlling Nanojet Droplet Emulsions (NanoDEs) in Microfluidic Channels
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Abraham Lee, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2005
* USD 68,799.00

We propose to design and optimize water-in-oil droplet emulsions using novel
microfluidic devices with sub-femtoliter volume control and rapid generation
rates (&gt;1000 drops/sec). To achieve these goals, we will investigate the
nanoscale interfacial forces that control droplet generation, droplet fission,
droplet fusion, and intra-droplet mixing/reactions, with and without the
presence of amphiphilic molecules. Preliminary results demonstrate microfluidic
devices capable of controlling the local shear forces between oil and water
interfaces to generate nanojets for droplet emulsions (nanoDEs). These devices
generated monodispersed droplet emulsions (0.5m-50m diameter) at high rates (100
drops/sec) corresponding to the input flow rates. Our target is to generate
droplet emulsions 100 nm in diameter and droplet generation rates greater than
1,000 drops/sec. In contrast to what has currently been done by others, the
proposed research aims to devise new techniques and platforms for forming each
individual vesicle with complete nanoscale control of parameters in order to
"program" its size, shape, compositional structure, and ultimately its functions
and properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables for the project include new
instrumentation for directed self-assembly of amphiphilic vesicles (AV), new
methods to precisely control nanoscale self-assembly process, new
characterization methods and tools to monitor vesicle interactions and
reactions, the design of new manufacturing processes to implement biological
cell machinery in the artificial "transporter vesicles", and understanding of
interfacial tension hydrodynamic flow for droplet/vesicle self-
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant will also make an impact on
infrastructure for research and education. The new equipment from this grant and
other required existing instruments for the project will be housed in the soon-
to-be built building for the California Institute for Telecommunications and
Information Technology (Cal-(IT)2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project,
the PI intends to introduce a "Freshman Seminars" course to promote
nanobiotechnology to incoming freshmen. This will have the broader impact in
attracting future new US citizens as well as underrepresented groups to pursue
research careers in nano science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;