* 0342942
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Investigation of Microscopic Structure of Exotic Compressional-Mode Giant Resonances
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Umesh Garg, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* R. Clive Woods
* 12/31/2009
* USD 51,150.00

0342942 Garg

This award supports a three-year international collaborative research project
between Professor Umesh Garg at the University of Notre Dame and Professor
Hidetoshi Akimune at Konan University in Japan. They will undertake a study on
investigation of microscopic structure of exotic compressional-mode giant
resonances. The proposed measurements aim at investigating the microscopic
structure of the compressional-mode giant resonances - the Giant Monopole
Resonance (GMR) and the Isoscalar Giant Dipole Resonance (ISGDR) - via
coincidence measurements. The importance of the compresssional-mode resonances
lies in that their energies are related to the nuclear incompressibility. The
nuclear incompressibility is a critical component of the nuclear equation of
state (EOS). In nuclear physics, the search for EOS is motivated by aspects
unique to the nucleus, especially that it can be considered as a two-fluid
quantal droplet. The EOS is crucial to understanding the properties of neutron
stars, the "largest nuclei" that exist in nature. Indeed, the compressibility of
nuclear matter strongly influences the structure of the neutron stars, their
stability against gravitational collapse, their production during supernova
explosions, and their manner of cooling.

The project brings together the efforts of several laboratories that have
complementary expertise and research capabilities. The expertise developed by
the U.S. researchers in giant resonance studies, and the superb experimental
facilities at RCNP (the Research Center for Nuclear Physics) in Osaka, Japan
provide a synergy with tremendous mutual benefits for the collaborative
partners. It is expected that this work will contribute to the field of
astrophysics, as the information attained from these studies may impact our
understanding of "neutron stars." The project advances international human
resources through the participation of a number of postdocs, graduate students
and undergraduate students. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
understanding and cooperation. Results of the research will be disseminated at
scientific meetings and in scientific journals.