* 0342090
* Chlamydomonas Annotation Meetings to be held in October 2003, and March 2004, in Walnut Creek, CA
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Arthur Grossman, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 08/31/2005
* USD 20,695.00

A series of two meetings to generate a robust annotation for nearly all of the
genes of the Chlamydomonas reinhardtii genome will be held at the Joint Genome
Institute located in Walnut Creek, California. The work is to be initiated in
October,2003, at a meeting of a group of domestic and international
investigators and is to be completed during a second meeting (with only domestic
participants) in March, 2004. The meetings also have other objectives: 1) to
provide principal investigators, students, and post-doctoral fellows with
training in the use of the genome browser and cDNA information; 2) to define
changes and new features to be incorporated into the C. reinhardtii sequence and
microarray databases; 3) to provide information for determining the usefulness
of the different types of gene models available; 4) to summarize progress being
made with respect to closing all sequence gaps along the genome; 5)to bring
leaders of the community together to discuss the nature of the genome, and give
students the opportunity to meet and interact with many of the top-level
scientists in the field; and 6)to allow investigators to draft an outline of a
manuscript describing the C. reinhardtii genome and to determine strategies to
disseminate the information, making it readily accessible to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These meetings will enable Chlamydomonas
researchers to synthesize and organize the wealth of information generated about
this model organism, and to determine what is necessary to optimize its
usefulness to the scientific community, and thus to all of society, in the
future. &lt;br/&gt;