* 0342483
* STEM Leadership Institutes for Systemic Initiatives Principal Investigators and Project Directors
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Floretta McKenzie, McKenzie Group
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 09/30/2009
* USD 276,744.00

Project Abstract NSF 0342483

Systemic Research, Inc is seeking support to host an Annual Invitational Urban
Key Indicator Data and Evaluation workshop in the spring of 2004. The workshop
will target PI/PDs data managers, evaluators, and selected NSF funded study
group members. This workshop intends to build on previous workshop by focusing
exclusively at the classroom level to high local districts use data from student
achievement scores, school and classroom profiles, and evaluations to extend
their understanding of science and mathematics. This workshop will target
approximately 130 participants with the potential to reach hundreds of teachers
and thousands of students through the information gained from the plenary and
other workshop sessions and activities.

Intellectual Merit

Systemic Research, Inc, (SR) intends to host an invitational workshop to promote
the use of data and evaluation to enhance NSF-funded urban sites in their
understanding and use of data. For several years SR has held workshops for
PI/PDs data managers, and other district and national leaders to facilitate the
use of data as a management and planning tool for improving science and
mathematics education. Therefore, SR has been a leader in helping school
districts establish and enhance how they collect and use data. This approach has
greatly. With prior knowledge of collecting data for several urban-focused
programs and working with representatives in over the years adds immensely to
the likelihood that strategies and practices shared and learned at the workshop
will greatly enhance how districts use data to improve practice.

Broader Impact

Building on past efforts (See www.systemic.com) this workshop intends to promote
further dissemination of lessons-learned by helping local district leaders
effectively address local issues regarding the use of data and evaluation. In
addition to sharing information and best practices at the workshop, SR maintains
a website with conference proceedings, copies of presentations, links to other
relevant sites, and links to research studies on urban reform.

