* 0342277
* Seismic Characterization of Core Structure of the San Andreas Fault at Parkfield, California Using Fault-Zone Guided Waves
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Yong-Gang Li, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 01/31/2006
* USD 207,135.00

In this research project, the PIs carry out field seismic experiments to
acquire fault-zone guided waves (FZGW) generated by microearthquakes and
explosions at the San Andreas Fault (SAF) Parkfield, California. Observation and
preliminary modeling of 2-5 Hz trapped waves recorded at dense seismic arrays of
55 three-component seismometers deployed in 2002 on 500-1000-m long lines along
and across the fault traces for events located within the fault zone shown
evidence of a damaged core zone on the main SAF. The zone from the surface to at
least 4-5 km depth is marked by a low-velocity waveguide ~150 m wide, in which Q
is 10-50 and shear velocities are reduced by 30-40% from wall-rock velocities,
with the greatest velocity reduction at shallow depth. This distinct low-
velocity zone on the main SAF is interpreted as being a remanent of repeated
damage due to M6 episode and historical large earthquakes on the principal fault
plane at Parkfield. In the current FZGW experiment conducted closer to the SAFOD
(San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth) drilling site, more valuable data are
recorded at along- and across-fault dense arrays for a bunch of shots detonated
by USGS and refraction experiments, and microearthquakes occurring at various
depths, including SAFOD "target" events at ~4km depths and deep events to the
~11km depths beneath arrays. The quantitative analysis and 3-D finite-difference
modeling of fault-zone trapped wave data are to be carried out for a high-
resolution delineation of the magnitude and extent of damage on the SAF nearby
the drilling site, and draw the depth-dependent and lateral variations in
internal structure and material properties of the fault zone. The body wave
arrival times inversion for all shots will be used to obtain a quasi-3D local
velocity structure for improvement of the numerical modeling of guided waves in
terms of a refined structural model as a function of depth and distance along
the fault. PIs plan to reoccupy seismic stations and repeat shots within the
fault zone in 2004-2005. The data from the repeated experiment will be used to
detect if there are the temporal changes in fault-zone material property before
a pending M6 earthquake at Parkfield. The shear-wave splitting (SWS) analysis
for earthquake data shall provide information on near-fault stresses. The 3-D
finite-element dynamic rupture simulations based on the fault-zone structure
delineated by trapped waves and the stress pattern from SWS will help better
understand the relationship between the fault zone structure and dynamic
rupture. Through data collection and analysis efforts in this project, PIs shall
characterize the dimensions, magnitude and time dependence of the damaged zone
on the SAF at Parkfield. The spatial extent of fault weakness compared to
surrounding bedrock, and the loss and recouping of strength across the
earthquake cycle are critical ingredients in understanding of fault mechanics
and physics, as well as in estimation of losses from future
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt; This research project is a supplement to the main
program SAFOD among various components of EarthScope. The PIs are responsible on
fault-zone trapped wave study while overall coordination between this
supplementary project and scheduling of the field work for geophysical site
characterization in SAFOD program will be done under the main
project.&lt;br/&gt;