* 0342837
* Joint Russisa - US Cruise in the East-Siberian Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Gunter Weller, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

A surprise permission for a joint Russia-US cruise to the East-Siberian Sea in
the summer of 2003 will enable five US researchers from the University of Alaska
and University of S. Carolina to conduct research linking the fate of riverine
waters from East-Siberian watersheds to the shelf seas and pan-arctic transport.
The cruise will sample water, particulate matter, and sediments with a set of
modern instruments on transects between the coast out to the ice edge. A set of
hydrochemical measurements (nutrients, pH, dissolved oxygen, dissolved methane)
will be done immediately after sampling or directly in situ (pCO2, CDOM, Chl).
Additional measurements (DOC, O-18, C-13, N-15, biomarkers, chemical
composition) in water and sediment will be done after the cruise using
facilities of the University of Alaska, University of S. Carolina, and the Far
Eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences
(FEBRAS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A transect of the East Siberian will provide new
measurements across the widest and most shallow and unexplored area in the World
Ocean that represents a boundary zoe between local shelf waters and Pacific
derived waters. New CTD and biogeochemical data will contribute significantly
towards understanding how the hydrological and hydrochemical parameters respond
to short-term changes in atmospheric condition and to understand better
connections between atmospheric forcing, river discharge and oceanological
processes over the Arctic Eurasian shelf, with a special eye onto the westward
penetration of the Pacific-derived waters. New data will help also to construct
a believable present-day regional summertime CO2 budget that is essential for
reliable prediction of changes in atmospheric CO2 in connection with the sea
ice, atmosphere and water circulation changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts and Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will also promote
teaching and training through support for graduate students (two from US, and
two from Russia), and will provide a web site accessible to the public,
especially for undergraduate students. It will enhance collaboration by
providing an opportunity for USA based workers to collaborate on a common
project in the Asian Arctic on Pan-Arctic land-shelf and shelf-basin
interactions. This is a first real cooperative venture in this region and there
is reason to believe that Russian colleagues desire genuine cooperation. New
experience to work in the Russian EEZ (including logistics and custom issues)
will help to plan further US studies and establish a long-term mutual
cooperation in the Pacific sector of the Arctic ocean (mostly Russian EEZ) with
FEBRAS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;