* 0342253
* The Role of YABBY Gene Family Members in Promoting Lamina Expansion
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* John Bowman, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Zhongchi Liu
* 12/31/2007
* USD 410,000.00

Lateral organs of seed plants, such as leaves and floral organs, are formed from
the flanks of apical meristems. Therefore, an inherent positional relationship
exists between them: leaf primordia have an adaxial side adjacent to the
meristem, and an abaxial one away from the meristem. Surgical and genetic
studies suggest that a signal, whose source is the meristem, is required to
induce adaxial identity, and in its absence, abaxial fates are acquired by
default. Subsequently, the asymmetric adaxial-abaxial axis provides cues for
proper lamina growth. Several key players involved in this process were
identified recently, and it has been suggested that complex relationships
between and within various members of these plant-specific gene families (class
III HD-ZIPs, YABBYs and KANADIs) may account for a significant portion of the
morphological variation in lateral organs of seed plants. The class III HD-ZIP
genes promote adaxial fates and are expressed in the meristem and adaxially in
lateral organs. In contrast, the KANADI and YABBY genes promote abaxial fates,
and their expression is confined to the abaxial domains of developing lateral
organs. Thus, the adaxial and abaxial factors are expressed in mutually
exclusive domains, and interaction between these domains is required for proper
leaf lamina development. Several lines of evidence suggest that YABBY gene
activity may be intimately involved with the development of the lamina. The
overall aim of this proposal is to better understand YABBY function addressing
the role of YABBY gene family members in promoting abaxial cell fates and in
promoting lamina development. The proposed experiments should clarify our
understanding of YABBY function in the promotion of abaxial cell fates and the
development of leaf lamina. In the long term, the ability to manipulate the size
and shape of lateral organ, such as leaves, could lead to increased productivity
of many crop species.

