* 0342189
* Scarab Biodiversity of Southern South America
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Andrew Smith, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 04/30/2008
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract - Scarab Biodiversity of Southern South
America&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaborative effort between the
University of Nebraska State Museum and several natural history museums in Chile
and Argentina. A network of collaborators has been assembled to implement to
execute an inventory and survey of all the scarab beetles occurring in southern
South America. Specimens will be borrowed from collections and collected during
field expeditions; then examined, identified, and described if they represent
new species. It is estimated that 25% of the species of scarab beetles in the
study region will be new to science. The data from all specimens will be
gathered and made available electronically in database format with an
identification guide to all the species found in the region. Taxonomic revisions
and analyses of evolutionary relationships will be completed on many of the
groups along with robust biogeographic analyses within southern South America
and between this region and other continents in the southern hemisphere.
Southern South America (including Patagonia and Central Chile) is biologically
of particular interest due to its isolation and large number of unique groups of
organisms. Additional, there is a strong urgency to studying the biodiversity of
this region. Habitat destruction has been so severe that Central Chile has been
labeled a global biodiversity hotspot in critical need of conservation by
Conservation International and other authorities. In response to these needs,
this collaborative project will investigate the biodiversity of scarab beetles
in the region with an emphasis on collecting new material from poorly explored
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scarab beetles are a diverse group, are ecologically
significant, and common in most terrestrial habitats. Although most scarab
beetles feed on plants, many other species feed on fungus, detritus, dung,
carrion, or are predacious. Scarab beetles are some of the most significant
foliage, flower, and root feeders in ecosystems. In spite of their diversity and
importance, it is estimated that less than 65% of the living species have been
described and documented worldwide. Results of this project will provide a means
of addressing gaps in our knowledge of scarab evolutionary relationships because
many taxa in this region are highly endemic and have been isolated for tens of
millions of years. Placing these groups in the taxonomic context of scarabs
worldwide will answer questions about the distributions of organisms and the
dating of evolutionary events. The electronic guide to southern South American
scarab beetles will allow this megadiverse group of organisms to be used for
large scale ecology and conservation research in the region. Data from scarab
specimens collected in Chile and Argentina, but housed outside these countries,
will be electronically repatriated, and data from specimens in museums all over
the world will be immediately accessible to scientists through the Internet.
Other positive aspects of this research include the international partnership
building and collaboration with institutions and scientists in Chile and
Argentina. This will lead to more independent research initiatives within these
countries. In-country infrastructure development and network building within
Argentina and Chile will long outlast this project and lead to multi-
institutional collaborations on other research endeavors