* 0342183
* RUI: The Functional Significance of Chorus-Mediated Changes in Signaling Behavior in the Gray Treefrog
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2004,09/30/2009
* Joshua Schwartz, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 09/30/2009
* USD 180,000.00

The Functional Significance of Chorus-Mediated Changes &lt;br/&gt;in Signaling
Behavior in the Gray Treefrog&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Joshua J.
Schwartz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animals often communicate under challenging
natural conditions. For example, species of insects, frogs, and birds aggregate
in large groups where levels of background noise can be high. This project will
investigate aspects of the vocal behavior of treefrogs with the goal of learning
how flexibility in the pattern of male calling improves their ability to
communicate and achieve reproductive success. Findings should shed light on how
the ear and brain may improve the ability of individuals to exchange information
under very noisy conditions. Specifically, the project will test three ideas as
to why male gray treefrogs change the duration of their calls with changes in
their sound environment. The first hypothesis proposes that males do this so
that enough essential call elements remain clear of acoustic interference to
attract a mate. The second hypothesis proposes that males modify their calling
to compensate for changes in the probability that their signals will not be
detected in background noise. The third hypothesis proposes that males adjust
their calling behavior in response to the perceived threat of competition for
females. The research will develop new approaches to the study of communication
in groups. The university where this work will be undertaken is focused on
undergraduate teaching (RUI school) and the proposed research will provide a
diversity of undergraduate students with valuable research experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;