* 0342556
* Quality of Service Management for Enterprise-Application Computing Utilities
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2009
* Tzi-Cker Chiueh, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2009
* USD 242,967.00

A growing concern among corporate information technology (IT) managers is the
elevating gap between the increasing system maintenance and administration cost
of the IT infrastructure and the decreasing hardware/software acquisition cost.
This gap is escalating because system administration and management is still
heavily labor-intensive and does not scale very well with system size and
complexity, despite extensive research efforts to automate the process. One
promising approach to drastically reduce this cost is to adopt a computing
utility model, in which a centrally managed computing infrastructure is shared
among multiple enterprise applications in a way that preserves their high-level
business objectives. The primary technical challenge in the computing utility
model is how to provision and schedule system resources to support the desired
quality of service (QoS) of individual business applications that share the same
physical infrastructure without human intervention. This project proposes to
develop a multi-dimensional resource virtualization system called Iguacu, which
multiplexes multiple system resources among a set of enterprise applications on
a large-scale PC cluster such that the delay and/or throughput requirement of
each such application is satisfied. Iguacu features three key innovations.
First, unlike most previous QoS efforts that focus on a single system resource,
Iguacu coordinates the allocation and scheduling of multiple system resources,
including CPU, disk, and network link, to meet application-specific QoS
requirements while significantly improving individual resource's utilization
efficiency. Second, Iguacu supports a unified and reusable implementation
framework that could quickly convert, with zero or minor modification, a given
database-intensive enterprise application into a form that provides guarantees
based on service-specific performance metrics. The development of such a
framework greatly mitigates the efforts required to deploy QoS-aware enterprise
applications in a complicated IT environment. Third, Iguacu features a novel
procedure that automatically translates high-level QoS specifications into
physical system resource requirements for distributed enterprise applications
running on a cluster environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides its
intellectual contributions, this project is expected to make a major impact on
the undergraduate and graduate education of the Computer Science department at
Stony Brook University by introducing a series of system management and
administration courses, which will use the Iguacu prototype as a case study on
the functionality and implementation details of an enterprise-scale system
management system for scalable PC clusters. Finally, the technologies developed
in this project are expected to influence the future product directions of a
major system management solution vendor, Computer Associates International,
through an on-going research collaboration in the network/system management
area.&lt;br/&gt;