* 0342113
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Chromatin Boundaries in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* David Donze, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael K. Reddy
* 02/29/2008
* USD 425,570.00

Living organisms must regulate expression of their genes for proper
developmental growth and survival. Genes encoded in DNA must be transcribed into
RNA, and most are then translated into protein to carry out their functions
within cells. But not all genes need to function at all times, so there must be
tightly controlled regulation of the transcription and translation processes.
One way cells control gene expression is to package DNA-protein into a structure
called chromatin, in which the DNA is wrapped around complexes of histones and
other proteins that provide a scaffolding for the regulation of their
transcription. The goals of this research project are to study how chromatin
regulates gene expression at the transcriptional level. The research will use
the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a eukaryotic microbe that allows easier
study of cellular functions, while providing information that in most cases can
be extrapolated to all eukaryotic cells, even human cells. The major goal of the
project is to determine how certain chromatin structures, called
heterochromatin, that repress transcription of genetic information, are limited
by other structures called boundary elements. Previous research has identified
such boundary elements in yeast, and the project will use genetic and molecular
analyses to investigate how boundary elements function to prevent
heterochromatin from inappropriately repressing genes, and to identify other
proteins bound to chromatin that create a boundary element, and how these
proteins function to help regulate transcription. The first aim of the project
will consist of a genetic screen to identify genes that encode proteins required
for the function of a specific boundary element in yeast, followed by a
biochemical and molecular analysis of the mechanistic roles of these proteins.
The second aim will involve a genetic screen aimed at identifying other yeast
DNA sequences that are capable of functioning as boundary elements. These
studies will yield a better understanding of the basic processes of
transcriptional regulation and provide training opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students, some of them members of underrepresented minorities.