* 0342634
* ITR:     Risk, Reward, and Reinforcement
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* John Moody, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Douglas H. Fisher
* 07/31/2008
* USD 339,998.00

The objectives of this project are to develop efficient and reliable algorithms
for direct reinforcement, to learn risk-averse behaviors for problems with high
degrees of uncertainty, and to apply the methods developed to an economically
important problem: global asset allocation. Reinforcement learning (RL) enables
a goal-directed agent to discover strategies through trial and error exploration
with only limited feedback. Direct Reinforcement (DR, or "policy gradient")
methods enable an agent to discover a strategy without the need to learn a value
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic programming and related value function RL
methods are often found to be inefficient, to produce unstable solutions, and to
have difficulty scaling up to large problems. Hence, there have been relatively
few real-world applications of the value function type RL. This project seeks to
make several advancements in Direct Reinforcement that will enable the
development of efficient and effective practical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By controlling the "exploration vs.
exploitation" trade-off during on-line learning, DR agents will be able to
discover better policies and do so more efficiently. Stochastic optimization
methods, such as stochastic "search then converge" or annealing of a Boltzmann
temperature are candidate approaches. By developing risk-averse reinforcement
methods, DR agents will be able to learn robust policies for uncertain or risky
environments. Using risk-sensitive intertemporal utilities, DR agents will learn
to avoid risky states or actions while they pursue long-term reward. Dynamic
programming is widely used in economics and finance, but few attempts have been
made to solve important financial problems with reinforcement learning. As a
demonstration of risk-averse DR, this project will build a prototype global
asset allocation system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Risk-averse direct reinforcement
may find application in a variety of engineering domains, from robotics to
industrial control to autonomous agents. Many industries, such as energy and the
airlines, need to manage operational and financial risks together, in order to
avoid supply shortfalls or bankruptcy. Individual investors must manage risk
while building their investment portfolios to meet future needs, such as
children's college expenses or retirement. Risk-averse Direct Reinforcement may
find application in many such contexts.&lt;br/&gt;