* 0342974
* Isotope Effects on the Urate Oxidase Reaction
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Peter Tipton, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 04/30/2008
* USD 408,911.00

The chemical mechanisms of enzyme-catalyzed reactions with O2 are of particular
interest, both because of the importance of O2 to living organisms, and because
reactions between O2 and organic molecules are formally forbidden by the rules
of quantum mechanics. In order to facilitate reactions with O2, nature has
evolved enzymes that contain cofactors, either organic or inorganic, which
readily react with O2. The enzyme urate oxidase is quite unusual in that it
requires O2 as a substrate, but neither contains nor requires any cofactor. The
research outlined is designed to provide a detailed understanding of how urate
oxidase facilitates the reaction between O2 and urate. A small but growing
number of enzymes has been recognized to catalyze reactions with O2 in the
absence of cofactors. The urate oxidase reaction will be probed by measuring
13C, 18O, and 35S isotope effects on substrate oxidation and on the binding of
ligands at the active site. Binding isotope effects will be particularly useful
for determining how hydrogen-bonding interactions at the active site influence
the reactivity of urate. Kinetic isotope effects will help to define the
mechanism that urate oxidase employs to enhance the reactivity of urate towards
O2. One can envision several means that could be used in the enzymatic reaction.
Model studies have shown that the urate dianion can be oxidized readily, and
evidence from kinetic studies suggests that urate oxidase does generate the
urate dianion at the active site. Since the product of the urate oxidase
reaction contains a tetrahedral carbon at C5 while the substrate is planar, the
enzyme could also enhance the reactivity of urate by contorting it away from
planarity. The enzyme can also vary hydrogen-bonding and pi-stacking
interactions with the ligand, to vary its redox potential. All of these
mechanisms are expected to generate heavy atom kinetic isotope effects.
Furthermore, if binding does induce deformation of the substrate or introduce
unique hydrogen bonds, there should be equilibrium isotope effects on the
binding of ligands to urate oxidase. Interpretation of the isotope effect data
will be facilitated by comparison with calculated isotope effects. Ab initio
calculations will be performed to generate wave functions for urate and urate
analogs participating in molecular interactions that are expected to occur at
the active site. &lt;br/&gt;The model proposed for the urate oxidase reaction
draws parallels with flavin and pterin cofactor chemistry. Since urate is a
substrate rather than a cofactor, isotope effect methodologies can be applied to
urate oxidase in ways that are not practical with flavoenzymes or pterin-
dependent enzymes. However, the fundamental insights gained should allow of a
greater understanding of the chemistry between O2 and flavin and pterin as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will promote teaching and training of graduate and undergraduate students
through hands on research experience. These research experiences will be
directed to learning mechanistic enzymology and protein chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;