* 0342807
* Spectroscopic Definition of Electronic Structure and Contributions to Reactivity of Binuclear Non-Heme Iron Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Edward Solomon, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2009
* USD 999,000.00

Binuclear non-heme ferrous active sites are involved in a wide-range of
reactions with dioxygen including O2 binding (hemerythrin), activation for
hydroxylation (methane monooxygenase, MMO), desaturation (desaturase), tyrosine
radical formation (ribonucleotide reductase, RR, by a proton coupled electron
transfer (PCET) process), reduction by two-electrons (ferroxidase site of
ferritin, and the related peroxidase site of rubrerythrin), and its four-
electron reduction to water (rubredoxin: O2 oxidoreductase, NO reductase, and
the alternative oxidase in plants). Structures exist for many of these proteins
in at least one oxidation state, Fe2III-peroxide and high valent iron-oxo
intermediates have been trapped, and relevant oxygen-non-heme diiron model
complexes and de novo designed protein analogues have been synthesized.
Spectroscopic methodology emphasizing variable-temperature variable-field
magnetic circular dichroism (VTVH MCD) has been developed to probe the biferrous
active sites and analyze the excited and ground state interactions in terms of
the geometric and electronic structure of each iron and the bridging ligands.
VTVH MCD combined with other spectroscopies (resonance Raman excitation
profiles, X-ray absorption, EPR, etc.) have further been applied to define the
geometric and electronic structures of a number of the oxygen intermediates in
the proteins and models and their relevance to reactivity. Combining these data
with electronic structure calculations (DFT) has provided significant insight
into geometric and electronic structure/function correlations. Research now
focuses on using this spectroscopic/computational methodology to structurally
define the intermediates in the reaction coordinates of RR and MMO. These
studies will define the structural changes of the biferrous resting state
associated with activating the site for O2 reactivity, determine geometric and
electronic structural differences that contribute to differences in substrate
reactivity (desaturation, hydroxylation and PCET), and generally evaluate
geometric and electronic structure differences over the range of proteins and
enzymes listed above (and de novo designed analogues) which contribute to their
different roles in O2 biochemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iron enzymes and
proteins play key roles in many important biological functions. The focus of
this research is to understand the structure and function of binuclear non-heme
iron enzymes, providing molecular level insight into reaction processes and
catalysis. The enzymes studied are important in catalytic processes,
biotechnology, environmental regulation, and DNA biosynthesis. The scientific
methodologies developed as part of this study have applications to a variety of
important classes of metal sites in biology and catalysis. Postdoctoral
associates, graduate students and undergraduates involved in this research are
well trained in a wide range of spectroscopic methods, quantum chemistry
calculations and enzymology, and have gone on to become significant contributors
in academia and industry. The instrumental and theoretical resources available
in these labs for the study of binuclear active sites have been made accessible
to the bioinorganic community through a range of collaborations which also
leverage these resources to enhance impact on the field. The PI has also
attempted to enhance the general awareness of the importance and information
content of the different spectroscopic methods in bioinorganic chemistry through
organizing symposia, books, overview articles and presentations of general
lectures and lecture series on this topic. There have also been a wide-range of
sabbatical visitors spending time in the PI's labs at Stanford to further their
knowledge in this area ranging from well established bioinorganic/biophysical
chemists, to a local high school chemistry teacher and an under-represented
minority Professor from an undergraduate college interested in enhancing
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the
Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Program in the Chemistry Division.
&lt;br/&gt;