* 0342304
* Cytotoxic Molecules in Invertebrate Immunity
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Anthony Nappi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 07/31/2005
* USD 230,517.00

Insects and other arthropods are vectors of numerous parasitic diseases of
medical and veterinary importance, including malaria, trypanosomiasis (sleeping
sickness, Chagas' disease) filariasis (eye worms, elephantiasis), and dog
heartworm. Knowledge of the factors that regulate the infection process in the
insect vector is essential for the development of counter strategies to protect
humans and livestock from the adverse effects of insect-vectored parasites.
Insects possess effective innate cellular and humoral immune mechanisms that
exhibit striking parallels between the innate immune responses of mammals,
suggesting a common ancestry for these critically important processes. With the
exception of studies documenting and characterizing various immune effector
responses for several insect species, little or nothing is known of the
mechanisms underlying the initial non-self recognition response, or the identity
and mode of action of killing molecules used by immune activated cells. The
proposed research is designed to elucidate the nature of the cytotoxic
components generated by insects that specifically target and destroy their
internal parasites. The researchers plan to study the cellular defence responses
made by the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster against the metazoan parasite
Leptopilina boulardi, and the cytotoxic responses of the reduviid bug Rhodnius
prolixus against the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma. Using these two insect-
parasite model systems, the production of various reactive oxygen intermediates
(superoxide anion, hydrogen peroxide, and the hydroxyl radical) will be
monitored, as will the production of reactive nitrogen intermediates (e.g.,
nitric oxide and peroxynitrite), and the activity levels of two important
enzymes, NADPH oxidase and nitric oxide synthase. To investigate the changes in
biochemistry and enzyme activity that occur during the immune responses elicited
by Drosophila and Rhodnius against their respective metazoan and protozoan
parasites, the investigators will employ high performance liquid chromatography
with electrochemical detection, spectrophotometry, fluorometry and molecular
techniques. This comprehensive approach for positively identifying specific
cytotoxic molecules and the enzymatic mechanisms by which they are produced
during insect immune responses will be extremely useful by providing important
insights concerning cell-cell signaling and immune recognition in insects.

