* 0342369
* Automatic Tools for Deriving, Analyzing, and Implementing Linear Algebra Libraries
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Robert van de Geijn, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/29/2008
* USD 299,999.00

Van de Geijin, Robert&lt;br/&gt;CCF-0342369&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will develop prototype tools for the automatic&lt;br/&gt;derivation,
automatic implementation, automatic performance modeling,&lt;br/&gt;and
automatic stability analysis of high-performance sequential
and&lt;br/&gt;parallel linear algebra libraries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of
the proposed project, a set of tools will be created that&lt;br/&gt;will merge
the capabilities of the above described prototypem (semi-) automated systems.
The functionality will be extended to encompass automated generation of code
targeting APIs for different languages, automated cost analysis for
architectures with multi-level memories (including distributed memory) as well
as automated stability analysis. The input to the system will be matrix
operations in form of linear algebraic expression. The output will be entire
families of algorithms for the given operations, high-performance
implementations for sequential and parallel architectures, cost analyses of the
implementations, and stability analyses of the algorithms. A demonstration of
the system will be the automatic creation of a next-generation high-performance
library with functionality that encompasses LAPACK and more, parameterized for a
broad range of sequential and parallel architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
the reduction to a system of the knowledge that underlies
the&lt;br/&gt;development of high-performance linear algebra libraries
that&lt;br/&gt;represents the primary contribution to science of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;Automation of the kind that is targeted is the ultimate
demonstration&lt;br/&gt;of the level of understanding that has been
achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of the proposed work will then
measured by: (1) the&lt;br/&gt;broadness of applicability of the automated
tools; (2) the amount of&lt;br/&gt;effort required to accommodate new
architectural features; and (3) the&lt;br/&gt;ease with which new functionality
can be accommodated by the tools.&lt;br/&gt;In other words, the measurement of
success will largely be with&lt;br/&gt;respect to productivity, maintenance, and
applicability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;