* 0342820
* Sources of Heterogeneity in Grasslands: Responses of Wildlife to People on Savanna Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Philip Chapman, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2009
* USD 463,554.00

An important, unresolved question in the design and management of wildlife
reserves worldwide is: What is the role of traditional human land-use in
conservation areas, particularly when those land uses have a long evolutionary
relationship with the natural system? Equally important are questions about the
cultural evolution of indigenous management systems into more modern systems and
the impacts of these changes on wildlife outside reserves. Our study will be one
of the first in the world to address both of these problems. This project will
study these interactions in the savannas of East Africa, where our hominid
ancestors and wildlife have lived side-by-side for at least 4 million years, and
where it is logical to expect that these interactions will be deeply developed.
Through field experiments, aerial surveys, and imagery analysis, our project
will examine how and why traditional pastoral peoples affect large mammal
populations in the Mara-Serengeti ecosystem. The project will then develop
robust models describing people-wildlife interactions that land managers in East
Africa can use to conserve these grand wildlife ecosystems in the face of
current changes in land tenure and economic opportunities for pastoral peoples.
This research will also provide a model for addressing these questions in the
western US and other places where conservation management attempts to mimic the
practices of indigenous peoples in efforts to maintain intact, native
ecosystems.