* 0343919
* Collaborative Research: Functional Significance of "Dark Septate" Endophytes in Grassland and Meadow Ecosystems of Western North America
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* David Myrold, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Russell
* 03/31/2008
* USD 299,251.00

Plant roots provide a nutrient-rich environment for a variety of fungi. These
fungi participate in several ecosystem functions: decomposition of dead
material, facilitation of plant nutrient uptake, and a food source for
terrestrial animals. This research program focuses on a new group of root-
associated fungi. These fungi appear extremely common in many ecosystems, yet
their function has remained beyond the scope of previous investigations. This
research program aims to determine whether the target fungi are common
throughout North American grasslands, whether the same fungi occur in different
grasslands, and what is their function. A combination of microscopic and
microbiological techniques will be used to estimate the abundance of the
organisms and to identify the common players across the grasslands. Once a
selection of the most common fungi has been established sources of nutrients,
which the fungi can utilize will be determined. Based on these results the role
of these fungi in aiding plant nutrient use will be determined.

Understanding the function of these root-associated fungi is crucial as they may
be key players in plant performance and allow access to nutrient sources
otherwise not available to the plants. Accordingly, these fungi may become an
important option for biofertilization in low impact or organic agriculture. The
proposed research has also a significant training component: one post-doc, two
graduate students and at least two undergraduate students will be involved. The
proposed studies will establish a new and innovative research collaboration
between a molecular ecologist at Kansas State University and ecosystem ecologist
(Myrold) at Oregon State University.