* 0343534
* RUI: Cellular Role of CTP:Phosphocholine Cytidylyltransferase Isoforms
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Jon Friesen, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 02/29/2008
* USD 313,258.00

The objective of this research project is to understand how the enzyme
CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (CCT) regulates cellular
phosphatidylcholine synthesis. CCT is the rate limiting enzyme of the CDP-
choline pathway and therefore is extensively regulated. Translocation of soluble
CCT to the surface of a cellular membrane results in enzyme activation, a
reversible process that can be mimicked in vitro through association of purified
CCT with synthetic lipid vesicles. There are two CCT isoforms present in higher
eukaryotes, including Drosophila melanogaster and humans. This research project
is designed to determine the role(s) of each individual enzyme isoform within a
eukaryotic cell. RNA interference using cultured Drosophila melanogaster
Schneider 2 cells will be employed to selectively "knock out" each CCT isoform.
The first research objective is to identify the cellular location of each
Drosophila melanogaster CCT isoform. A second objective is to determine whether
each CCT isoform is essential for cell growth. The final research objective
involves elucidation of the contribution of each CCT isoform to
phosphatidylcholine synthesis. Completion of the research will provide
information about the relative contribution of each CCT isoform to cellular
phosphatidylcholine synthesis, elucidate additional roles of CCT within a
eukaryotic cell, and provide insight into the necessity of multiple CCT isoforms
for the function of eukaryotes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: A broader
impact of the research is manifested in the positive effect it will have on the
research development of undergraduate students and the educational environment
of Illinois State University, a predominantly undergraduate institution. Support
for undergraduate Biochemistry majors to conduct full-time summer research
fosters a scientific career at a critical, early stage. Independent laboratory
research is a valuable complement to the extensive classroom training
undergraduate students obtain, allowing application of the scientific knowledge
learned in the classroom. In addition, students will obtain technical training
in the use of specialized, modern scientific equipment. The result will be a
graduate who is well-prepared to begin pursuit of a graduate degree in science.
&lt;br/&gt;