* 0343820
* Population Ecology and Conservation of a Threatened Group of Long-lived Aquatic Birds
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2009
* Christine Hunter, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 04/30/2009
* USD 300,000.00

Albatrosses are unique among birds because of their complex life cycles and
because they are linked to the oceanic environment at the largest scales. They
are also one of the most threatened groups of species, the greatest threat
coming from incidental mortality in longline fisheries. The goal of this project
is to analyze long-term data on populations of the Wandering Albatross (Diomedea
exulans), Black-browed Albatross (Thalassarche melanophrys), and Grey-headed
Albatross (Thalassarche chrysostoma) on Bird Island, South Georgia, where data
have been collected since 1968 by the British Antarctic Survey. Population
models will be developed from these data and used to characterize the short- and
long-term dynamics of the population, the results of perturbations, and the
effects of environmental factors and human-induced mortality. Model parameters
will be estimated using newly developed statistical procedures adapted to the
biology of albatrosses. Models will be analyzed using deterministic methods in
preparation for later studies of stochastic models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research has broader impacts in the areas of societal benefits and education.
Its results will have important implications for albatross conservation. A
series of workshops will bring together an international group of scientists
working on other albatross populations, carry out comparative analyses, and
apply the results to population management. The workshops will include
participants involved in international conservation efforts, and guarantee the
``broad dissemination'' of research results. Research methods and results will
also be incorporated into graduate coursework in the WHOI/MIT Joint Program in
Oceanography. &lt;br/&gt;