* 0343485
* Coupling the Land Surface to Radiative and Hydrological Processes in a Climate Model
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Robert Dickinson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 01/31/2007
* USD 854,026.00

This research project will investigate physical and biological interactions
between land surface processes and climate in the context of climate modeling.
The PI's motivation is his recognition that current climate modeling objectives
require much more comprehensive and realistic land surface parameterizations and
data use. How the land surface communicates to the atmosphere through its flux
and radiative properties and so modifies clouds and precipitation, and how these
are modified by aerosols, still needs to be better understood. Some specific
questions include: - How do the modeled land processes contribute to
precipitation? - How can land surface processes be characterized in terms of
sensitivity and feedbacks? - What characterizes the dynamics of soil moisture
and runoff? - How are clouds and aerosols coupled to land? - What bounds can be
placed on the classical climate sensitivity and how is it related to coupling to
the underlying surface?

He will address some aspects of these questions with regional foci, the Amazon
and northern and northwest China.

Broader Impacts: The grant funding is almost entirely to support student
research. Their training should provide the US and the world will highly capable
new scientists in a very important research area. Since all of the PI's current
students are either of African, African-American, or Chinese origin and the
majority of them are female, the project should promote the education of
underrepresented minorities. Moreover, the broad issue to which it is
specifically targeted is improvement of content and application of climate
models for use in national efforts to provide better forecasts of climate
variability and in international assessments of the human contributions to
climate change.