* 0343273
* Role of Drosophila Bunched Protein Isoforms in Regulating Notch Signaling at Cell Fate Boundaries
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Leonard Dobens, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2008
* USD 386,440.00

B. PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Role of Drosophila Bunched protein isoforms in
regulating Notch signaling at cell fate boundaries
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;During development of a
multicellular animal, cell proliferation must be orchestrated with cell
differentiation for proper tissue formation. Cells coordinate their activities
by segregating into separate domains - or compartments - and establishing
regions of reduced cell mixing at their boundaries. Cell fate boundaries
organize patterning and morphogenesis of a wide range of tissues, including the
eye equator and wing margin in Drosophila, and the apical ectodermal ridge,
somite and hindbrain rhombomeres in vertebrates. Little is known about the
mechanisms that generate cell fate boundaries and translate compartment
boundaries into the structural features of mature
tissue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Drosophila bunched gene, a member of the highly
conserved TSC-22/GILZ family of transcription factors, establishes an epithelial
cell fate boundary during oogenesis. bunched, which encodes three distinct
protein isoforms whose structural features correspond to three isoforms of the
mouse TSC-22 gene, is regulated by long-range morphogens to set the position of
a cell fate boundary. The Bunched1 isoform regulates cell affinities and short-
range Notch signaling at a cell fate boundary that coincides with a key
structural feature of the fly eggshell, the collar of the
operculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a simple model tissue and applying
powerful molecular and genetic approaches, the goals of this proposal are to:
(1) determine how long-range morphogen signaling is refined to short-range Notch
activation via Bunched1; and (2) characterize how interactions among the three
Bunched isoforms pattern cell fates. The long term goal of this proposal is to
elucidate the complex, conserved mechanism by which cell fate boundaries are
established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental
question in development is how tissue subdivision occurs by genes, initially
expressed in broad, overlapping domains, which regulate the expression of
downstream genes to establish a defined pattern. The TSC-22 family of proteins
is widely conserved in animals but extensive mammalian tissue culture studies
have shed no light on their developmental function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments proposed will give basic insights into how
Bunched protein isoforms interact to regulate gene transcription at forming cell
fate boundaries and illuminate similar regulatory processes in limbs, nervous
system and other vertebrate and invertebrate tissues. Experiments proposed are
designed to integrate research with a program of teaching and training
undergraduate and graduate students. The focus on a Drosophila gene similar to
human TSC-22, a gene associated with several human cancers and diabetic
neuropathy, will convey to students the potential of model organisms to
elucidate developmental mechanisms as a basis to understand human disease. The
logical series of experiments detailed in these Aims are divisible into larger
projects suitable for graduate students and smaller projects appropriate for
undergraduates. Work outlined here will complement undergraduate research,
including scholars programs for extended research and summer research (SEARCH
and Sapere Vedere scholarships) and the Ph.D. training program. This project
will enhance teaching: (1) Developmental Biology for undergraduates and Advanced
Cell Biology, a graduate level course emphasizing the use of animal model
systems like Drosophila, C. elegans, and yeast as genomic tools. This work will
further development of a lab course for Developmental Biology, based in part on
the genetic experiments planned here.&lt;br/&gt;