* 0343917
* Homeostatic and Circadian Control of Energy Expenditure
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Roberto Refinetti, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2007
* USD 182,984.00

Living beings require energy to survive and thrive. According to the traditional
homeostatic view, animals and humans spend metabolic energy at a constant rate,
just like a light bulb spends electrical energy, so that energy expenditure can
be expressed in units of watts. For the last 50 years, much research has been
conducted on variations in physiological processes that take place during the
course of a day. This body of research suggests that the traditional homeostatic
view may be incorrect. Because the natural alternation of day and night imposes
on most animals a daily cycle of food availability, mating opportunities, and so
on, it seems that energy expenditure may be regulated on a daily (circadian)
basis rather than on a constant-rate (homeostatic) basis. According to this
hypothesis, which diverges from a long tradition in physiology, metabolic rate
would be properly expressed not in units of joules per second (i.e., in watts)
but in units of joules per circadian cycle. The present project will evaluate
this hypothesis experimentally through studies on laboratory animals. Knowledge
to be gained from this project is particularly relevant to the design of special
workplaces, such as submarines and underground facilities, and to the
understanding of metabolic adjustments associated with the yearly seasons in
livestock as well as in humans. In more general terms, knowledge on the
circadian modulation of energy expenditure has potential applications in the
prevention of jet lag and the malaise associated with shift work, the treatment
of sleep disorders and depression, and the timing for effective administration
of medicines. The project will also enhance the research environment at the
grantee institution. An enhanced institutional environment that improves faculty
and student research opportunity will lead to direct student experience and
training in research as well as to increased involvement of the PI in research
in his discipline, which in turn will lead to improved student preparation. The
composition of the affected student population will be approximately 60% female
and 45% ethnic minority. The results of the project will be disseminated to the
scientific community by publication of articles in peer-reviewed professional
journals and to the population at large by summaries published in research
reports issued by the university and by synopses posted on the web site of the
principal investigator's laboratory, which receives over 5,000 visitors each
year.