* 0343127
* Global Change and Nitrate Assimilation
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Arnold Bloom, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/28/2009
* USD 585,000.00

Global Change and Nitrate Assimilation

Carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere that are associated with global
warming have risen by more than 30 percent during the past two centuries and are
expected to double during the next. Some scientists believe these rising levels
of carbon dioxide will benefit plants because carbon dioxide is one of the
essential ingredients in photosynthesis, the process by which green plants use
sunlight to manufacture the chemical energy they need. Indeed, many plants
initially respond to a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide levels by
assimilating 30 percent more carbon dioxide into carbohydrate. Further study,
however, reveals that the accelerated rate of carbon dioxide assimilation is not
sustained: within a few days or weeks of exposure to elevated carbon dioxide,
carbon dioxide assimilation drops back to just 12 percent greater than normal, a
phenomenon known a carbon dioxide acclimation.

Bloom and colleagues discovered that carbon dioxide acclimation derives from
nitrogen deprivation because elevated carbon dioxide inhibits the assimilation
of nitrate into amino acids in leaves and nitrate is a major form of nitrogen
that plants obtain from the soil. Three mechanisms appear to be responsible.

First, plants place a higher priority on assimilating carbon dioxide than they
do nitrogen, so when carbon dioxide levels rise, some of the high energy
compounds needed to assimilate nitrate are already tied up in assimilating
carbon dioxide.

Second, to make use of nitrate, the plants initially convert nitrate into
nitrite in the cytoplasm and move the nitrite into the chloroplast for
conversion into ammonium and then amino acids. Bloom's research indicated that
elevated levels of carbon dioxide blocked this vital transfer of nitrite into
the chloroplasts.

Third, under current levels of carbon dioxide and oxygen, most plants lose about
one-quarter of the carbohydrate that they could accumulate from a process known
as photorespiration. This process was thought to be wasteful, unavoidable
consequence of the method that most plants use to generate carbohydrate. Bloom's
latest results show that these plants must photorespire in order to convert
nitrate into amino acids.

These studies suggest that plant and tree species in natural ecosystems that
depend on nitrate conversion into amino acids in their leaves are likely to be
at a competitive disadvantage to those species that are either able to convert
nitrate into amino acids in their roots or use ammonium as their predominant
nitrogen source. As a result the distribution of plants in the wild may change
significantly as atmospheric carbon dioxide levels continue to rise.

Nitrous oxide is another major greenhouse gas that contributes to global
warming. Bloom and colleagues showed that wheat plants emit a significant amount
of nitrous oxide as part of nitrate assimilation. The form of nitrogen that a
plant uses, therefore, may influence its nitrous oxide emissions.

The proposed research will determine the interdependence among photorespiration,
carbon dioxide assimilation, nitrous oxide production, and nitrate assimilation.
It will employ Arabidopsis genotypes with altered capacities to assimilate
nitrate and a series of Flaveria species that vary in their extent of
photorespiration. Laboratory and field studies will also examine the relative
importance of ammonium and nitrate as plant nitrogen sources. Lastly, at a
national facility for monitoring the influence of elevated carbon dioxide on
desert flora, experiments will assess in situ the extent to which carbon dioxide
inhibits plant nitrate assimilation.