* 0343381
* Mammalian Behavioral Development Under Contrasting Regimes of Interspecific Competition
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Kay Holekamp, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 03/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

Mammalian behavioral development under contrasting regimes of interspecific
competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #
IBN0343381&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Kay E. Holekamp, Michigan State
University&lt;br/&gt; Laura Smale, Michigan State University&lt;br/&gt; Jeffrey
A. French, University of Nebraska at Omaha&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; NON-
TECHNICAL ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is currently known about how the
tendency to engage in risky behavior varies across the life-span in mammals, or
how the behavior of young mammals varies with ecological circumstances. In most
parts of Africa, lions (Panthera leo) and spotted hyenas (Crocuta crocuta) are
the most common large carnivores, and these two species compete regularly for
food. Here hypotheses will be tested suggesting that risk-sensitive behavior
exhibited by free-living hyenas is affected by age and by competitive
interactions with lions. Naturally-occurring variation will be documented in
ranging behavior, vigilance, and risky behaviors shown by hyenas during
interactions with lions over food. In addition, two playback experiments will
inquire how age and local lion density influence hyenas' decisions regarding
whether to approach or avoid recorded lion roars when these are broadcast from a
hidden speaker. Concentrations of excreted stress hormones will be measured in
hyena feces to determine whether stress physiology in these animals is affected
by age or by local competition with lions. Measures of naturally-occurring
behavior, experimental results, and hormone concentrations will be compared
among hyenas at three different developmental stages in two Kenyan national
parks in which ratios of resident hyenas to lions differ greatly. Finally, in
collaboration with the Kenya Wildlife Service, methods will be developed for
effective monitoring of large carnivores, and these methods will later be
applied in several other national parks in Kenya. This research will thus
combine strong basic science focused on behavioral development with direct
applications to management and conservation of large African carnivores,
including those that are rare and endangered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;