* 0343300
* ECS Workshop on Wireless Networked Sensor Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,09/30/2004
* William Kaiser, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 09/30/2004
* USD 47,922.00

NSF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS (ECS) WORKSHOP ON WIRELESS NETWORKED
SENSOR SYSTEMS: PROJECT SUMMARY Wireless sensor network technology has expanded
from its origins of over a decade ago to now include many new communities in
both research and applications. New technology requirements have rapidly
appeared along with many new applications. For example, whereas early sensors
focused on seismic and acoustic sensing channels for event detection, the new
applications in natural and urban environmental sensing now require new sensing
channels for example, multispectral imaging for detailed understanding of
phenomena and chemical sensing for detection of biological pathogens in water
resources. Also, as applications have evolved, the requirements for precision
have increased as well. Further, new applications may emerge in the future where
bounded response time and distributed control present their requirements. While
these new applications appear, the long standing problems of scarce energy
resources and unreliable, energy-intensive wireless communication remain as
challenges. A broad set of research can be developed opportunities for
addressing these new requirements. In particular, the Electrical and
Communications Systems (ECS) Division of the NSF can contribute to a vision of
joint development of hardware and software architectures that uniformly consider
sensing, signal processing, event detection, computing, and networking. This
research can consider the unique areas of ECS expertise, for example in the
development of jointly optimized hardware and software architectures, sensor
systems, communication systems, and distributed, real-time control methods. This
proposal describes an NSF Electrical and Communications Systems (ECS) Workshop
on Wireless Networked Sensor Systems. This is intended to engage Grantees of the
ECS Division as well as others to explore the new ECS opportunities, develop a
series of new program concepts, and ultimately create new research avenues on
urgent ECS problems. The topics of this workshop will include the examples of 1)
Decentralized Detection and Control with Wireless Sensor Networks, 2) Wireless
Sensor Node and System Energy Barriers and Solution Pathways, 3) Energy-Aware
Networked Sensor and Instrument Systems, 4) Energy-Aware, Wireless Sensor
Specific Hardware and Software Architectures, and others to be developed. The
Workshop is proposed to take place over a two-day period in August 2003, and
engage at least 50 investigators. The Workshop schedule will include brief
orientation/discussion periods along with breakout sessions that are intended to
not only produce guiding summary documents, but to also promote the development
of this new community. Broad Societal Impacts: The wireless sensor research area
has promising impact in science and engineering disciplines including natural
environmental science and environmental engineering, industrial automation,
physical security for homeland defense, and healthcare technology. Many new
challenges are rapidly appearing that must be solved to support the wireless
sensor network vision. This Workshop will provide guidance at many levels for
the development of new innovations and research pathways that will have broad
impact. Broad Education Impacts: Wireless sensor research has already
demonstrated broad impact in education through the development of new courses
and the direct benefits of engaging undergraduate and graduate student
researchers with inherently multidisciplinary research programs. This Workshop
will create a set of new such opportunities specifically in the ECS area, thus
broadening the opportunities for identifying vital undergraduate and graduate
student thesis research objectives and programs. Workshop results will be
immediately valuable for student researchers and their advisors.