* 0343757
* Bridging Length and Time Scales in Catalytic Reaction Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Dionisios Vlachos, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2007
* USD 233,365.00

Research: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulations have
emerged as an excellent computational tool for diverse problems ranging from
materials growth, to catalysis, to DNA/surface interactions, to image
processing, and to modeling of metabolic pathways for biochemical engineering
and bio-informatics. Generally, KMC simulations are limited to short length and
time scales, while device sizes and morphological features often involve much
larger spatial and temporal scales. The PI has been developing systematic,
hierarchical coarse-grained stochastic models, referred to as Coarse-Grained MC
(CGMC), which are capable of describing much larger length scales than
conventional KMC simulations at significantly lower computational cost, while
still incorporating microscopic features and the correct noise. They thus
provide a mathematical and computational paradigm with potential impact on
numerous applications, except that CGMC tools cannot currently handle complex
chemistry accurately.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI plans to
develop the necessary multiscale enabling technology for surface reaction
systems. The tasks depart from the available technology and entail a combination
of: (a) density functional theory for estimation of surface reaction parameters
and potential energy surfaces, (b) molecular dynamics to model surface
diffusion, (c) novel multilevel, adaptive mesh CGMC, and (d) the integration of
this multilevel CGMC in hybrid multiscale reactor simulations to enable modeling
of realistic reacting flow length scales. This will be applied to model reaction
systems and to the spatio-temporal patterns observed in hydrogen oxidation on
platinum via high speed scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). The Intellectual
Merit derives from the development of a reaction multiscale framework that will
have the ability to link microscopic parameters, such as intermolecular
potentials, micrscopkic rates, and fluctuations, to mesoscopic scale phenomena
such as spatio-temporal patterns and local reaction rates.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coarse-graining
methodology has potential in numerous applications, from single catalyst
crystals, to microchemical systems for portable, "green" devices, to hydrogen-
based fuel cells, to microporous films based membrane reactors, to advanced
materials fabrication, to micromagnetics. It can thus benefit industry and the
environment. On the educational side, the PI plans to (1) develop a short course
on mesoscopic modeling and (2) widely disseminate the research material via the
web with tutorial examples and codes for students.&lt;br/&gt;