* 0343732
* Collaborative Research: Architectural Effects and the Analysis of Sexual Size Dimorphism
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Jill Miller, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 03/31/2010
* USD 87,000.00

In 1888, Charles Darwin published "The Different Forms of Flowers on Plants of
the Same Species". Darwin described many plant species in which morphologically
distinct flowers were born on the same individual or on different individuals
within populations, and speculated about how such floral dimorphisms evolved.
Since Darwin's time, additional hypotheses have been proposed and explored, the
majority of which focus on the contrasting reproductive functions of the
different floral types. This research addresses a new hypothesis, that
divergence in flower form can be due to differences in the timing of development
and to the position of flowers within the three-dimensional structure of the
organism.

This research contributes to the nascent field of evolutionary developmental
biology by incorporating unique aspects of plant development into evolutionary
hypotheses. In addition, this project will integrate research with teaching,
training and learning. Students at different stages of their education (graduate
and undergraduate) from two institutions that differ dramatically in learning
environment (Amherst College, a small liberal arts college and University of
Colorado, a large research I institution) will participate in this collaborative
project. Each student will receive training in morphological and comparative
evolutionary analyses and will have the opportunity to work with diverse taxa.
Undergraduates will also have the opportunity to spend one summer at the
alternate institution and to work with both PIs.

