* 0343327
* Structure-Function Analysis of the Plant NB-LRR Disease Resistance Protein, Rx
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Peter Moffett, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2008
* USD 612,518.00

Structure-function analysis of the plant NB-LRR disease resistance protein,
Rx&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peter Moffett&lt;br/&gt;Boyce Thompson Institute for
Plant Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants
have evolved an innate immune system whereby disease resistance is dependent on
the genotypes of both the plant and the pathogen. This is known as gene-for-gene
resistance, in that plant resistance (R) genes confer resistance to pathogens
with a matching Avirulence (Avr) gene. The most abundant type of R gene is the
NB-LRR class of genes; so named because the encoded proteins have a similar
predicted structure including nucleotide binding and leucine rich repeat motifs.
Plant genomes encode for hundreds of NB-LRR genes, often with multiple alleles
or copies. Genes of this class have been shown to confer resistance to very
different types of pathogens including bacteria, viruses, fungi, nematodes and
insects. These proteins are thought to initiate a signal transduction cascade
upon recognition of an Avr determinant. &lt;br/&gt;Plant R genes represent a
resource of great agronomic importance but can have limitations such as non-
durability and lack of transferability between species. These situations may be
improved upon, but only with an in-depth knowledge of how this class of proteins
functions at the molecular level. Despite the cloning of many NB-LRR genes with
known specificities and hundreds more with unknown specificities there has,
until recently, been very little known about the physical mechanisms by which
these proteins translate a recognition event into a signaling
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been demonstrated that the potato NB-LRR
protein Rx undergoes at least two intra-molecular protein-protein interactions
between different domains of the protein. These interactions are disrupted in
the presence of its Avr determinant, the potato virus X (PVX) coat protein (CP).
These results have allowed the investigators to formulate models of how NB-LRR
proteins function that can be rapidly assessed using a transient expression
system in Nicotiana benthamiana (a wild relative of tobacco) leaves. The
approach is to divide Rx activity into a number of discrete functions including
fine- mapping of intra- and inter-molecular interactions. Using random- and
site-directed mutagenesis, it will be determined which motifs of Rx are involved
in the different functions. How these functions relate to each other will then
be assessed, and a comprehensive model of Rx activity will be formulated.
Additionally, using size separation techniques, the interactions of Rx with
cellular components and how they relate to the intra-molecular interactions will
be characterized. These results will allow the investigators to develop a model
of how the Rx protein acts as a molecular switch to induce a cellular state
inhospitable to pathogens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A program to purify Rx from
plants will also be undertaken to identify interacting proteins using N.
benthamiana plants carrying affinity tagged Rx transgenes. Such proteins would
be predicted to be involved in making Rx competent to function, in retaining it
inactive in the absence of Avr determinants, or in the signaling process. Given
the similarity in structure of R genes, work on Rx will yield insights into the
general mechanisms of disease resistance. This work will also provide training
opportunities for undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows.&lt;br/&gt;