* 0343034
* Memory for Location:  Changes over Learning and Development
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Jodie Plumert, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 07/31/2010
* USD 335,000.00

Where are my keys? How do I get to your house? We've all experienced long and
tedious searches for hard-to-find objects and places. These experiences
underscore how important memory for location is for everyday functioning. So how
do people remember where things are? Other research has shown that people recall
several types of information when trying to locate a missing object (like their
car keys). They might remember something rather general about the area
containing the keys (on a cluttered kitchen table). They might also remember
something more specific about exactly where the keys are on the table (close to
the far edge). But how people actually combine more general information about
areas or regions with more specific information about distance and direction is
not well understood. Even less is known about developmental changes in how
children use these two types of information to remember
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the National Science
Foundation, Dr. Jodie Plumert will conduct basic research to better understand
developmental changes in how the mind combines information about the category to
which a location belongs (e.g., area or region) with information about where the
location is within the category (e.g., distance and direction) to arrive at
estimates of location. Using techniques that make it easier or harder for
children to remember metric and categorical information, Dr. Plumert will
observe how children's reliance on these two types of information changes over
development. This research will enhance our understanding of how children and
adults solve the problem of remembering where things are, a skill fundamental to
everyday functioning. More broadly, this research will inform the field of
geographic education by providing new insights into how children combine
information about geographic regions such as states with information about
distance and direction within states to remember specific locations (e.g., state
capitols). The research will also provide many opportunities to enhance graduate
and undergraduate learning, develop new equipment and software, and disseminate
research findings.&lt;br/&gt;