* 0343598
* Molecular Evolvability In Theory And In A Bacterial Drug-Resistence Gene
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Daniel Hartl, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/2007
* USD 235,999.00

Genetic mutations are random changes in an organism's genome. They are almost
always harmful to the individual, but rare beneficial mutations do occur.
Familiar examples of the latter include mutations for antibiotic resistance in
bacteria, vaccine resistance in influenza viruses, and insecticide resistance in
insects. In spite of their great medical and agricultural importance, beneficial
mutations are not well understood because they are so rare. One critical issue
is whether two or more beneficial mutations interact to produce greater effects
than would be expected from their individual effects. Drs. Weinreich and Hartl
will study this issue in the bacterium Escherichia coli, using a gene for
resistance to the widely used antibiotic cefotaxime. Five different mutations in
that gene have been associated with resistance. To investigate their
interactions, the researchers will make all possible combinations of those
mutations and study their effects on cefotaxime
resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad benefits are likely to flow from the
proposed research. Many infectious diseases are caused by viruses or
microorganisms that, in response to clinical use of drug therapy, evolve
beneficial mutations so rapidly that even the newest drugs become ineffective
before still newer drugs can be developed. Research on drug resistance will lead
to a better understanding of the origin of these "super bugs" and of drug
resistance in viruses such as HIV. The study also addresses several general
questions of evolutionary theory. &lt;br/&gt;