* 0343607
* Biomedical Imaging Education: Safe, Inexpensive Hands-on Learning
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2008
* Stacy Klein-Gardner, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 11/30/2008
* USD 299,464.00

The overall objectives of this project are (1) to excite the interest of a
broader range and greater number of learners in the field of biomedical imaging
(BMI), a strong and growing subdiscipline of biomedical engineering (BME) with
applications in basic science research, medical diagnosis, and the guidance of
therapeutic interventions, and (2) to improve the effectiveness of BMI
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the overall objectives, three
specific aims are proposed. The first aim is to develop and test safe,
inexpensive hands-on exercises and challenge-based learning activities designed
to teach the principles of BMI to undergraduate biomedical engineers and to high
school science students. The use of actual biomedical imaging equipment for
education is typically not feasible due to safety concerns, high cost, and lack
of availability. The hands-on exercises of the proposed project are unique in
that they will utilize carefully chosen, very inexpensive, safe alternatives -
models - to the actual imaging technique to teach the
relevant&lt;br/&gt;principles. Exercises on general imaging principles, x-ray
imaging, ultrasound, radionuclide imaging, and basic magnetic resonance imaging
will be developed and embedded into challenge-based learning activities designed
to motivate learners, especially those from underrepresented populations. The
second aim is to design, implement, and distribute these learning activities and
exercises electronically with encapsulated video and still images of BMI
experts, including many women and minorities sharing their knowledge and
experiences in the field of BMI. These recorded perspectives will amplify the
impact of a limited number of minority and female role models and will
potentially inspire learners from these groups to pursue careers in BMI and BME.
The third aim is to carefully assess the impact of these activities and
exercises on learning and retention of engineering principles in BMI and on
motivation for BMI/BME careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this activity lies in the careful selection of creative yet accurate models to
teach the physics and engineering of imaging, the incorporation of proven
challenge-based and hands-on learning techniques, the development of effective
learning activities designed to introduce, motivate learning of, and reinforce
imaging principles, the incorporation of significant engineering education
expertise and resources, and the rigorous analysis of the effectiveness and
impact of the exercises and activities on learning, concept retention, and
motivation in different groups of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will have broad impact as a consequence of several key features intended to
enhance the experiences of all learners. First, the hands-on exercises are
targeted to cost no more than $25 per experiment. This low cost will allow
learners in economically disadvantaged settings to learn the principles of
imaging. The second factor that will broaden the impact of this project is that
the exercises will be hands-on, thus benefiting kinesthetic, language impaired
and ADD learners, and constructed in the context of real-life applications,
benefiting all learners, especially females. Third, many students and educators
will work on this project, thus sowing the seeds for future work in this area by
a larger number of people. Finally, results will be widely disseminated and
learning materials will be distributed electronically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;