* 0343385
* Workshop Support: Ecological Model Systems in Community Ecology, held at the National Science Foundation in the fall of 2003
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Peter Morin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2005
* USD 18,637.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Morin -- 0343385&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests
funds to cover travel expenses for 10 investigators to attend a workshop on
"Experimental Model Systems in Community Ecology" to be held at the National
Science Foundation Headquarters in Arlington, VA s in Fall, 2003. This workshop
would bring together theoretical and empirical ecologists who use diverse
approaches to study an assortment of different systems with the specific goal of
promoting a broader appreciation within the research community for the value of
model system approaches. The goal would be to address whether model system
(e.g., microcosm) approaches to answering questions in community ecology are
viable. Much of the current controversy concerns the ability of studies of
relatively simple ecological systems (microcosms, mesocosms, controlled
environment facilities, glass house systems, etc.) to inform us about the
workings of much more complex natural systems. Some question whether study
systems of reduced complexity and limited spatial scale, may overlook important
processes (mixing, transport, fragmentation, environmental heterogeneity) that
could drive patterns in nature. Other concerns hinge on whether artificially
assembled systems or models may inadvertently omit critical species or
processes. Other workers are more positive about the approach pointing out that
some model systems, especially those based on microorganisms, permit studies of
multigenerational duration that are essential to evaluate predictions about
population and community dynamics over tractable spatio-temporal dimensions. And
even though such systems are simpler than that seen in nature, this simplicity
allows precise measurement of biological responses that become obscured by
system complexity. This workshop would address and debate the benefits and
limitations of using experimental model systems as a means of understanding
community-level phenomena. A goal would be to more precisely prescribe how and
when model system approaches could and should be used. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;