* 0343825
* RUI: Cortical processing of moving objects by moving observers
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Constance Royden, College of the Holy Cross
* Continuing grant
* Martha Flanders
* 07/31/2008
* USD 297,365.00

A person moving through the world must judge his or her own path of motion,
identify and locate moving objects and judge the direction of motion of those
objects. In this set of studies a computational model of neural processing will
be developed to investigate the mechanisms used by the brain to compute the
properties of a moving object for a moving observer. The computational model
makes use of model neurons, called "motion-opponent" operators, that are based
on the neurons found in an area of the primate visual cortex known as MT. A
computational model has been developed that uses these model neurons to compute
heading and scene layout for a person moving through a stationary scene. This
project will further extend this model to examine how these neurons may be used
by a moving observer to compute the location and direction of motion of a moving
object. The results of the model simulations will be compared with the data
gathered from the experiments with human observers. Human observers will
identify, localize and judge the direction of motion of a moving object in
experiments in which people view computer simulations showing motion through a
scene that contains moving objects. This will enable us to test whether the
model computes the location and direction of motion of a moving object as well
as human observers. This project will give undergraduates an opportunity to
participate in leading-edge scientific research in an interdisciplinary field.
The research will be widely disseminated, and the programs and tools developed
will be made available to others. This information will benefit society in
aiding policy decisions regarding drivers and traffic rules.