* 0343083
* Invariants in Low Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* James Conant, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2006
* USD 64,532.00

DMS-0305012 James Conant

The principal investigator, a low dimensional topologist, is utilizing a tool he
developed with Peter Teichner (called ``grope cobordism") to find topological
applications and interpretations for an important class of invariants called
Vassiliev invariants. In particular he and Teichner are pursuing the question of
whether Vassiliev invariants detect knottedness. The principal investigator is
also looking for more powerful versions of the theory of Vassiliev invariants,
hopefully giving rise to four dimensional (concordance) information. Some of
this is joint with Jacob Mostovoy and Ted Stanford. Working jointly with Matt
Horak and Karen Vogtmann, the principal investigator is studying the mapping
class group of surfaces via a tool developed by Harer, Penner, and elucidated by
Kontsevich (graph homology). Graph homology is very similar to the algebra that
appears in the context of Vassiliev invariants. The principal investigator is
also studying the group of outer automorphisms of a free group via graph
homology. Finally, the principal investigator, working jointly with Ryan Budney,
Kevin Scannell, and Dev Sinha, is pursuing a program for grounding Vassiliev
invariants in classical homotopy theory and differential topology. This program
has already borne fruit in terms of geometric interpretations of the simplest
Vassiliev invariant.

The yoga behind the theory of topological invariants is that they provide
useful, computable topological information. When the number of dimensions is
large, complete answers to topological questions can often be found using
algebraic invariants. In low dimensions, such as 3 and 4, the situation is more
complicated. The invariants still exist, but they are much weaker, and usually
do not give complete answers. On the other hand, there are lots of invariants in
low dimensions which don't have high dimensional analogues, and which are poorly
understood topologically. For example, there is a polynomial you can associate
to any knotted loop (such as a piece of DNA or a singularity in spacetime) which
will not change even if the loop is pushed and pulled into a new shape. This
polynomial, called the Jones polynomial, has a definition which eludes any
topological interpretation and whose topological applications have been modest.
The principal investigator is working to understand precisely the connection of
this polynomial (and other similar objects) with topology, and this will lead to
more effective methods for answering questions in low dimensional topology and
beyond.