* 0343662
* Collaborative Research: Molecular and Chemical Ecology of Freshwater Sponges: Impacts of Sponge Hosts on Symbiotic Microbial Communities
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Julie Olson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2007
* USD 60,269.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Julie Olson at the University of Alabama at
Tuscaloosa and Dr. Robert Thacker at the University of Alabama at Birmingham to
examine microbial communities associated with freshwater sponges. Several
species of freshwater sponges from the Mobile River Basin, Alabama, will be
examined to determine whether they host unique microbial taxa that are not found
in the surrounding riverine environment. A combination of bacterial cultivation
studies and molecular genetic analyses will be employed in this determination.
These investigations will also assess whether bacterial symbionts are host-
specific, and whether freshwater sponges produce chemical compounds that affect
the composition of their internal microbial communities. Crude extracts of
freshwater sponges will be tested in laboratory assays for their ability to
inhibit growth of bacteria isolated from freshwater environments. Active
compounds will be isolated and characterized, with a strong potential for the
identification of novel antibiotic compounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will provide much-needed documentation of the diversity and
abundance of freshwater sponges in the Mobile River Basin, since the ecological
status of these sensitive indicators of water quality is currently unknown.
Freshwater sponges and their symbiotic bacterial communities may provide a model
system to integrate studies of ecology, evolution, and drug discovery. In
addition to providing research opportunities for one graduate student and one
undergraduate student, the investigators will incorporate protocols and results
from these studies into graduate and undergraduate courses. These results will
also be disseminated to the local community to enhance awareness of water
quality issues, including eutrophication, sedimentation, and pollution.
&lt;br/&gt;