* 0343957
* Collaborative Research: Arabidopsis NHX-like Vacuolar Antiporters: Structure and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Mark Yeager, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2008
* USD 255,994.00

Cation/proton antiporters play a major role in pH and Na ion homeostasis of
cells throughout the biological kingdom, from bacteria, algae, fungi and worms
to higher plants and humans. These proteins are integral membrane proteins
residing in the plasma membranes and endomembranes of different cells. Although
the functional analysis of amino acid residues of mammals and bacteria plasma
membrane-bound sodium/proton antiporters is emerging, little is known about the
specific amino acids that are involved in cation/proton exchange, pH sensing,
ion specificity, etc. There is no vacuolar or lysosomal transporter (animal,
yeast or plant) whose topology, structure and mode(s) of action have been
characterized to date. The main purpose of this research is to address this lack
of critical information. The research will use a multidisciplinary approach that
will combine biochemistry, molecular biology, membrane transport, heterologous
expression in yeast and plants, and crystallography. The specific goals are: (i)
Determine the topology of the Arabidopsis vacuolar antiporters AtNHX1 and
AtNHX5; (ii) Structure/functional analysis of AtNHX1 and AtNHX5 in order to gain
insight into key amino acids and regions of the protein responsible for ion
binding, ion selectivity, pH regulation and transport activity; and (iii)
Determine their three-dimensional structure.

Broader impacts: Plant vacuolar cation/proton antiporters have been shown to
play important roles in ion homeostasis and plant development. The ectopic
overexpression of AtNHX1 and AtNHX5 has been shown to confer salt tolerance in
Arabidopsis and other plants. An understanding of the antiporter mode(s) of
action together with the identification of factors affecting its activity will
augment our capability of producing plants with enhanced salt tolerance. These
plants would provide an important tool for crop production in large areas of the
world affected by salinity. In addition, the nature of this project provides
excellent opportunity for interdisciplinary training at all levels from high
school students and teachers to post-doctoral trainees.