* 0343862
* Improving and Assessing the Spatial Ability of Engineering Students Using a CAD Integrated Physical Model Rotator
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Edward O'Brien, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 04/30/2008
* USD 311,110.00

This project will spatial ability as an essential skill in Science, Technology,
Engineering Education. A strong correlation exists between spatial ability and
achievement in the undergraduate study of engineering, chemistry, biology, and
physics. In particular, the ability to correctly visualize three dimensional
objects when they are represented in two dimensions by Computer-Aided Design
(CAD) software or in a part drawing, is a vital spatial skill for current
mechanical engineering, civil technology, and civil engineering students.
Research has shown that the spatial ability of STEM students will improve
through training, for example during a semester long course that uses 3D
computer modeling software and paper and pencil activities and also that
students preferred working simultaneously with real physical objects
when&lt;br/&gt;developing these skills. Furthermore, spatial ability training
over the course of a semester has lead to improved retention in engineering and
technical fields. However, optimal training methods are unknown. For instance,
shorter training, taking significantly less time than an entire semester, may
produce similar results, and the integration of an actual physical model with
commonly used CAD software programs may produce further advances in spatial
ability. Additionally, there is a critical need to identify students who are at-
risk due to poorly developed spatial skills and who should thus be targeted for
enhanced training.&lt;br/&gt; In the proposed research, a computer integrated
Physical Model Rotator (PMR) device will be designed and implemented for use in
spatial ability assessment and training. The PMR device will rotate a real
object in synchronous motion with a virtual model of the same object on the
computer screen. This simple device will assist the user in bridging the
perceptual gap between the 3D object and its 2D representation on
the&lt;br/&gt;computer screen. Device construction will be followed by a study
to assess its effectiveness and to develop optimal training methodology. The
study will include bachelor degree mechanical engineering and civil engineering
students from the University of New Hampshire and associate degree civil
technology students from the Thompson School of Applied Science. Standard
spatial ability tests and selfconcept and self-efficacy questionnaires will be
used for evaluation before and after PMR training. The spatial ability
improvements attained may particularly affect the retention of women, who are
underrepresented in engineering fields. Web-based assessment tools will be
developed which will be used to identify at-risk students who will then be
targeted for enhanced training to improve their spatial ability. This project
may affect both the quality, through improved achievement, and quantity, through
increased retention, of engineering students by improving spatial ability
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;