* 0343439
* Flora of China
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Ihsan Al-Shehbaz, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 07/31/2005
* USD 250,002.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;China has a richer Flora than any other country
in the North Temperate Zone. Although the areas of Europe, continental United
States, and China are somewhat similar, the ratio of species in the three areas
is about 1 to 2 to 3, as China has more than 30,000 species of vascular plants
(or 12% of the world's total), compared with about 20,000 species in the United
States and Canada combined, and about 12,000 species in Europe. The Flora of
China (FOC) is a collaborative international project to publish the first
English language treatment of Chinese plants. All FOC accounts are jointly co-
authored by non-Chinese (mostly American and European) and Chinese scientists.
By the end of 2004, the Project would have published 21 of the 50 volumes of
text and illustrations. All published treatments, illustrations, and maps of FOC
are available electronically on the websites of the Missouri Botanical Garden
(MBG) and Harvard University Herbaria (HUH). The project has eleven centers:
MBG, HUH, California Academy of Sciences, Smithsonian Institution, Royal Botanic
Gardens (Kew, Edinburgh), Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle (Paris), and the
institutes of botany in Beijing, Kunming, Nanjing, and Guangzhou. These
institutions complement each other in their excellent libraries and rich
collections of Chinese plants and, they exchange material and literature.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Study of the FOC is important for understanding modern
floristic relationships between North America and China because numerous species
are found only in these two areas. The Chinese-North American disjunctions
represent remains of a once widespread flora. Knowledge of FOC is essential for
understanding the fossil composition in the Northern Hemisphere because many
genera that are known only from fossil records in North America and Europe are
represented by living members in China. China still heavily depends on timber as
energy sources, and 30% of its timber industry is used for household heating and
cooking. This led to serious deforestation in most of China and has pushed
numerous species to the brink of extinction. Consistent efforts will be made
during the course of FOC to identify threatened and endangered species and those
that have not been collected for some time. The information in FOC is essential
for the proper management of the plant resources of China. The information in
FOC is an important educational resource for use in training students and young
scientists. Students in botany, medicine, horticulture, and other fields will
find FOC a valuable reference. The Project provides training opportunities for
American students and young scientists through visits to Chinese institutions
and field studies. It is also supporting the visits to the United States and
Europe of many Chinese students and young botanists to train and work on FOC
accounts. Finally, China has a higher number of medicinal plants that are
actively traded and used than any other country in the world. About 23% of the
entire Flora has medicinal properties. Only recently, however, has Chinese
herbal medicine received increased attention in the West.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;