* 0343633
* Conserving Energy to Optimize Fecundity in a Derived Host Race of the Goldenrod Gall Fly:    Do Warm Winters Limit Distribution?
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Warren Abrahamson, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2007
* USD 312,000.00

Warren Abrahamson DEB-0343633 Abstract

Conserving Energy to Optimize Fecundity in a Derived Host Race of the Goldenrod
Gall Fly: Do Warm Winters Limit Distribution? While the factors limiting
geographic distributions of insects are poorly understood, climate is certainly
of great importance. The investigators will study the goldenrod gall fly to
examine the role of climate on the geographic range of insects. This fly feeds
during the summer to accumulate fat that supports the fly through the winter, as
well as adult emergence and reproduction in the spring. Flies experiencing
warmer winters use more energy through the winter and thus have lower survival
and produce fewer eggs in spring. The investigators will create a model linking
winter temperatures to energy use and, ultimately, the southern geographic limit
of the gall fly. The model will be applied to predict the northward shift of the
gall fly as climate change occurs. Today and into the next century, global
climate change will influence the geographic range of insects. This could have
serious consequences, especially for agriculture, as pest insects may move into
areas they previously could not inhabit. Before scientists can predict how
insect distributions might shift, they need to understand which factors limit
these distributions. The investigators are testing a model based on winter
energy use, which will assist us in predicting the geographic shifts in insect
distributions as climates shift.