* 0343073
* Symposium:  Evolutionary Innovation; New Orleans, Louisiana; January, 2004
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Stuart Newman, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

0343073&lt;br/&gt;Newman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project described is a
Symposium on Evolutionary Innovation, to be held during the annual meeting of
the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology in New Orleans, Louisiana,
on January 5-9, 2004. The symposium is a thematic continuation of previous
symposia organized by the Division of Evolutionary Developmental Biology of the
Society that also received support from the National Science Foundation. The
goal of this symposium is to highlight a historically important area of
evolutionary developmental biology (EvoDevo) that has received little attention
from developmental and evolutionary biologists during much of the past century:
evolutionary innovation. This is the question of how new phenotypic characters
arise during phylogeny, a phenomenon not adequately addressed by investigations
that focus solely on genetic variation. Recent advances in developmental
biology, however, have brought to the fore mechanisms that can provide the
bases, beyond incremental variation, of evolutionary novelties. The symposium,
which is at the intersection of developmental and evolutionary biology, will be
important for several reasons. First, individual investigators who have worked
independently on the problem of innovation will be brought together to learn
about the range of approaches that have been pursued. Second, the particular
relevance of the topic of innovation for the new field of EvoDevo will be
demonstrated to a wider audience. Third, the integration of empirical results
into an expanded theoretical framework of evolution will be facilitated. Fourth,
an emerging new research agenda pertaining explicitly to the developmental
analysis of the problem of evolutionary innovation will be sharpened and will
thus visibly enlarge the scope of EvoDevo. To achieve these goals, we have
assembled a group of speakers who represent some of the most eminent people in
their fields, who all have addressed the innovation issue in their work. It
includes paleontologists who study the large scale patterns of innovation,
developmental biologists who study specific cases in plants and animals,
molecular biologists who concentrate on the evolution of the regulatory genome,
computational biologists working on the evolution of development, and
evolutionary biologists concerned with the implications of this kind of work for
evolutionary theory. To our knowledge this will be the first comprehensive
symposium on innovation directed to the community of EvoDevo
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;