* 0343440
* CAREER:Superparamagnetic Nanoparticles as Soluble Supports for Recyclable Reagents and Scavengers
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Yong Gao, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 12/31/2008
* USD 469,500.00

Professor Yong Gao of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Southern
Illinois University at Carbondale is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program to pursue a research program that intends to develop the
core/shell iron oxide/organic polymer nanoparticles into novel soluble supports
for recycling industrial homogeneous catalysts, reagents and scavengers. In
addition, such soluble matrixes can be used as alternative supports for the
parallel solution-phase combinatorial synthesis. The education part of this work
will include setting up two research training programs to target students at
different levels. Senior undergraduate and graduate students will be invited to
join a training program through a research collaboration with chemical,
pharmaceutical and biotech companies, which will offer unique opportunities for
students to interact with industrial R&amp;D scientists. An outreach program is
devoted to encouraging junior undergraduate students, especially the ones who
are currently underrepresented in the sciences to participate in chemistry
research and pursue a career in chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this CAREER
award the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the work of Dr.
Yong Gao whose studies can potentially bring more insight into self-assembly
processes, nanomaterials and the reaction kinetics of the solid-phase reactions.
The proposed work could also have broader impacts on the development of
industrial processes, combinatorial syntheses, drug discovery, material
synthesis and environmental protection, and present an excellent vehicle for
training students at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;