* 0343128
* Planning Revisions in the Mechanical Engineering Program at WPI
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Allen Hoffman, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,960.00

The goal of this planning grant to Worcester Polytechnic Institute is to plan
for curriculum changes in the mechanical engineering department that will better
prepare students for professional work in an environment where changes are
rapidly taking place. The new curriculum will preserve and enhance the unique
character of a WPI education, including the emphasis on skills that go beyond
the narrow discipline and the freedom to individualize the curriculum, but also
result in both a structure and material that can be exported to other
institutions. At the highest level the goal of the changes are to achieve a
program that: &lt;br/&gt;o provides solid preparation in the Engineering
Sciences, focused on preparing&lt;br/&gt;students to deal with modern problems
in a modern way, including understanding&lt;br/&gt;how to integrate the material
between disciplines and take a "systems" view of&lt;br/&gt;problems.&lt;br/&gt;o
prepares the graduates for the human aspects of professional life, including
working in teams and communicating with diverse audience and who understand the
need to consider non-technical aspects in engineering decisions.&lt;br/&gt;o is
structured in a way that recognizes that the ME degree is becoming more
interdisciplinary and that ME students will pursue many different career paths
requiring many diverse skills.&lt;br/&gt;o emphasizes the education of the
"technical humanist" who understands the global aspects of engineering and is
both able and interested in applying engineering knowledge to help solve "non-
engineering" problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The actual implementation of these
goals into concrete changes are likely to involve an emphasis on introducing
students to modern manufacturing in the freshman year; A "compact" core of ME
"engineering science" courses designed to meet the ABET-ME requirement; A number
of courses introducing the students to engineering practice, including design
and realization; Opportunities to specialize in at least one area of current
interest through a concentration within the ME department or a minor in another
department; and continuing focus on engaging our students in the broader aspects
of engineering, including a strong emphasis on the WPI global
project.&lt;br/&gt;