* 0343790
* Disordered Critical Quantum Magnetic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Antonio Castro-Neto, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

This award supports fundamental theoretical research and education in the area
of quantum magnetism and the role of disorder in quantum magnets. The cuprate
and heavy-fermion materials have phase transitions between magnetic and non-
magnetic phases. Often, these phase transitions are driven by chemical
substitution that also introduces disorder into the system. Depending on its
nature and strength, disorder can lead to substantial changes in the critical
behavior of magnetic systems. The PI aims to study of the effects of disorder
and electronic dissipation on the critical behavior and collective excitations
of quantum magnetic systems. Contrary to the classical problem with weak
disorder, there is no established criteria for the relevance of disorder in
quantum critical systems. The PI will search for the relevant criteria in
quantum systems. Although there are an enormous number of systems in which
critical behavior is modified by disorder, the PI will focus on the study of two
experimentally relevant systems: the metallic f-electron alloy UCu5-xPdx where
the so-called "non-Fermi liquid" (NFL) behavior has been observed, and the low-
dimensional dilute insulating magnet La2Cu1-z(Zn,Mg)zO4. These systems have
common features: (i) they can be tuned from a magnetically ordered phase to a
paramagnetic phase through a quantum critical point (QCP) via chemical
substitution; (ii) they have an anomalous magnetic behavior close to the QCP;
(iii) they are disordered alloys. The PI will study these systems using modern
field theoretical methods and compare the results with recent experimental data.
These comparisons will serve as a filter for the development of the theory.
Success of this work, involving developing criteria for disordered quantum
magnets and the classification and elucidation of universal behavior, would have
broad and direct impact on the area of quantum magnetism. This work has broader
impacts in education at the graduate and postgraduate levels. This work also
supports efforts to stimulate interest in condensed matter physics by advanced
students belonging to underrepresented groups and outreach to elementary school
students to stimulate the interest of the next generation of scientists. %%%
This award supports fundamental theoretical research and education in the area
of quantum magnetism and the role of disorder in quantum magnets. The PI will
focus on chemical substitution and the effect of the disorder that often results
on the properties of quantum magnets. Chemical substitution enables tuning
through a quantum phase transition. Quantum phase transitions are distinct from
classical phase transitions and are of great fundamental interest. They may
provide a key to understanding unusual properties exhibited by heavy fermion,
high temperature superconductors, and other strongly correlated electron
materials. This proposal is concerned with the role of disorder, how it changes
the properties of the "clean" materials, and the discovery of a criterion that
can indicate when disorder is important. Success of this work would have broad
and direct impact on the area of quantum magnetism and on a wide class of
intriguing and challenging materials. This work has broader impacts in education
at the graduate and postgraduate levels. This work also supports efforts to
stimulate interest in condensed matter physics by advanced students belonging to
underrepresented groups and outreach to elementary school students to stimulate
the interest of the next generation of scientists. ***

