* 0344753
* Control of Embryo Development in Higher Plants
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2004,05/31/2007
* John Harada, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Zhongchi Liu
* 05/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

PI: John J. Harada December 1, 2003 Control of Embryo Development in Higher
Plants Page 3 NSF 0344753

ABSTRACT Embryogenesis describes the period of the plant life cycle during which
a single-celled zygote undergoes a series of differentiation events, resulting
in the formation of a mature and metabolically quiescent embryo. Embryogenesis
in higher plants consists of two conceptually distinct phases. The earliest is
the morphogenesis phase during which the basic body plan of the plant is formed.
This is followed by the maturation phase during which the embryo accumulates
proteins and lipids, induces processes that allow them to withstand desiccation,
and becomes metabolically quiescent. There are two major goals of this proposal.
One objective is to understand how these two embryonic phases are coordinated.
The maturation phase evolved to permit higher plants to make seeds. Given that
lower plants do not undergo maturation or make seeds, it is likely that, in
higher plants, the maturation phase was inserted into a continuous phase of
morphogenesis. The second objective is to define the developmental processes
that allow cells to change their fate and enter into an embryonic mode of
development. A diversity of higher plant cell types can be induced to undergo
embryogenesis. Although it is known that many of these embryos follow similar
morphogenetic pathways, virtually nothing is known of the molecular processes
that allow these cells to initiate embryonic programs. We will address these
problems using Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON2 (LEC2). LEC2 encodes a protein that
regulates the transcription of other genes and is a central regulator of
embryogenesis required for processes that occur during both the morphogenesis
and maturation phases. For example, we have shown that overexpression of the
LEC2 gene activates maturation processes in vegetative and reproductive organs
and induces somatic embryo formation from vegetative cells. This proposal
addresses the overall question of how LEC2 establishes an environment that
activates the maturation program and promotes cellular competence to undergo
somatic embryogenesis. An immediate objective is to identify genes directly
regulated by the LEC2 transcription factor. The spectrum of genes activated and
repressed should provide insight into the regulatory programs directly
controlled by LEC2. A second aim is to identify other embryonic regulators that
work in concert with LEC2 to discover other participants in the regulatory
network controlling embryogenesis. Together, these experimental approaches
should provide new insights into the control of embryo development. In addition
to providing new basic knowledge about higher plant embryogenesis, information
derived from these studies may be relevant to the design of strategies to
manipulate seed development for applied purposes. The educational value of the
project is that it will provide strong training opportunities for undergraduate,
graduate students, and high school students.

