* 0344313
* RUI: A Survey of the Moss Dwelling Tardigrades of China
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Marshall Crosby, Chestnut Hill College
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 07/31/2006
* USD 355,018.00

RUI: A SURVEY OF THE MOSS DWELLING TARDIGRADES OF CHINA&lt;br/&gt;William R.
Miller, Clark Beasley, and Marshall Crosby&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tardigrades or
water bears are small moss dwelling animals that exhibit&lt;br/&gt;cryptobiosis,
the remarkable ability to withstand extreme heat, cold,&lt;br/&gt;pressure and
other severe environmental conditions. Generally less than 1 mm&lt;br/&gt;in
length, the slow moving tardigrade resembles a cute miniature bear
or&lt;br/&gt;caterpillar. They are found on every continent in the moisture
trapped by&lt;br/&gt;moss, lichen, soil, or marine sediments. Their cryptobiotic
life stage has&lt;br/&gt;been defined as the reversible suspension of metabolism
and may last for&lt;br/&gt;decades. While desiccated in cryptobiosis,
tardigrades have been&lt;br/&gt;experimentally subjected to temperatures between
-272 C and +150 C, to 6000&lt;br/&gt;atmospheres of pressure, to complete
vacuum, to high radiation, to common&lt;br/&gt;gases, and still they returned to
an active life stage. These results&lt;br/&gt;kindle both physiological and
evolutionary speculation, including the&lt;br/&gt;possible ability of the animal
to be transported through space. Yet, the&lt;br/&gt;ecological requirements and
life cycles of tardigrades remain little known.&lt;br/&gt;They are suspected of
being carried around the world by the winds, but their&lt;br/&gt;global
distributional patterns are very incomplete. For example, only 47&lt;br/&gt;out
of 950+ described species of tardigrades have been reported as
occurring&lt;br/&gt;in China. By comparison over 500 species are known to occur
upwind in&lt;br/&gt;Europe. Although water bears are often abundant, their
contribution to the&lt;br/&gt;life web of the planet is still a mystery. This
project will develop&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate research teams at Chestnut Hill
College, Philadelphia, PA, and&lt;br/&gt;McMurry University, Abilene, TX. The
teams will conduct a survey of the&lt;br/&gt;tardigrades of China, and over four
years, more than 20 student researchers&lt;br/&gt;will collect, identify and
publish in the project. First, the teams will&lt;br/&gt;extract tardigrades from
the 10,000 moss samples collected by the Missouri&lt;br/&gt;Botanical Garden in
their NSF-funded "Moss Flora of China" project. Second,&lt;br/&gt;the teams will
conduct an expedition to China in collaboration with a member&lt;br/&gt;of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, and collect 2000 additional
samples.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the teams will work at the Academy of Natural
Sciences in&lt;br/&gt;Philadelphia to build and document a voucher
collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The teams will contribute to the understanding
of global diversity by adding&lt;br/&gt;possibly as many as 300 species of
tardigrades to our knowledge of the&lt;br/&gt;Chinese fauna. Our students will
probably discover and describe many new&lt;br/&gt;and endemic species. We will
expand the understanding of the ecological&lt;br/&gt;requirements of the animals
and test several hypotheses relative to local,&lt;br/&gt;regional, and global
distributional and spatial patterns. The data will be&lt;br/&gt;added to the new
Tardigrade Reference Center web site for tardigrade&lt;br/&gt;education and
research. The ultimate product will be a data based, digital,&lt;br/&gt;and
printable catalogue to the Tardigrades of China, complete
with&lt;br/&gt;descriptions, images, identification keys, geo-referencing,
and&lt;br/&gt;bibliography. Such a reference resource will aid taxonomists,
ecologists,&lt;br/&gt;biogeographers, teachers, and students all over the world
who will be able&lt;br/&gt;to use tardigrades in assessment studies, education,
experiments, and&lt;br/&gt;discovery.&lt;br/&gt;