* 0344066
* CAREER: Nuclear RNA Processing, Coilin and Cajal Bodies
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2010
* Michel Bellini, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 03/31/2010
* USD 720,000.00

How molecular events, such as RNA transcription and maturation, influence
nuclear architecture is an important physiological aspect of the eukaryotic cell
nucleus. In recent years this central question promoted renewed interest in the
organization of the nucleus and rediscovery of several discrete nuclear
organelles. The overall objective of this research project is to evaluate the
role of one of these nuclear organelles, the Cajal body (CB), in the regulation
of nuclear RNA processing. The main experimental system used is the nucleus of
Xenopus laevis oocytes, because it provides the unique opportunity to approach
this question with unequaled spatial resolution. Two essential questions will be
addressed: What is the functional relevance of small nuclear ribonucleoprotein
particles (snRNPs) trafficking through CBs, and how does coilin, the signature
protein of CBs, recruit snRNPs to CBs? Coilin will be used as a molecular tool
to prevent the entry of snRNPs into CBs, without affecting the apparent
physiology of the latter. It will allow the investigation in vivo of whether the
flow of snRNPs through CBs is required for some aspects of their maturation
and/or the processing of pre-messenger RNAs. Biochemical fractionations will
also be performed on oocyte extracts to identify the putative nucleoplasmic
proteins and RNAs that interact with coilin. This information will then be used
in various cell systems to define the molecular mechanisms by which coilin, and
the newly identified factors, recruit snRNPs to CBs. Investigation of coilin's
biochemistry and cellular dynamics in relation with snRNPs will provide new
insights into the nuclear roles of CBs. Because of its visual appeal and
accessibility, this research is highly amenable to an active outreach program.
It will be applied at several educational levels by mentoring a high school
biology teacher and class, and introducing many undergraduate and community
college students, including women and minorities, to the wonders of biology and
new imaging technologies.