* 0344126
* Fluid Mechanics of Suction and Ram Feeding in Elasmobranchs.
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Cheryl Wilga, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 02/29/2008
* USD 400,926.00

FLUID MECHANICS OF SUCTION AND RAM FEEDING IN ELASMOBRANCHS&lt;br/&gt;Cheryl
A.D. Wilga, University of Rhode Island&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this research is to quantify the pattern of water flow around and into the
mouths of suction and ram feeding sharks and skates, and to describe the
mechanism by which it was generated. Suction flow into the mouth of a shark is
generated by rapid expansion of the mouth and gill cavities, which pulls the
prey into the mouth. In contrast, ram feeders simply open their mouths wide and
engulf their prey with relatively little expansion. Three species based on the
type of feeding morphology and mechanism exhibited will be investigated in this
study: bamboo sharks, Chiloscyllium plagiosum, are specialized for suction
feeding; little skates, Raja erinacea, are also specialized for suction feeding;
and swellsharks, Cephaloscyllium ventriosum, are specialized ram feeders. Using
these species, previous hypotheses about the anatomy of ram and suction feeding
fishes and the mechanism of suction generation will be tested.&lt;br/&gt;The
specific aims of this research are to: quantify the anatomical characteristics
of the muscular and skeletal elements of the ram and suction feeding sharks and
a suction feeding skate; construct biomechanical models that involve the force
and speed of ram and suction feeding, and output of various muscular and
skeletal elements; quantify cranial and gill movements during feeding using
sonomicrometry; quantify activity patterns of cranial muscles thought to be
involved in the generation of suction using electromyography and video; and
visualize and quantify the patterns of water flow generated by suction and ram
feeding using digital particle image velocimetry (DPIV). The integrative
approach in combining these techniques will allow a fuller understanding of the
relationship between anatomy, feeding mechanism, muscular effort, suction
generation, and water flow.&lt;br/&gt;These objectives include two techniques
that have yet to be applied to studies of shark feeding: sonomicrometry and
DPIV. A major advantage of quantifying movements using sonomicrometry over video
is that continuous quantification of moving structures are recorded even though
structures may not be visible externally or have moved out of camera view. The
relatively new technique of DPIV will provide direct visualization and
quantification of the development of water flow around and into the head of
feeding sharks and skates throughout the feeding event. This has been the goal
of many researchers interested in the feeding mechanism of aquatic vertebrates,
but has been hampered by the lack of accurate quantifiable images of the fluid
moved by the feeder, now available with DPIV. &lt;br/&gt;This project is
significant in that it will improve our understanding of the internal muscular
and kinematic events that generate suction and their relationship to fluid flow.
This study will demonstrate the usefulness of DPIV and sonomicrometry for
studies of other aquatic feeding vertebrates. In addition, the proposed research
will increase our knowledge of feeding mechanisms in vertebrates, and
elasmobranchs in particular, by evaluating the role of anatomy in function.
Finally, the proposed research will contribute to our understanding of feeding
behavior and the evolution of vertebrate musculoskeletal mechanisms. This
research will provide a basis for interpreting the evolution of key
musculoskeletal systems in the most basal of gnathostomes: most agree that
skates have evolved from sharks. This study on the most ancestral of all living
jawed vertebrates will provide the basis for further studies on the flow
mechanics of aquatic feeding in more derived vertebrates, such as bony fishes
and salamanders.&lt;br/&gt;