* 0344387
* Geomagnetic Guidance Mechanisms in Sea Turtles
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Catherine Lohmann, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 02/29/2008
* USD 413,000.00

GEOMAGNETIC GUIDANCE MECHANISMS IN SEA TURTLES&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kenneth
J. Lohmann&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Catherine M. F. Lohmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
long-distance migrations of sea turtles involve some of the most extraordinary
feats of orientation and navigation in the animal kingdom. Hatchling turtles
entering the ocean for the first time immediately establish courses toward the
open sea and steadfastly maintain them long after swimming beyond sight of land.
As the turtles mature, they often follow complex migratory pathways across vast
distances that sometimes span entire ocean basins. Older turtles take up
residence in feeding grounds but periodically migrate long distances to
particular mating and nesting sites, after which many navigate back to the same
feeding sites that they inhabited previously. How sea turtles guide themselves
across vast expanses of seemingly featureless ocean has remained an enduring
mystery of animal behavior.&lt;br/&gt;Although sea turtles, like other animals,
exploit multiple cues in orientation and navigation, growing evidence suggests
that the Earth's magnetic field provides turtles with an important source of
both directional and positional information that can be used in different ways
at different life history stages. As hatchlings, turtles may first use the
Earth's field as a directional cue that enables them to maintain headings as
they migrate out to sea. Later, in the open ocean, regional magnetic fields
apparently function as navigational markers that elicit changes in swimming
direction at crucial geographic boundaries, thus helping young turtles remain
within favorable oceanic regions and progress along the migratory route. Turtles
at this life history stage, however, do not navigate to specific geographic
locations. In contrast, older juveniles take up residence in coastal feeding
grounds, and recent evidence suggests that they acquire a "magnetic map" that
enables them to navigate to specific feeding sites. A similar navigational
ability may explain how adult turtles locate nesting beaches.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research consists of field and laboratory experiments designed to
investigate the role that magnetic cues play in guiding sea turtles at several
different stages of their lives. The work has three major objectives. First, the
researchers will conduct a pivotal field test to determine whether hatchling
turtles that have migrated a few kilometers away from their natal beaches in
Florida rely on magnetic compass orientation to maintain offshore headings, as
has been hypothesized on the basis of extensive laboratory results. Second, the
researchers will investigate how young loggerheads exploit regional magnetic
fields as open-sea navigational markers during their trans-oceanic migration.
Finally, the newly discovered magnetic map sense of juvenile green turtles will
be studied with a view toward determining how turtles exploit magnetic fields to
navigate to coastal locations used as feeding sites. An improved understanding
of how sea turtles guide themselves during transoceanic migrations, and how they
recognize and relocate specific geographic locations of importance to them, will
benefit conservation efforts to save these jeopardized species from extinction.
In addition, the results of the work may provide insights into possible new
methodologies relevant to human navigation. The project will provide research
experience for a number of undergraduate and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;