* 0344389
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Secondary Vein Patterning
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Leslie Sieburth, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Zhongchi Liu
* 02/29/2008
* USD 360,000.00

1. Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of the Sieburth lab
is to understand the molecular basis for vein pattern. Plant veins contain two
specialized tissues, xylem and phloem, which function to transport primarily
water and photosynthetic end products, respectively. These transportation
functions are crucial, as water is typically only directly supplied to roots,
yet is needed throughout the plant, and the fixed carbon endpoints of
photosynthesis are produced only in photosynthetic organs (e.g. leaves), yet are
required by all growing tissues. Thus, appropriate patterning of veins is
required to supply needs for all organs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sieburth lab
uses a genetic approach to identify genes that function in vein patterning. Two
crucial genes that have been identified by these studies are SCARFACE (SFC) and
VARICOSE (VCS). sfc mutants have fragmented secondary veins. Fragmented veins
are visible at the earliest stages of procambium development, indicating a role
for SFC in establishing the pattern of continuous linear secondary veins. In
contrast, vcs mutants have disorganized secondary veins. VCS encodes a WD domain
protein, indicating that it functions in protein-protein interactions. Based on
these and other mutants, a model for secondary vein patterning emphasizing the
links between leaf development and vein pattern has been
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goals for this research project are to
determine the functions of the VCS and SFC genes. VCS expression patterns will
be characterized for normal plants and plants exposed to auxin and polar auxin
transport inhibitors; double mutants between vcs and mutants for auxin transport
components will be characterized; and genes whose products interact with VCS
will be identified. The SFC gene will be identified, and the influence of auxin
will be characterized both using auxin reporter genes and by characterizing
double mutants between sfc and mutant for auxin transport or auxin response
components. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt; By carrying out
this research, the Sieburth lab will provide training to undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral investigators. Undergraduates are typically given
projects to characterize the phenotype of a mutant and to carry out high-
resolution mapping. These are important research tools for these students, many
of whom contemplate a future career in medicine. Dr. Sieburth presents research
talks to undergraduate groups, including specialized small groups of
undergraduate women, and encourages them to seek research opportunities
(especially in her lab). &lt;br/&gt; Undergraduate members of the Sieburth Lab
are urged to attend and present their research at meetings. Three undergraduate
researchers in the Sieburth Lab attended and presented their work at the
National Conference for Undergraduate Researchers (UNCR). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;