* 0344220
* Collaborative Research: Plant Secondary Metabolites as Mediators of Trophic Interactions in a Tropical Forest Community
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Craig Dodson, Colorado Mesa University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/28/2007
* USD 69,685.00

Studying how soil quality, light availability, plant chemistry, and insect
abundance interact is an important component of understanding how ecosystems
function. The rain forest shrub, Piper cenocladum, and its associated insects
have been useful for such studies. Piper cenocladum provides food and shelter
for ants that protect it from insect herbivores, and it produces several toxins
that increase with moderate increases in soil quality and light availability.
Previous research with this system demonstrated that the ants controlled
specialized insect herbivores, while the plant toxins deterred herbivory by
insects with broader diets. Are these results unique to this unusual ant-plant
mutualism or are these common phenomena that can happen in many rain forest
understory plants? As one step towards exploring the generality of previous
results, the proposed study will examine the effects of insects, soil, and light
on a closely related plant species that has not evolved a mutualism with ants.
The proposed collaboration between ecologists and chemists will allow for a
thorough study examining the roles of insect predators versus plant toxins in
controlling insect herbivores. Results from the work will provide valuable
information for ecological theory and guidance for practical decisions in
conservation biology and agriculture.