* 0344369
* Identifying the Effects of Scale on Population Dynamics in Birds: An Individually-Based Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Therese Donovan, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/2006
* USD 30,362.00

In many places throughout the United States, forests are being converted to
housing and other land use types - at the expense of forest wildlife species.
Though a number of studies suggest that habitat fragmentation influences
distribution, and birth, death, and movement rates, none conclusively show that
landscape pattern is the primary influence because fragmented landscapes are
also characterized by poor habitat quality and by low density of breeding
individuals. The goal of this study is to separate local scale habitat quality,
intermediate scale density, and coarse scale landscape pattern by experimentally
increasing density of the Black Throated Blue Warbler (Dendroica caerulescens)
in high and low quality local habitats across a landscape fragmentation
gradient. The results will identify which factors most significantly influence
distribution and persistence of a forest bird species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal advances our understanding of population dynamics in heterogeneous
systems by experimentally testing the mechanisms that drive the patterns and by
tracking individually marked birds over time and space. Funding will support a
female Ph.D. student, and 6 students will be trained in field ornithology.
Partnerships include the Vermont Department of Fish and Wildlife, who will put
the results of this study into action to improve songbird
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;