* 0344654
* Linguistic Symposium on Romance Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Randall Gess, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2005
* USD 16,713.00

The National Science Foundation will support the 34th annual
Linguistic&lt;br/&gt;Symposium on Romance Languages, to be hosted by the
University of Utah's Department of Linguistics, in Salt Lake City, Utah, on
March 12-14, 2004. The symposium will provide a forum for the sharing and
dissemination of cutting-edge scholarly research on theoretical Romance
linguistics, and will foster collaboration between scholars with a variety of
perspectives on the field. The conference will include a special parasession on
"Laboratory Contributions to Romance Linguistics", facilitating intellectual
exchange between theoretical and experimental scientists concerned with language
in general, and the Romance languages in particular. A Public Outreach Lecture
on the Spanish(es) of the Intermountain West will foster a deeper appreciation
not only of the cultural and linguistic diversity of the region, but also of the
cultural and scientific aspects of language, the nature and methods of
scientific inquiry in general, and the potential roles and impacts of such
inquiry in society. The symposium will thus provide an opportunity for non-
linguists to learn about Romance Languages in North America generally, and about
ethnic and linguistic issues of relevance to the Hispanic population of the
Intermountain West in particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Papers to be presented at
the Linguistic Symposium on Romance Language (LSRL) will contribute to the
general conceptual framework of generative grammar. The research presented will
thus serve to further refine the proposed model of the human biological
endowment for language, thereby better characterizing not only the similarities
observed among all individuals and groups but also the differences that
distinguish groups like the Romance languages. The publication of selected and
refereed research from the symposium will ensure a broader impact on the fields
of Romance and general theoretical linguistics. LSRL volumes serve as a vital
resource for researchers of the Romance languages, and for those researching
specific current issues in theoretical linguistics, no matter what their
language(s) of specialization. The long tradition of volumes also provides a
unique and valuable perspective on the fields of Romance scholarship and
theoretical linguistic inquiry over more than three
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;