* 0344723
* Characterization of Novel Importin-Beta Targets in Mitotic Spindle Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2007
* Christiane Wiese, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 10/31/2007
* USD 368,825.00

Temporal and spatial control of microtubule nucleation and organization are
essential for several fundamental cellular processes, including cellular shape
changes, intracellular transport, cell motility, cytoplasmic partitioning during
embryonic development, and the separation of chromosomes during cell division.
Most eukaryotic cells contain an elaborate macromolecular machine, the mitotic
spindle, which ensures that a complete set of chromosomes is distributed to each
subcell during cell division. Mitotic spindle assembly is a highly orchestrated
process that is tightly regulated to avoid mistakes in chromosome segregation
that could lead to developmental defects, cell death, or genomic instability.
Using the Xenopus model system, the PI has identified importin-b and an
interacting protein, maskin, as key proteins in the regulation of mitotic
spindle assembly. This new project continues the PI's research on understanding
the molecular mechanism of how importin-b and maskin regulate mitotic spindle
assembly. The specific questions that will be addressed include: What is the
effect on spindle assembly of altering the levels of maskin? What are the maskin
interacting partner(s)? What is the effect of maskin on microtubules in vitro?
Is there a link between maskin's role in spindle assembly and its role in
translational regulation? How is maskin regulated? What is the role of
importin-b in the regulation of maskin? Results from this project will further
the understanding of the role of maskin and other mitotic spindle assembly
factors in the spatial and temporal regulation of microtubule assembly and
organization during early development in Xenopus, which may also shed light on
the function of other members of this family of proteins. The results will also
further the understanding of how importin-b regulates spindle assembly and will
provide new insights into the role that importin-b and maskin and/or their human
homologs play more generally in the life of a cell or an organism. The project
will provide research training at three levels: undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral.