* 0344907
* Ecological Functional Genomics of Cryptic-Phenotype Hox Gene Knockouts
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Wayne Potts, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 02/28/2007
* USD 280,000.00

One of the great genetic surprises of the last decade is that many genes when
disrupted, reveal no phenotypic change. This is usually interpreted as
functional redundancy among genes. Alternatively, many phenotypes are largely
invisible until the individual is stressed or otherwise challenged by factors
absent from the lab environment. For example, the deleterious effects of
inbreeding in mice are barely detectable using lab assays (10% effect), but when
analyzed under competitive ecological conditions, males show a 500% effect. Hox
genes are transcription factors that direct development of the mammalian body
plan, including adult traits such as mammary glands, behavior, nervous and
immune systems. Targeted mutagenesis has been applied to all 39 members of the
mouse Hox gene family and while most disruption mutants show developmental
defects, it was surprising to discover that some have no detectable phenotypic
change. The ecological competition inherent in the social behavior of
seminatural house mouse populations will be used to determine the performance
(fitness) consequences of three cryptic-phenotype Hox mutants. Any fitness
differences detected allow characterization of the physiological and molecular
basis of the genetic defect to proceed. The long-term goal of this research
program is to continue developing these sensitive ecological methods for
characterizing health and performance defects (phenotypes) in mice. These
methods are important not only for characterizing gene function and complex
phenotypes, but also for evaluating the safety of potential health risks such as
environmental toxins, vaccines, therapeutic agents, among
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;