* 0344732
* Intertemporal Decision Making Under Uncertainty: Experiments with Environmental Applications
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Lisa Anderson, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2005
* USD 37,700.00

Environmental decision-makers are faced with uncertainty from many different
sources. First, we cannot be certain of the effect human decisions will have on
the environment. Second, we do not know how ecological changes will affect human
welfare because the valuation of environmental changes is uncertain. Finally,
decision-makers also face regulatory uncertainty. The intertemporal nature of
environmental decisions adds another layer of complexity. Choices are made
today, but the consequences of those choices are not known until some time in
the future. However, many models of environmental decision-making incorporate
assumptions about intertemporal choice under uncertainty that may not represent
the way individuals truly behave. One particularly problematic assumption is
that all uncertainty can be modeled as risk, that is situations where the
possible outcomes are known and the likelihood of each outcome can be estimated.
In reality, environmental issues often involve ambiguity rather risk, that is
situations where all of the possible outcomes are not known, or where the
probability of each outcome cannot be estimated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because
it is particularly difficult to observe and measure uncertainty faced by
environmental decision-makers, individual behavior cannot easily be studied
using traditional empirical methods. Hence, we will use laboratory experiments
to analyze how the nature of uncertainty, that is whether there is risk or
ambiguity, affects intertemporal decision-making. A better understanding of
individual behavior in the presence of intertemporal uncertainty will help us
build more realistic models of environmental decision-making so that we can
better design policies to protect human health and the environment. The results
of these experiments will be used to develop a research program to analyze
intertemporal decision-making in more complex environmental settings. Moreover,
this research will produce valuable insights into human behavior that can be
applied in all situations where there is intertemporal uncertainty.