* 0344429
* Temporally Regulated MicroRNAs in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Frank Slack, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 12/31/2006
* USD 420,001.00

b. Summary: Intellectual merits: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a novel class of
regulatory RNAs found in plants and animals that regulate gene expression by
binding to complementary sequences in the 3'untranslated region (UTR) of their
target gene mRNAs. lin-4 and let-7, founding members of the miRNA family, are
critical for timing of stage-specific developmental events in C. elegans. Both
are temporally regulated during development and are conserved in higher animals,
including humans. Despite being the best understood miRNAs, little is known
about their mechanism of action, their targets, or how they are temporally
regulated. lin-4 and let-7 RNAs first accumulate during the first and fourth
larval stages, respectively. They act as timing switches to initiate a cascade
of developmental changes in the somatic cells between the L1 and L2 stages
(lin-4), and the L4 and adult stages (let-7). Since the appearance of these
miRNAs correlates with temporal transitions in cell fates, we can distill the
timing of temporal transitions down to the timing of appearance of these miRNAs.
In this work, the Slack laboratory will systematically identify the sequences
and factors important for the temporal up-regulation of lin-4 and let-7. The
lin-4 and let-7 promoters contain elements conserved in other nematode species.
In the case of let-7, a conserved element called the temporal regulatory
enhancer (TRE), which binds an unknown factor called TRE binding factor (TREB),
is required for temporal up-regulation of let-7. This work will identity TREB.
In a similar manner, the regulatory factors that bind to important sequences in
the lin-4 promoter will be identified. This should help define the pathways
upstream of these important miRNAs. Since both are conserved and temporally
regulated in other animals, this work will provide valuable insights into the
regulatory mechanisms used by the miRNA family.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since lin-4
RNA accumulates during the L1 stage and is responsible for the L1/L2 transition,
and let-7 RNA accumulates during the L4 stage and is responsible for the
L4/Adult transition, it seems plausible that additional temporally regulated
miRNAs control other developmental transitions in C. elegans. Over 100 miRNAs,
encoded by mir genes, have been identified in C. elegans, about one third of
which are temporally regulated. This work will focus on the three let-7
homologues, e.g. mir-84, and the lin-4 homologue, mir-237, since they are
temporally regulated and complementary to the 3'UTR of known heterochronic
genes. The Slack laboratory will determine the expression pattern of these
miRNAs by developmental northern blot and mir::gfp fusion technology. In
parallel, this work will also genetically test the developmental role of these
miRNAs by examining the phenotype caused by over-expressing each selected mir
gene in a wild-type background. Knowledge of the expression patterns may
additionally lead the Slack laboratory to identify additional potential miRNA
target genes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Not only will this work aid
in our understanding of the heterochronic pathway in C. elegans, but it will
also provide important information on the regulation and complexity of miRNA
control of developmental timing. In addition, since many of the temporally
regulated miRNAs are conserved in other animals, including humans, this work
should provide important information about their regulation and even their
potential targets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One postdoc, 2 graduate students and a
number of undergraduate students will be trained during the course of this
proposal. The experiments outlined here are mostly accessible to undergrads, and
a small project can be completed within a summer or semester. The Slack lab has
historically provided research opportunities to 3 undergrads a year, and it is
anticipated that this involvement will increase over time, e.g., there are 4
undergrads here this year. Most of these students are from the Yale SURF and
STAR programs, which cater to minorities underrepresented in science. If
interested, they attend the current C. elegans meeting, where they present a
poster and interact with other scientists. Two are second authors on
manuscripts.&lt;br/&gt;