* 0344200
* Analysis of the Regulation of TTG1-dependent Pathways
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Alan Lloyd, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Zhongchi Liu
* 01/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

Summary&lt;br/&gt;The plant epidermis is the plant's environmental contact layer
and, as such, is critical for controlling such processes as gas exchange,
nutrient uptake, interactions with insects and disease organisms, and the
transmission of light. The Arabidopsis protodermal cell differentiates into just
a few epidermal cell types. On the primary root there are just two cell types,
hair and non-hair. On the leaf there are three or four cell types, guard cell,
trichome (and trichome subsidiary cell), and pavement cell. This proposal aims
to study the processes and molecules that lead to epidermal cell fate decision
events and control of the anthocyanin secondary metabolic pathway. The control
of cell fate in the plant epidermis is a valuable model system for understanding
plant developmental processes and eventually understanding how a plant interacts
with its environment. The theme running through this proposal is to understand
the processes that are dependent on a key WD-repeat-containing pleiotropic
epidermal regulator, Transparent Testa Glabra 1 (TTG1). TTG1 controls such
disparate epidermal pathways as shoot trichome and root hair differentiation,
anthocyanin pigment production, and seed coat mucilage cell
differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants triple mutant for three basic-
Helix-Loop-Helix loci, Glabra3, Enhancer of Glabra3, and TT8, phenocopy the ttg1
mutant. These proteins form protein-protein interactions with TTG1, with each
other and with a series of myb elements. When overexpressed, these bHLH proteins
can suppress the ttg1 mutation. Molecular, genetic and biochemical experiments
are proposed to understand the function of the TTG1-associated
complex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific goals for this proposal include:
exploration of the differential roles for GL3, EGL3 and TT8 in trichome
initiation and in activating the anthocyanin pathway; determination of whether
the GL2 and DFR promoters are the direct targets of bHLH/myb transcription
factors and test the hypothesis that promoter discrimination is at the myb
level; continue the characterization of TTG1's role in controlling the activity
of transcription complexes; and work towards identifying all members of
TTG1-associated transcription complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;One way this project will have a broader impact is that the
information resulting from the research proposed here will increase our basic
knowledge of the control of plant epidermal cell-fate decisions and plant
secondary metabolism. Eventual uses of this knowledge include the ability to
manipulate crops to make them better able to cope with diverse environments and
to make them more nutritious for livestock and humans. Another impact will be
that the original research provides opportunities for undergraduate, graduate
and postdoctoral students to learn both technology and creative thinking. A
third impact will be the felt by both Lloyd lab members and students from a
local elementary and the Austin Community College (ACC). For the past six years,
all lab members have participated in judging the yearly science fair at Barton
Hills Elementary. This includes interactive interviews of the elementary
students. For the past three years, the Lloyd lab has taught a lab section for
the Biotechnology program at ACC. This section consists of the ACC students
coming to UT to do a hands-on plant transformation and lab robotics
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;