* 0344749
* Computational Design of Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Tracy Handel, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2005
* USD 340,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop and apply computational methods to
design novel proteins. Protein engineering is a potentially powerful method for
designing functional proteins such as enzymes, biosensors, and binding proteins,
and for improving the properties of natural proteins for industrial
applications. As a demonstration of a practical application, natural proteins
containing disulfide bonds will be redesigned to remove the disulfide bonds.
This may permit the production of these industrially important proteins with
inexpensive bacterial expression systems. Computer-assisted protein design is a
powerful method for testing our understanding of the underlying physical
principles that dictate protein folding and function.

Computer-assisted protein design also has much potential for practical
applications. For example, proteins can be engineered to be specific and
sensitive sensors for molecules such as toxins. Many chemical syntheses require
heating reactants to high temperatures and/or the use of environmentally
damaging solvents and catalysts, and often result in significant side-products.
Artificial enzymes could reduce the energy and toxic waste used and produced by
industrial chemical synthesis, and may also increase the overall yield of
desired enantiomerically specific products. There is much excitement and promise
for the nascent field of nanotechnology. Proteins are the original
nanotechnology. Their ability to adopt specific complex shapes is unmatched by
any other class of compound, natural or artificial. Students will learn how to
write computer programs, develop optimization algorithms, and model the basic
physics of the factors involved in protein folding and binding. They will also
learn a variety of experimental techniques such as gene cloning, protein
expression and purification, biophysical chemical characterization of protein
stabilities and binding affinities, and macromolecular structure determination.
The mix of both experimental and theoretical work required for this project will
offer a unique educational experience.