* 0345729
* Development of "Smart" Scanning Probe Microscopy Instrumentation for Studies of Mineral-Water Interfaces
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Steven Higgins, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2007
* USD 197,208.00

EAR-0345729&lt;br/&gt;Higgins &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument development
project will provide a new "Smart", in-situ, probe microscopy tool for
investigations of mineral-water interfaces. The project objectives are to
improve throughput of useful data, resulting in (1) a 10- to 100-fold increase
in speed of "imaging" with negligible increase in noise levels and (2) the
capability for locating discontinuities along linear or otherwise one-
dimensional surface features. Through a 2-dimensional lateral feedback
mechanism, the instrument will allow for tracking and tracing of surface sites
of high reactivity, thereby eliminating the need for imaging other surface
regions of considerably less importance. The advantages of these developments
are the ability to observe molecular level surface structures responsible for
surface reactivity and to follow the dynamics of these features in real time.
The development of this Step Tracing Scanning Probe Microscope (ST-SPM) will
involve design, construction and testing of the feedback electronics, custom
microscope, and software interface. The initial application of the ST-SPM will
be in the study of carbonate mineralization where surface dynamics will be
directly observed using the improved instrument. The project outcomes will
include development of new instrumentation for advancement of scientific
research and enhanced scientific understanding. The ST-SPM, with its ability to
recognize and follow particular surface features, may also have a large impact
on crystal growth research, micro- and nanoscale device characterization,
molecular electronics, and nanolithographic techniques, thereby enhancing
scientific understanding across a range of interdisciplinary fields.
Commercialization plans include partnering with a leading SPM manufacturer to
evaluate this new technology and if feasible, make it readily
accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;