* 0345385
* Research Frontiers in Appalachian Geology:  A Pre-EARTHSCOPE (USArray) Workshop Proposal
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2004,07/31/2005
* James Read, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 07/31/2005
* USD 33,500.00

EarthScope is the largest earth science initiative to date, designed to make new
and fundamental contributions to our understanding of the 4-D evolution of
continental North America. The U.S.Array component of this initiative "will
dramatically improve the seismic imaging of the continental lithosphere and
deeper mantle, and integrate these images to unresolved issues of continental
structure, evolution and dynamics" (www.Earthscope.org). Towards this vision, it
is necessary that earth science researchers begin the process of critically
evaluating both the status of our current knowledge regarding the 4-D
evolutionary record of continent formation, as well as formulating new questions
that will provide the intellectual challenge for EarthScope. &lt;br/&gt;The
Appalachian orogen within the continental United States provides a geologic
template to explore some of the key questions concerning continental evolution
.For example:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do terranes accrete? What is the
structure in three dimensions of the accreting terrane and its continental
infrastructure? Recognizing structural features in 3-D of deeply eroded terranes
and associated suture zones will allow for a more rigorous interpretation of
both modern accretionary processes, as well as helping discriminate buried
suture zones common in the central United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What is
the effect of lithospheric structure and its deformation history on the
development of volcanic rifted margins within the present passive margin along
the eastern seaboard?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Can seismic data be used effectively
to image buried passive margins, foreland basins and infer basin geometry? Can
new knowledge of terrane accretionary mechanisms or thrust tectonics be related
to presence/absence of long lived Paleozoic depocenters?&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;What lithospheric structure is associated with neotectonic activity
in the Appalachians? A number of destructive mid-plate earthquakes have occurred
in the region, and detailed imaging of the lithosphere holds the potential to
answer fundamental questions about mid-plate
seismicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Can high resolution seismic data become the
most critical discriminant for distinguishing the 1500Ma granite-rhyolite
province of the mid-continent from the 1000 Ma Grenville province assumed to
underlie the Paleozoic Appalachians? It may provide the missing link in
interpreting the origin of many of the igneous/volcanic rocks of the Appalachian
orogen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What are spatial and temporal scales of deformation
across the continent? The Appalachian orogen has been at a plate boundary for
most of its history, and the record of its deformation history/mechanisms can be
recognized into the interior of North America . Developing such geologic
relationships across the continent is an EarthScope
vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will provide an open forum
for all earth scientists to collaboratively formulate new research opportunities
within the EarthScope program, particularly those involving the natural
laboratory provided by the Appalachian Mountains. Another significant objective
of the workshop, in keeping with the broader goals of EarthScope, will be to
initiate the process of developing synoptic databases that identify the current
state of knowledge in the Appalachian orogen. Database scientists will be
invited to facilitate the understanding of the research benefits of analyzing
multidisciplinary data through use of information technology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be widely advertised and open to all, but it is
planned that the attendance be limited to approximately 50 individuals,
including graduate students and agency representatives. This will enable timely
and explicit formulation of science themes that can take advantage of EarthScope
facilities, especially the US Array component. The workshop steering committee
includes A.K.Sinha (Principal Investigator, Virginia Tech, pitlab@vt.edu),
J.F.Read, (Virginia Tech), Art Goldstein (Colgate University) and Larry Brown
(Cornell University), and will oversee the development of the workshop agenda.
They will also prepare the final workshop report for publication in a national
earth science society magazine, as well as for submission to NSF.&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop format will consist of breakouts coupled with plenary sessions. Plenary
sessions will present both current and bold new ideas, and will be followed by a
round of breakouts. The reports from the breakout sessions will lead to a
consensus set of recommendations for advancing research opportunities in the
Appalachian region. These recommendations will constitute the final workshop
report. &lt;br/&gt;