* 0345254
* Foldamer Heterosequences: A Modular Approach to Customizable Molecular Containers
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Jeffrey Moore, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2007
* USD 577,888.00



The focus of this research is the development of methodology for the use of
heterosequences in a modular way to customize the space inside molecular
compartments derived from conformationally ordered oligomers. Statistical
computer aided design (SCAD) algorithms will be developed to help rationally
design both the volume requirements and concave surfaces inside these
compartments complementary to a particular guest, intermediate or transition
state of interest. Improved methods for the preparation of oligomeric phenylene
ethynylene (PE) heterosequences will be developed and new building blocks will
be explored in order to diversify the size, shape and internal functionalization
of compartments created by folded PE heterosequences. Optimized sequences
identified by SCAD will be prepared and binding affinity to
N,N'-diphenylpiperazines will be measured and compared to a set of isomeric
control sequences predicted to have low affinity for this ligand. Building on
these developments, the concept of catalytic reactive sieving is proposed as a
means to achieve size-based selective activation of reactive substrates.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Dr. Jeffrey S. Moore of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and Dr. Jeffrey G. Saven of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Pennsylvania. This collaborative
effort will focus on the development of methodology for the construction
oligomeric sequences that will fold into nanoscale containers. This approach,
guided by theory and experiment, will allow the production of a customized space
inside a molecular compartment and this, in turn will bring about specific
molecular recognition for the eventual purpose of controlling chemical
reactivity. The project has the broader impact of integrating activities in both
theory and experimentation thus providing an excellent setting for the
multidisciplinary training of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students.