* 0345864
* Development of an Integrated Superconducting Gravity Meter Sensor System for Subsurface Water Storage
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2011
* Clark Wilson, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2011
* USD 494,258.00

0345864&lt;br/&gt;Wilson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports acquisition,
development and testing of a field superconducting gravity-meter (FSG) as an
ultra-sensitive system for monitoring fluctuations and trends in subsurface
water storage over long (months) unattended deployment periods. The FSG will be
constructed from a commercially available superconducting gravimeter (GWR, Inc.)
that does not require liquid Helium replenishment and integrated with
meteorological sensors (barometric pressure, temperature, humidity,
precipitation), a field enclosure and appropriate monumentation and deployed at
two test sites in Texas and Arizona (through a subaward to the Univ. of Arizona)
representing varying aquifer types. The monument design will allow for re-
occupation of the sites. Observational experience at these sites will lead to
understanding of appropriate environments for deploying the sensor system and
sampling requirements (minimum duration of gravity observations, spatial
sampling of lateral heterogeneity, and data processing methods). The GWR. Inc.
superconducting gravimeter has a stated sensitivity of 1 part in 10 billion of
the Earth's field in laboratory tests. If similar measurement sensitivity can be
achieved in the field and with appropriate corrections for atmospheric pressure
and humidity, soil moisture, temperature and any changes in vertical
displacement at the instrument site, the PI's hope to detect cm-level changes in
the underlying water table height and together with other independent
hydrological measurements at well characterized sites, should be able to
separation of water storage components between unsaturated and saturated zones,
estimate aquifer parameters such as specific yield, and improve quantification
of hydrologic processes, including infiltration, evapotranspiration, and
recharge. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;