* 0345151
* Theoretical Studies in Gravitation and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Stuart Shapiro, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 05/31/2008
* USD 441,000.00

This reseach spans several problems involving general relativity, the generation
of gravitational radiation, relativistic hydrodynamics, magnetohydrodynamics,
and stellar dynamics. A common thread uniting the different theoretical topics
is the crucial role of gravitation, especially relativistic gravitation. Compact
objects (e.g., black holes and neutron stars) provide the principal forum, and
the dynamics of matter in a strong gravitational field is a major theme. Some of
the topics under investigation include the inspiral and coalescence of binary
neutron stars and black holes, the generation of gravitational waves from
binaries and other promising astrophysical sources of gravitational radiation,
gravitational collapse, the stability of rotating neutron stars and supermassive
stars and the final fate of unstable stars, and the formation of supermassive
black holes now observed in the cores of galaxies and quasars. Most of these
topics represent long-standing, fundamental problems in theoretical physics
requiring large-scale computation for solution.

Hence the approach involves large-scale computations on parallel machines, as
well as analytical modeling. Many of the numerical calculations employ the
state-of-the-art computational resources of the UIUC's National Center for
Supercomputing Applications (NCSA). They comprise both initial value and
evolution computations and treat vacuum spacetimes containing black holes as
well as spacetimes containing realistic matter sources. The research bridges the
fields of general relativity and astrophysics. The results have important
implications for astronomical observations, including those planned for
gravitational wave interferometers, such as LIGO and LISA.

An appreciable portion of the effort is devoted to the education, training and
support of postdoctoral students and a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) team at UIUC in computational astrophysics and relativity. These students
collaborate with the PI on the majority of research. The training that each of
the PI's students receives in large-scale computations and scientific
visualization, as well as in several different areas of theoretical physics and
astrophysics, prepares them to pursue professional careers in a broad range of
scientific and technical fields. The computer algorithms and numerical codes
that are being developed are useful to other groups working in computational
physics and astrophysics. The research and outreach activities of the PI and his
group help promote the use of computers and visualization tools at all levels of
education, as well as the public awareness of some the latest and most exciting
developments in gravitation physics and astrophysics.