* 0345944
* DMUU: Management of Ecosystems in the US Southwest and Related Areas of Northern Mexico in the Context of Complex Uncertainties
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Jonathan Overpeck, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2006
* USD 77,513.00

Climatic, ecological, and societal changes are having major effects on the US
Southwest and northern Mexico, but the complex changes that are occurring are
poorly understood. At the same time, the potential is high for making
significant contributions to improved decision making under conditions of
biophysical and societal uncertainty. Two workshops will be held to address
these issues. Workshop participants will include key researchers from academia,
government, and non-governmental organizations who have expertise in biophysical
and/or societal processes and systems in the region. The first workshop will
identify the major issues and select themes for a set of papers to be written by
a subgroup of workshop participants. These papers will summarize the status of
scientific knowledge in the specified thematic areas and will provide
information about crucial research and decision-support needs. A proceedings
document also will be published that summarizes the workshop. The second
workshop will review the papers produced from the first workshop and prioritize
a series of viable research, education, and outreach activities. Summary
documents from the second workshop will be published on the web, as well as a
bibliography of key publications and other information
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshops will address a critical issue in the
region, how to harmonize people's disparate activities and aspirations in the
context of multiple stressors and high levels of uncertainty about nature and
implications of biophysical and societal changes occurring in the area.
Biophysical and societal systems in the US Southwest, which stretch across the
border into northern Mexico, are showing the results of these stressors in many
ways. A marked increase in average annual temperatures over more than a decade
is clearly discernible in the instrumental climate record, and paleo records
indicate that the steepness of the increase is virtually unprecedented. At the
same time, the region features a high degree of climatic variability, most
crucially with regard to variations in precipitation and related availability of
water resources over space and from one season, year, and decade to the next.
These biophysical trends are accompanied by rapid population growth in the
region, urban sprawl, exurban development of second and third homes, pressure on
Native American lands and on cultural/religious sites important to them and
other cultural groups in the area, high levels of activity and economic
dependency on tourism in the most beautiful areas of the region, military
activities, and transboundary flows of drug traffickers and illegal migrants.
Solving these problems requires high levels of scientific interdisciplinarity,
development of effective partnerships with stakeholders, and commitment to
developing decision support tools that are both usable and useful for addressing
the many issues that exist. The two workshops provide a jumping-off point for
achieving these ends. This developmental award was supported as part of the
Fiscal Year 2003 Human and Social Dynamics priority area special competition on
Decision Making Under Uncertainty (DMUU).