* 0345570
* Cold Spring Harbor Conference on Evolution of Developmental Diversity, Spring 2004
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/28/2005
* USD 16,763.00

In the last few years the fields of evolution and molecular developmental
genetics have intersected to produce new results and insights which have
generated much current excitement. It is now clear that the very few primary
model organisms that are currently utilized in biomedical research are not
sufficient to let us understand the tremendous diversity of animal and plant
life on earth. Understanding the generation of this diversity, honed over eons
of evolution, will most likely provide important insights into the mechanisms
that cause organ variation and the evolution of species. The goal of the
proposed Cold Spring Harbor Conference on Evolution of Developmental Diversity
to be held March 31 to April 4, 2004 is to bring together a broad range of
scientists studying various molecular and genetic aspects of animal and plant
biology with a strong emphasis on morphological and functional comparisons of
organismal diversity and evolution. This conference is expected to attract
approximately 250 scientists from around the world. This biannual meeting will
provide a format for the exchange of ideas and information among both junior and
senior scientists for the discussion of the latest research findings and
technical advances towards the study of the evolution of developmental
mechanisms that diversify animals and plants, and fosters scientific
collaboration. Eight topics (eight sessions) have been selected for detailed
discussion as a reflection of the most advanced and interesting areas of study
in the evolution and development field (Evolution of Gene Regulation, Genetics I
and II, Genomics, Axial Pattern, Segmentation and Regionalization,
Organogenesis: Morphological Innovation, Speciation). Two established scientists
per session are invited to present a relatively global perspective of their work
(one of which will also act as the chairperson for that session), while the
remainder of the talks will be selected from the submitted abstracts. Other
participants are able to present their research in poster sessions to be held
during the conference. This format allows the participation of many junior
scientists, giving them a format to present their latest work.