* 0345214
* International Perspectives of Geo-Hydrological and Geo-Mechanical Research at a Proposed U.S. Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory (DUSEL)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Peter Smeallie, American Rock Mechanics Association Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 08/31/2004
* USD 49,715.00

The establishment of a Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory
(DUSEL) is currently under consideration. The US still lacks access to a
comprehensive long-term deep underground laboratory. In the fields of geo-
hydrology and geo-mechanics, significant gains have resulted from in situ
research conducted in existing underground facilities despite the limited
longevity of these facilities and the absence of broad access across the
research community.

In September 2002, a workshop was held to identify research areas of value to
the nation that could be conducted at a DUSEL. The American Rock Mechanics
Association (ARMA) Foundation contributed to this project by holding a
preliminary workshop to identify research needs for geo-engineering and rock
mechanics for consideration at the NUSL workshop. This project, International
Perspectives of Geo-Hydrological and Geo-Mechanical Research at a Proposed U.S.
Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory, is to conduct an
international workshop designed to augment and refine the research agenda. The
workshop, to be held in cooperation with the South African Institute of Mining
and Metallurgy, will be convened at the 10 th quadrennial congress of the
International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM) in September 2003 in South
Africa. The workshop will invite practitioner experts from underground research
laboratories around the world. The goals are to identify research needs and
opportunities from an international perspective and to refine the scope of
proposed activities at a proposed deep underground research laboratory that will
complement current international activities, rather than duplicate them.

Current views for the conduct of activities at DUSEL will be presented at the
workshop by the US delegates. International delegates will present overviews of
current research needs and activities from the variety of underground research
facilities around the world. The outcome of this one-day caucus will be
synthesized into a final report and made available on the ARMA Web site.

This project will advance the field of geo-engineering and rock mechanics by
identifying for consideration needed research to be undertaken at the DUSEL. An
international perspective will be obtained through participation of researchers
from other underground research facilities around the world. International
collaboration among researchers from the geo-engineering and geo-sciences areas
will advance knowledge and understanding across disciplines.

This project, put in the broader context of the realization of a DUSEL, will
give unprecedented opportunities for educators, students, and researchers to
obtain field experiences and to carry out complex projects under field
conditions. Results of research carried out at the DUSEL could potentially have
direct impacts on issues of national importance through a better understanding
of how rock behaves. These areas include resource exploration and production,
national security issues, environmental considerations, and civil infrastructure
systems through advances in tunneling and excavation technologies.