* 0345113
* Observational Studies
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Paul Rosenbaum, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2007
* USD 219,957.00

An observational study is an empirical investigation of the effects of a
treatment, policy, intervention or exposure that was not randomly assigned to
subjects, as it would be in a randomized experiment. The central difficulty in
an observational study is that, because treatments were not randomly assigned,
the subjects receiving different treatments may not be comparable, so differing
outcomes after treatment may not be effects caused by the treatment. If the
treatment groups differ before treatment in ways that have been measured, there
is an overt bias that often can be removed by adjustments, such as matching.
Often there is concern that treatment groups differed before treatment in ways
that were not measured, that is, concern about hidden biases. Hidden biases
cannot generally be removed by adjustments and must be addressed by other means.
Statistical methodology for observational studies concerns adjustments for overt
biases and methods of design and analysis to address hidden biases. Building
upon earlier work funded by NSF, the current project will extend statistical
methods for overt and hidden biases.

Observational, or nonexperimental, studies of treatment effects are common in
most fields that study people, because harmful or unwanted treatments cannot be
imposed on human subjects for experimental purposes. They are common in studies
of public health, public policy, medicine and economics. New statistical methods
will be developed for use in observational studies, and they will be illustrated
with examples from labor economics, genetic epidemiology, injury prevention, and
cancer treatment for children.