* 0345666
* RUI: fMRI Investigation of the Role of Motor Processes in Mental Rotation
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Maryjane Wraga, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 05/31/2006
* USD 75,000.00

Mental rotation enables one to participate in a variety of spatial reasoning
tasks, from solving geometry problems to reading maps to learning how to dance.
Much of the empirical work in the field has focused on mental rotation of
objects. However, within the last few decades, researchers have begun to examine
other classes of mental rotation, including mental rotation of body parts and of
one's own body. Researchers also have begun using neuroimaging techniques to
explore whether these different mental transformations are subserved by unique
neural mechanisms. One contentious finding within the cognitive neuroscience
literature is that some classes of mental rotation have been shown to activate
frontal motor areas of the brain, while others have not. For example,
researchers have found primary motor cortex and premotor activation in some
imagined object rotation tasks, presumably because such tasks allow people to
anticipate what they would see if they had manipulated a physical object. In
contrast, the task of mental rotation of one's body has been shown to elicit no
activation in frontal motor areas, despite its explicit link to body movement.
With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Maryjane Wraga's research
focuses on this question this by examining the role of motor processing within a
wider range of mental rotation tasks than previously has been studied. The
research will be conducted using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),
which will allow for direct comparisons of specific brain regions of interest
across experimental conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this project are to provide opportunities for undergraduate women at Smith
College to become involved in the field of cognitive neuroscience. Students will
gain hands-on experience in every aspect of fMRI experimentation, from designing
and programming studies, to running participants in the fMRI scanner, to
analyzing and interpreting results. Such opportunities will facilitate
participation of an underrepresented group, women, within the field of cognitive
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;