* 0345307
* Nanoscale Investigation of Microbial Role in Promoting the Smectite to Illite Transformation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Jinwook Kim, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2008
* USD 253,630.00

Smectite-illite interstratified clay minerals are ubiquitous in sedimentary
basins. The smectite to illite transformation is linked to the maturation,
migration and trapping of hydrocarbons, the development of pore pressures, rock
cementation and porosity reduction, and pore water chemistry. Despite the
importance of the reaction, considerable ambiguity exists as to how smectite is
converted to illite as a function of geological variables. It is well known that
the smectite to illite transformation is approximately concomitant with
maturation of petroleum during sediment diagenesis, but the relationship between
organic matter and clay mineral reactions has yet to be rigorously established.
We hypothesize that the linkage is in the role that microorganisms play, in
regards to organic matter oxidation coupled to metal reduction, in the smectite
to illite transformation. Sufficient evidence has accumulated that abundant
(~106 cells/g) and active microbes and clay minerals co-exist in argillaceous
rocks. Metal-reducing microbes have been discovered at burial depths of ~3000
meters, and at up to 100oC. These conditions bracket those commonly found during
clay diagenesis. Viable microbes (104-105 cells/g) also exist in organic-rich
shales, and their abundance may be higher at the onset of clay diagenesis or in
those shales under the .overpressure. condition. Both field and laboratory
evidence suggest the important role of microbes in clay mineral reactions, but
the functional linkage between microbial activity and clay mineral
transformations is poorly understood. Our recent investigations have shown that
microbes can transform nontronite (a smectite variety) to illite at room
temperature in one month. This reaction typically requires much higher
temperatures over extended time periods in absence of microbial activity. We
propose to investigate the effects of microbes on the smectite to illite
transformation, using unique and powerful analytical tools including
environmental cell transmission electron microscopy (EC-TEM) and electron energy
loss spectroscopy (EELS). Specifically, the goals of this three-year proposal
are to 1) investigate the effects of subsurface bacteria on the extent and rate
of the smectite to illite transformation under diagenetic conditions; 2)
determine mechanisms of the transformation process; 3) explore how microbes
affect kinetics of the transformation. We hypothesize that microorganisms
promote the smectite to illite transformation via 1) reduction of structural
Fe(III) in smectite; 2) production of organic acids. Fe(III)-containing smectite
(0.5-4.2 mmol Fe3+/g) is common in natural environments. To simulate smectite-
illite diagenesis, the effects of bacterial Fe(III)-reduction will be studied at
three different temperatures (30oC, 61oC, and 90oC) using mesophilic,
thermophilic and hyperthermophilic, Fe(III) reducing bacteria (S. putrefaciens,
G. metallireducens, Bacillus infernus, Geothermobacterium ferrireducens). A
variety of natural smectite samples will be used. Reduction experiments will be
designed under well-controlled conditions to mimic diagenesis. Reduction
products will be analyzed by a variety of techniques, including chemical
extraction, XRD, EC-TEM, EELS, Mossbauer spectroscopy and oxygen isotopes.
Attempts will be made to integrate microbial effects into smectite to illite
transformation models, which will have major implications for organic matter
maturation and petroleum migration. By the end of this project, we will have
answered the following questions: 1) do microbes accelerate the smectite to
illite transformation under diagenetic conditions? 2) how do they achieve this
acceleration? 3) what are mechanisms for the smectite to illite reaction in
presence of bacteria? Broader impacts. The proposed work will be carried out
with collaborations between national labs and university, and will involve three
PI.s and their 3 students for three years. Students will work in both academic
institution and governmental labs to gain unique research experiences.
Workshops, web pages, course materials, newsletters and museum exhibits will be
developed to efficiently and broadly disseminate research results. Major efforts
will be made to deliver lectures to those institutions without PhD program and
underrepresented, as well as K-12 schools.