* 0345800
* DMUU: Integrating Methods and Identifying Priorities
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2004,11/30/2007
* Thomas Dietz, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 11/30/2007
* USD 84,333.00

Climate change challenges our ability to make decisions under uncertainty. The
increasing ability to make predictions of key meteorological variables as much
as two years in advance adds to the challenge. While forecasts of future
conditions are fraught with uncertainty, they have increasing predictive
ability. A number of tools and methods have been developed in various
disciplines to aid in making decisions under uncertainty, including risk
analysis, environmental valuation, institutional design, and public
participation. But it is not clear how most of these can be applied to typical
decisions made in the face of uncertainty about climate change; nor is it clear
how well these tools make use of existing scientific
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will hold two workshops and a
public symposium that will bring together scientists expert on climate change
impacts, researchers who have worked on decision making methods and tools, and
those who have to make critical decisions in the face of uncertainty about
climate change. The goals of the project are to inform scientists about the
kinds of research that will help decision makers deal with climate change and to
inform decision makers about the knowledge, tools, and methods that already
exist and may be of help to them. The project will result in an integration and
synthesis of literatures on decision support methods that are not well
integrated at this point. The project also will produce both an agenda for
future research and guidance for decision makers about the strengths and
weaknesses of existing tools. Products from the workshops will be disseminated
to the broader community. This developmental award was supported as part of the
Fiscal Year 2003 Human and Social Dynamics priority area special competition on
Decision Making Under Uncertainty (DMUU).