* 0345194
* CONNtinue
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Richard Cole, Connecticut Academy for Education
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2004
* USD 199,859.00

Through an established partnership between the Connecticut (CT) Academy for
Education in Mathematics, Science, and Technology, and Danbury Public Schools
and Stamford Public Schools, CT intends to directly impact 4,020 students and
205 teachers to improve the teaching and learning of science.

Goals: CONNtinue will expand the capacity of two Connecticut urban public school
districts to: Make regular use of student achievement information to improve
standards-based curricula materials, instructional strategies, and professional
development activities; and Continuously improve classroom teachers' content
knowledge and instructional skills to maximize each student's mathematics and
science achievement.

Intellectual Merit: Aiming to bring about change by impacting schools as the
unit of change, CT intends to involve classroom teachers, institution of higher
education faculty, and educational administrators in improving science and
mathematics for all students. Leading research studies and reports on
educational policy and practice will guide activities and events planned by CT
to assist the districts. Broad Impact: The scope of work engages school district
leaders, school principals, and teams of teachers in the use of student
performance data, is driven by measurable goals, and is executed with standards-
based guides, strategies, and program evaluation. CT will work to provide a
student achievement model that can be replicated aimed at producing system-wide
improvements in other urban school districts throughout CT and beyond. The
project's process and results will be disseminated through state conferences, a
project website, and other websites within the public domain.

