* 0345386
* Novel Functions of the Sm Complex in Early Development
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Thomas Evans, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 01/31/2008
* USD 405,000.00

Project Summary

The Sm complex is an RNA-binding component of the splicesome, the machine that
catalyzes mRNA splicing. However, recent studies suggest that Sm family proteins
may have several diverse functions in eukaryotic cells. The Evans lab has
discovered a new function for the Sm complex in early development of the
nematode C. elegans. In the C. elegans embryo, the Sm proteins regulate germ
cell specification by a process that is distinct from mRNA splicing. To explore
the mechanisms of Sm function, the P.I. and colleagues will study how the Sm
complex controls the expression of proteins that localize to germ cell
precursors during early embryogenesis. Interactions between the Sm complex and
RNAs known to control germ cell formation will be investigated. The Sm complex
is likely to mediate a new mode of RNA regulation that influences a variety of
cell and developmental processes. Therefore, these studies will likely yield new
insights into novel mechanisms of gene regulation.

Broader Impacts of the proposed project: (1) Education and learning: This
project will provide science training for graduate students and forms the core
of their PhD theses. Students will present findings at local and international
meetings as part of their education. The P.I.'s lab also provides annual tours
for local elementary and high school students studying science. (2)
Participation of underrepresented groups: The P.I. is a member of two graduate
programs committed to recruitment of underrepresented groups, including a
minority student currently in the P.I.'s lab. (3) Dissemination of results:
Results will be published in broad based scientific journals and presented at
international meetings. In addition, the project will be presented at an annual
science fair designed to demonstrate U.C.H.S.C research to the general public.
(4) Enhancement of research infrastructure: The requested equipment will be
openly available for use by other labs. The P.I. regularly consults with and
provides reagents for researchers in other fields who want to study their genes
in C. elegans. (5) Benefits to society: This project aims to understand novel
mechanisms of RNA regulation, which may ultimately lead to new tools for the
detection or control of genes important for human, animal, and plant disease.