* 0345433
* Theoretical Stable Isotope Geochemistry of Alkaline-Earth Elements
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Edwin Schauble, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2008
* USD 247,951.00

Recent advances in mass-spectrometric techniques and instrumentation have
enabled accurate stable isotope measurements of many heavy elements. In order to
realize the full potential of these new measurements, it is important to develop
a thorough understanding of the basic mechanisms causing heavy-element isotopic
fractionation through careful theoretical studies and laboratory experiments.
Here, a systematic theoretical exploration of the equilibrium stable isotope
geochemistry of the alkaline-earth elements (magnesium, calcium, strontium, and
barium) is proposed. All of the elements in the proposed field of study lack
systematic theoretical characterization, and the role of equilibrium isotopic
fractionations in producing observed isotope abundance variations is not known.
These elements are logical choices because of their relevance to geology and
low-temperature geochemistry, because major uncertainties exist regarding the
underlying causes of observed fractionations, and because of the relative ease
with which they can be modeled. Studies will focus on materials that are
subjects of current and likely future isotope measurements, including
carbonates, silicates, and aqueous species. The alkaline-earth elements all have
relatively simple electronic structures and a single dominant oxidation state,
making them ideal test cases for determining the effects of coordination number
and hydration on isotopic fractionations. Because of their simple electronic
structures, these elements are amenable to many theoretical treatments,
particularly ab initio modeling of crystals using density functional
perturbation theory (DFPT). Ab initio computational chemistry and empirical
force-fields will be used to estimate the vibrational frequencies of
isotopically substituted crystals, molecules, and solvated clusters, providing
the necessary input data for quantum-statistical calculations of equilibrium
stable isotope fractionation factors. Materials with well known vibrational
spectra, like MgO and CaO, will also be modeled to check whether the calculated
vibrational properties are reasonable and accurate. Vibrational models generated
in this project will also become the nucleus of an animated mineral vibration
database for use in mineralogy instruction. A successful research program
devoted to these elements will provide a basic geochemical framework for
designing and interpreting stable isotope measurements in a wide variety of
natural samples. NSF Merit Review Criteria: Intellectual Merit: The proposed
research will be of broad interest in studies of the paleoclimate records
preserved in mineral precipitates, in searching for robust biosignatures in
minerals and biological molecules, in tracing alteration processes in the
seafloor and their contributions to global geochemical cycles in the mantle and
subduction zones, and in meteoritic studies of the origin of the solar system.
The proposed research is also relevant to basic studies in stable-isotope
geochemistry, because so little is known about the natural isotopic
fractionations of elements heavier than sulfur, and in particular for very heavy
elements like barium and strontium. The project will also adapt ab initio
techniques from computational chemistry and materials science that will be
broadly applicable to theoretical studies of the stable isotope geochemistry of
other main-group elements like silicon, sulfur and lithium. The PI is highly
qualified to perform the proposed research, having previously modeled stable
isotope fractionations of iron, chlorine, and chromium in molecules, crystals
and aqueous complexes. Broader Impacts: This project will advance graduate
education by supporting thesis research. Undergraduate education will also be
enhanced through hands-on summer research opportunities. The proposed work
involves the adaptation of modeling techniques from computational chemistry and
materials science, and will partially support a computer modeling laboratory,
improving the infrastructure for research and interdisciplinary cross-
fertilization. The online database of mineral vibrations is intended to advance
mineralogical research and education, particularly in the areas of infrared and
Raman spectroscopy, thermodynamics and heat transfer, and displacive phase
transformations.