* 0345750
* Diverse Fossil Floras from the Paleogene of Patagonia, Argentina: Origins of High Plant and Insect Diversity in South America
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Nestor Cuneo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2009
* USD 525,000.00

0345750&lt;br/&gt;Wilf&lt;br/&gt;Tropical South America has the highest species
richness in the world for many groups of terrestrial plants and animals, making
this region a top priority for conservation. However, the history of this
exceptional biodiversity is poorly understood because rock exposures in northern
South America are limited by forest cover and deep weathering. Paleocene and
early Eocene fossil floras from middle latitudes of Patagonia are invaluable
resources for addressing this problem. Well exposed in modern desert outcrops,
these assemblages represent humid subtropical vegetation from the southern
reaches of the expanded Neotropical forests that existed during a globally warm
time period. One of the most spectacular Patagonian floras comes from Laguna del
Hunco (LH), an early Eocene (52 million years ago) site in Chubut Province,
Argentina with outstanding preservation equal to the most famous North American
Eocene floras, such as Florissant and Republic. In earlier efforts, the
investigators recovered more than 155 plant species from fewer than 5,000
specimens. Fewer than 25% of these entities were previously known. Adjusted for
sample size, this significantly exceeds the richness of Eocene floras from any
other region, yet the potential exists for many more species to be found. On
these fossil plants is preserved the highest diversity of well-preserved,
insect-mediated leaf damage of any Cenozoic flora, including diverse and
previously unrecorded examples of specialized feeding such as galls and mines.
These early results support the hypothesis that South American hyperdiversity,
usually attributed to relatively recent events of the last 2-10 million years,
may have a considerably more ancient history. This study will examine floral
diversity, plant and insect systematics, and plant-insect associations at LH and
two other floras, one Eocene (Rio Pichileufu, Rio Negro Province) and one
Paleocene (Salamanca, Chubut Province). Major questions to be addressed include:
(1) Did high plant and insect-feeding diversity exist over a broad area of
Paleogene Patagonia? (2) Was there a diversification of plants and insects from
the Paleocene to the Eocene with global warming as seen elsewhere in the world?
(3) What are the precise Neotropical and "Australasian" affinities of the floras
and their insect herbivores, and what is the importance of these affinities for
understanding modern biotas?&lt;br/&gt; The work is expected to have several
beneficial impacts with regard to student training, international collaboration,
and dissemination of results. Student participation will be central to all
phases of the research from field to publication, including the major
involvement of two female and one male Argentine doctoral students. The project
is an international collaboration among diverse U.S. and Argentine specialists
at a time of reduced scientific opportunity in Argentina. Primary inventory data
will be permanently available to the research community through monographic
treatments, Internet publication of data sets, and the deposition of specimens
in the Argentine host repository. Illumination of the deep history of South
American biodiversity is expected to have impacts on research and conservation
efforts in South America today.&lt;br/&gt;