* 0345693
* Enamel Maturation in Mammals and Implications for Stable Isotope Analysis for Diet and Climate Signals
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Thure Cerling, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2007
* USD 181,984.00

The focus of this project is to study how temporal changes in the isotopic
&lt;br/&gt;composition of mammals are recorded in developing tooth enamel. Teeth
form &lt;br/&gt;progressively from crown to root and act as recorders of
seasonal isotopic variation in the &lt;br/&gt;animal blood bicarbonate
reservoir. This variation is in turn related to seasonal variations
&lt;br/&gt;in climate, food availability, migration, ecosystem interactions, and
other environmental &lt;br/&gt;conditions. Isotopic signals are preserved in
fossil tooth enamel, so teeth are important &lt;br/&gt;archives of ancient
seasonality and environmental variation on short time scales. &lt;br/&gt;Despite
the wide usage of intra-tooth isotope approaches, there is considerable
&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty as to how the measured signals relate to actual signals
of variation within the &lt;br/&gt;animal reservoir. This uncertainty stems from
inadequate knowledge of the temporal and &lt;br/&gt;spatial patterns of enamel
mineral deposition and accumulation in teeth that are &lt;br/&gt;commonly
studied. Although promising, the intra-tooth isotope method will remain
&lt;br/&gt;compromised as a paleoindicator until these uncertainties are
addressed. &lt;br/&gt;We will use micro-computed tomography (microCT) to
investigate the temporal &lt;br/&gt;and spatial pattern of enamel mineral
accumulation in developing teeth of animals of &lt;br/&gt;various ages from a
range of species. Maturation parameters determined from the &lt;br/&gt;microCT
data will enable development of tooth- and species-specific models that
&lt;br/&gt;describe how primary input signals are recorded as intra-tooth
isotopic profiles. Inverse &lt;br/&gt;models will be developed that allow
estimates of primary input signals based on &lt;br/&gt;measured isotope data and
knowledge of maturation parameters. Comparison between &lt;br/&gt;model results
and known isotopic changes in the animals studied will allow direct
&lt;br/&gt;evaluation of the accuracy of these models. &lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
this study will provide maturation parameters for dentitions of
&lt;br/&gt;Alpaca (alpaca), Capra (goat), and Bos (cow). These animals underwent
strictly &lt;br/&gt;controlled isotopic changes during tooth formation, and
therefore this study will show the &lt;br/&gt;extent to which forward and
inverse models based on maturation parameters allow for
&lt;br/&gt;reconstruction of primary input signals. These species span a range
of diversity within &lt;br/&gt;the artiodactyla and will show whether general
models can be applied to many species &lt;br/&gt;within this order.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. This study will significantly increase the
understanding of a &lt;br/&gt;basic tool used by a wide variety of researchers.
The microCT, forward modeling, and &lt;br/&gt;inversion modeling methods will be
of immediate use to researchers using the intra-tooth &lt;br/&gt;isotope method.
Forward and inverse modeling learned by other researchers as a result of
&lt;br/&gt;this study will broaden scientific background and benefit future
studies. Advances in the &lt;br/&gt;intra-tooth method owing to this study will
help advance our understanding of ancient &lt;br/&gt;human environments and
cultures, behavior and ecosystem context of extinct species, and
&lt;br/&gt;ancient climates and environments. &lt;br/&gt; Broader impact. This
research will form the Ph.D dissertation of Benjamin &lt;br/&gt;Passey. He will
be responsible for the design, execution, and dissemination of this
&lt;br/&gt;research and will learn valuable skills in project management,
laboratory practice, data &lt;br/&gt;evaluation, and professional communication.
An undergraduate student will be involved &lt;br/&gt;in laboratory aspects of
this project. This person will gain invaluable first-hand research
&lt;br/&gt;experience and have opportunities to attend professional meetings to
present results&lt;br/&gt;