* 0345922
* The cerebellar role in olfaction
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Noam Sobel, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 03/31/2005
* USD 100,001.00



This research addresses a fundamental aspect of sensory processing, that is, the
active nature of sensation. The term "sensation" itself appears inherently
passive, and conjures images of sensory stimuli projected onto the sensory
surface, as if it were a photodiode, microphone, or chemically sensitive
polymer. The sensing mammal, however, actively seeks sensory input, and nowhere
is this more evident than in olfaction, where the sensory search presents itself
as a clearly noticeable sniff. This sniff is constantly and accurately modulated
in accordance with the sensory input -- a strong odor is greeted with a weak
sniff and a weak odor is greeted with a strong sniff. Recently, whole-brain
imaging techniques have opened up a new look at the olfactory system. Although
the cerebellum has never been considered as part of the olfactory system, nearly
every olfaction imaging study to date has reported odorant-induced activity in
the cerebellum in both humans and monkeys. The role of the cerebellum in
olfaction, however, remains unknown. With NSF funding, Dr. Sobel is testing the
hypothesis that the role of the cerebellum in olfaction is control of the
olfactomotor response. Specifically, sniffs are modulated in accordance to
odorant content: high intensity odorants are met with small sniffs, and low
intensity odorants are met with large sniffs. This implies a neural feedback
mechanism that measures odorant intensity and modulates sniff vigor accordingly.
It is proposed that control of this mechanism is the cerebellar role in
olfaction. To test this two different methods are being applied, 1)
psychophysics in patients with cerebellar lesions, and 2) functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). In cerebellar lesion patients, the question will be
tested whether the well-documented inverse relation between odorant intensity
and sniff volume breaks down. This would be predicted if the cerebellum indeed
controls the olfactomotor response. With fMRI, the neural path from the nose to
the cerebellum will be probed, specifically whether this link is ipsilateral or
contralateral. This effort promises to elucidate both a fundamental component of
olfactory processing, as well as shed light on cerebellar function in general.

The results of this project promise to further the understanding of basic
mechanisms underlying sensory perception. Understanding of these mechanisms may
open doors towards both improved treatment of sensory impairments, as well as
incorporation of the elucidated mechanisms into devices aimed at mimicking
sensory perception. This is especially true in olfaction, considering the
increased interest in technologies aimed at sensing air-borne markers in
applications ranging from disease diagnostics to landmine and biological-agent
detection.

