* 0345528
* Protein Separations Using Affinity Ultrafiltration with Small Charged Ligands
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Andrew Zydney, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 02/29/2008
* USD 250,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Protein Adsorption and
Transport in Chromatographic Bioprocessing&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CTS-0345528&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Andrew
Zydney&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Pennsylvania State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to examine a novel approach for protein purification using small,
charged, affinity ligands to achieve high-resolution separations by affinity
ultrafiltration. Affinity ultrafiltration exploits the high selectivity that can
be obtained by molecular recognition, but the product and ligand are allowed to
interact in free solution, thereby eliminating the mass transfer limitations and
concerns about ligand accessibility that often hinder applications of packed
column affinity chromatography. The binding interaction causes a change in
electrical charge of the protein-ligand complex, and this is used to obtain high
product retention by exploiting electrostatic interactions during
ultrafiltration. Initial experimental studies will be performed using Cibacron
Blue as the charged affinity ligand and human serum albumin as the model
protein. Preliminary theoretical calculations indicate that the change in
protein charge will provide high selectivity for membrane separations between
albumin and protein impurities that are unable to bind Cibacron Blue. These
results will demonstrate the feasibility of this technique, while providing a
quantitative framework for design and optimization of affinity ultrafiltration
processes using small charged affinity ligands. In terms of the broader impacts,
this project will provide graduate and undergraduate students with hands-on
experience dealing with membrane processes and protein separations. The results
of this work may aid in the development of new technologies that provide high-
resolution protein purification at a price, scale, and quality appropriate for
high-value products.&lt;br/&gt;