* 0345135
* Refurbishment of a VG Sector Mass Spectrometer to Gain Negative Ion Capability
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Joel Blum, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2006
* USD 61,520.00

EAR-0345135&lt;br/&gt;Mukasa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from this award are to
be used to convert an old VG Sector conventional thermal ionization mass
spectrometer at the University of Michigan into a negative ion thermal
ionization mass spectrometer (N-TIMS). Once modified, the instrument will be
used in geological and environmental studies that require the measurement of
isotopic ratios for osmium and boron in their electronegative form. We
anticipate collaborations with both internal and external colleagues, which will
keep the facility very busy. The mass spectrometer to be converted has the
"Multi-1" collector block with six old-design, short-life, Faraday cups that are
moved manually. Because of their advanced age and throughput, the Faraday
detectors have suffered some damage leading to degradation in gain and peak
shape. The net result of this wear and tear is poor precision and
reproducibility in the measurements of Sr and Nd isotopic ratios. However,
because osmium and boron isotopic ratios have very large variations in nature,
their measurements do not require the high precision necessary for Sr and Nd
isotopes. Therefore, refurbishing the electronic components of the instrument
along with converting it to negative ion capability - but not replacing the
collectors - will extend the machine's life and afford us the opportunity to do
research in new areas of the geological and environmental sciences. This N-TIMS
conversion will open our respective groups to new areas of research that use
electronegative ions, such as Os and B, and provide our students and
postdoctoral research fellows with a "new tool" for tackling their research
projects in high-temperature geochemistry, petrology, environmental geochemistry
economic geology, and paleooceanography. Just as importantly, the refurbished
instrument will be used to teach students some fundamental skills such as mass
spectrometry, formulation of research problems, objective data processing and
analysis, and the presentation of written and oral reports. These skills can be
applied to later work situations in academia, government, or
industry.&lt;br/&gt;