* 0345154
* Business Aspects of Closed-Loop Supply Chains Workshops
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* V. Daniel Guide, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 08/31/2005
* USD 55,300.00

This grant provides funding for a workshop on the business aspects of closed-
loop supply chains. The focus of the meeting is on developing systems and tools
to support businesses seeking to create financially viable systems for product
recovery. The workshop participants will be drawn from leading international
academic experts in industrial engineering, supply chain management, operations
management, management sciences, and information technologies. Doctoral students
and early career faculty will also be invited. There will be speakers from
industry to provide overviews of current practice and specific problems
encountered when trying to create sustainable, financially viable, closed-loop
supply chains. There will be presentations from academics on projects with
industry and methodology applications. Small group break-out sessions will
encourage interactions and interdisciplinary research
cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of the workshop will be to
generate new research focused on the needs of the business community and
encourage partnerships between academia and industry. One of the objectives of
the workshop is to exchange experiences and the results of research projects. If
successful, these interactions will encourage academic researchers to focus on
the crucial needs of industry. The workshop also encourages partnerships among
international researchers in diverse disciplines. The workshop will also
encourage doctoral students to start research in this area and attract early
career researchers to develop new research streams. The findings and
recommendations will be disseminated via a white paper and research articles in
scholarly journals.&lt;br/&gt;