* 0345908
* Acquisition of a New Electron Microprobe
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Mark Reed, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 01/31/2006
* USD 547,851.00

0345908&lt;br/&gt;Wallace&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports acquisition
of a new, state-of-the-art electron microprobe (EPMA) at the University of
Oregon that will be actively used for research programs in geology and related
sciences. The instrument will be housed in the Department of Geological
Sciences, and it will be included in a group of interdepartmental, shared
facilities at the University known as the Center for Advanced Materials
Characterization in Oregon (CAMCOR). The capabilities of a new electron
microprobe will enhance a broad base of innovative research at the University of
Oregon, and its integration into CAMCOR will allow the PIs and other scientists
to expand their research into creative interdisciplinary areas. The new
microprobe will be used primarily for research in Geology, Chemistry, Materials
Research and Archaeology that includes igneous petrology, volcanology, ore
deposits, paleosols and paleoclimate, chemical kinetics, thin film structures,
semiconductors, and the provenance of prehistoric artifacts. The improved
capabilities of this instrument will enable a number of technical advances for
these research programs. The new electron microprobe facility will also play a
critical role in research training and education at the undergraduate, graduate
and post-doctoral levels in Geology and related sciences at the University of
Oregon. It will be particularly used by volcanology and petrology graduate
students in Geology and by Masters internship program students in Materials
Science who are pursing careers in semiconductor processing. As with other
CAMCOR facilities, the new instrument will be available for use by researchers
at other educational institutions throughout the Pacific Northwest. To maintain
the CAMCOR facilities, the University of Oregon has committed significant funds
to provide long-term technical support for all CAMCOR instruments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;