* 0345312
* Collaborative Research:  Quantitative Reconstruction of Paleohydraulics of the Kayenta Formation - Implications for Paleoclimate Reconstruction
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2006
* David Mohrig, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2006
* USD 36,597.00

Determination of paleoslopes in ancient fluvial systems has potentially broad,
but largely untapped, application to quantitatively constraining the history of
tectonics and paleoclimate in continental sequences. The objective of this
project is to, first, flesh out a new approach to calculating paleoslope and
associated information, such as water and sediment flux, from sandy braided
stream deposits. The second objective is to apply the method to the Kayenta
Formation (Jurassic) on the Colorado Plateau to demonstrate the utility of the
method in reconstructing aspects of long-term climate change from the ancient
record of fluvial deposits found on a regional scale. The key to reconstructing
paleoclimate as proposed here is to estimate paleowater flux from estimates of
paleoflow depth (as determined from bar forms) and calculations of paleoslope.
Paleoslope calculation follows a novel approach utilizing the Rouse Number, an
indicator of grainsize fractionation between bed load and suspended load in
water flows. The key tool to applying the method is the use of high-precision,
rapid, grain-size determinations available using equipment housed at M.I.T.
Preliminary results show the approach works well in the modern and yields
remarkably consistent comparisons with the Kayenta Formation. Theoretical
modeling of climate impact on fluvial systems suggests that longterm climate
change may produce a very different stratigraphic record than short-term
(Milankovich scale) changes. Hence application of the method to the ancient not
only provides an example of what the method can do, but will help answer
specific questions regarding how the long-term change from dry to wet to dry
conditions represented by the Wingate-Kayenta-Navajo formations of the Glen
Canyon Group, respectively, affect river systems. By systematically applying the
methodology to the Kayenta Formation, we will obtain statistically significant
probability distributions of aspects of paleoflow (slope and water flux) that
can be compared between sites within the unit to show how river systems changed
down basin and over time. Such an application will demonstrate the utility of
the paleohydraulic reconstruction approach to paleoclimate reconstruction that
can be applied to other sandy fluvial deposits in the ancient record. The
broader aspects of the study include training a female Ph.D. student at the
University of Wyoming in quantitative methodologies of sedimentation. An
undergraduate at M.I.T. will also be trained in field and laboratory techniques
as part of this project. In addition, the research includes a tie to an NCED
(National Center for Earth-Surface Dynamics) facility, allowing for outreach of
this NSF-funded Science and Technology Center.