* 0345935
* Development of new instrumentation and techniques for real-time spatial interferometry of geophysical processes
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2007
* John Scales, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 10/31/2007
* USD 139,600.00

0345935 Scales

Support from this grant will allow the Physical Acoustics Lab at the Colorado
School of Mines to acquire an ultrafast (femtosecond) mode-locked laser,
ultrafast CCD camera (100 ns shutter) based imaging spectrometer, and ancillary
equipment necessary to dramatically improve the signal to noise ratio and
acquisition speed of laser interferometric techniques for high fidelity spatial
and temporal observations of the propagation of elastic waves across the
surfaces of natural and man-made materials. In traditional seismic and
ultrasonic measurements, contacting transducers are used to measure elastic
waves at a single point. Under previous support from this program (EAR-0111804)
Scales and his Ph.D. student (K. van Wijk), now a research scientist at CSM),
developed a laser vibrometer interferometric technique for non-contact and non-
destructive seismology which can measure elastic waves at tens of thousands of
points. This support will facilitate more rapid non-contacting acoustic
interferometric techniques and will therefore allow for improved spatial
distribution of measurements over the surface of samples. While the technique
will not allow for study of rock properties under in situ conditions, it will
offer the opportunity to measuring the temporal evolution of elastic wavefields
in highly scattering media. This grant is a leveraged investment in a unique
technology that has potential broad implications for medical imaging, non-
destructive evaluation, land-mine detection, hydrocarbon exploration and
seismology.

***

