* 0345430
* US-Egypt Workshop: Water Resources and Environment Issues in Egypt, and Research Needs
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Tommy Coleman, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 28,570.00

0345430 &lt;br/&gt;Coleman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a "U.S.-Egypt Workshop on Water Resources and Environmental Issues in
Egypt, and Research Needs" to be held in Cairo, Egypt in December 2003. The
organizers are Dr. Tommy Coleman, Department of Soil Sciences at the Alabama
A&amp;M University and Dr. Mona El-Kady, Director, National Water Research
Center (NWRC), Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation, Cairo, Egypt. The
objectives of this workshop are threefold; first, to identify research gaps that
may exist in the water resources and environmental areas that could address
pollution problems that threaten the sustainability of Egypt's natural
resources. Second, to discuss state-of-the-art techniques and methodologies
currently used to combat pollution that may be applicable, e.g., engineering
approaches that are effective in environmental protection; remote sensing and
geographical information systems (GIS) applications in addressing environmental
issues, and GIS-base environmental modeling tools. Finally, to identify long-
term monitoring and decision support systems needed in the management of Egypt's
water resources. The workshop will be organized in three major sessions. The
first session will be comprised of two and half days of presentations and group
discussions by the U.S. and Egyptian scientists addressing the current research
gaps in the area of natural resources protection, environmental and water
resources technologies for monitoring, assessing, and ameliorating polluted and
degraded water bodies and landscapes. The second session will consist of a two
and half days field trips and tours of selected areas that are identified as in
need for immediate remediation, and areas that have been successfully protected
and restored. The third session will be a one-day strategy session to identify a
plan for addressing the primary research gaps and priorities identified in the
area of water resources degradation and environmental protection in Egypt.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This joint workshop is to identify research gaps in
addressing the most serious environmental problems, such as shortage in water
resources, water deterioration, coastal area soil erosion, and random
urbanization environmental problem. It will focus on those problems that are in
need of a suitable solution, feasible to complete and require joint cooperation
between the two parties. A "Third International Symposium on Sustainable Agro-
Environmental Systems: New Technologies and Applications" was conducted in
Cairo, Egypt in October 2002. Problems discussed are common to Egypt and to many
countries around the world. This workshop is an outgrowth of the discussions
made by the PI and the Egyptian participants from Egypt's NWRC. The workshop
results would lead to cooperative research of mutual benefits to the two
countries. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund
Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
carry out these joint scientific activities. &lt;br/&gt;