* 0346182
* Collaborative Research: Workshop for Integrated EarthScope Research and Education in the Northern Rocky Mountains
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Paul Mueller, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 08/31/2006
* USD 22,250.00

An EarthScope workshop in the northern Rocky Mountains (NRM) will provide an
opportunity for a diverse array of earth scientists to meet and discuss the
opportunities that EarthScope will provide to improve our understanding of the
wide range of processes that formed this segment of continental crust. The NRM
(generally defined as northern Wyoming, SW Montana, and eastern Idaho) is a
unique environment that provides an excellent natural laboratory for studying
many critical phenomena associated with the evolution of the continental crust-
mantle system. We propose to hold a 2.5-day workshop in the early fall of 2005
in SW Montana. The meeting will begin with a general session to inform
participants of the current status of EarthScope and provide overviews of the
overarching scientific questions related to the geology of the NRM. An
organizing committee will be charged to set the meeting agenda and participate
in selection of speakers and participants. The workshop will provide the
opportunity for smaller working groups to meet and identify scientific
objectives and assess how EarthScope can help address these objectives. Possible
working group topics and lists of individuals who have expressed an interest in
attending is provided. A concluding session will focus on presentations from the
individual working groups. Appropriate and timely announcements will allow ample
opportunity for all interested parties to apply to attend. The broader impacts
of the workshop will be realized through comprehensive web development that will
support workshop logistics, pre- and post-workshop activities, posting of all
workshop products (e.g. talks, posters, discussion summaries, essays, plans),
and will begin to compile a region-wide digital resource collection. The
workshop program will also address the EarthScope Education and Outreach (E&O)
objectives by establishing an E&O working group in parallel with the research-
oriented working groups. The workshop will also serve to identify and recruit
colleagues who are interested in contributing to EarthScope E&O in the NRM.