* 0346934
* The Fine-Tuning Argument
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Bradley Monton, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 07/31/2005
* USD 69,069.00

Proponents of the fine-tuning argument believe that facts from physics about the
nature of the universe can give insight into traditional philosophical issues
such as whether God exists and whether other worlds exist. Specifically, they
maintain that at least some of the fundamental constants (such as the masses of
the fundamental particles and the strength ratios between the fundamental
forces) are finely tuned for life, in that if the constants had slightly
different values life could not exist. Proponents of the theistic fine-tuning
argument conclude from this that an intelligent designer such as God exists, and
this designer designed the universe so as to be life- permitting. Proponents of
the many-worlds fine-tuning argument, on the other hand, conclude from this that
our universe is one of many existing universes, with different sets of
fundamental constants (and perhaps laws) obtaining in the different
universes.&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to examine the fine-tuning argument
critically, paying careful attention to the various philosophy of science issues
that are raised in discussions of this argument. The product will include a book
arguing that (with some qualifications) no version of the fine-tuning argument
is successful. A goal of the research is to gain insight into various issues in
philosophy of science that surround the fine-tuning argument. These include
issues in probability theory, such as the problem of old evidence, Bayesian
versus non-Bayesian versions of inference, and probability theory as it relates
to self-locating beliefs (as in for example the Doomsday argument). Non-
probabilistic issues include possible-worlds representations of modality, and
various controversies involving explanation, including the viability of
inference to the best explanation. &lt;br/&gt;The PI will ensure that the
research has an impact beyond the community of academic philosophers. The book
will be written in such a way that it is accessible to someone without training
in philosophy (though it will be more advanced than, say, a popular science
book). Underrepresented minority undergraduates from University of Kentucky and
undergraduates from area non-Ph.D. granting institutions will be recruited to
work on the research. In conjunction with the UK physics department and the
Gaines Center for the Humanities, there will be a conference on philosophy and
cosmology, which will be accessible to students and non-academics. Additionally,
a debate will be organized by UK's Veritas Forum, an annual student-run
Christian speaker series. Finally, there will be lectures presented at various
places, such as Asbury College and the historically black Kentucky State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;