* 0346991
* CAREER: Research in Complexity Theory with Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Christopher Umans, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 06/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

Complexity Theory is the mathematical study of the limits of
efficient&lt;br/&gt;computation. This study is framed in terms of the power
of&lt;br/&gt;nondeterminism, the power of randomness, and the relationships
between a&lt;br/&gt;rich variety of complexity classes that capture
computational aspects of&lt;br/&gt;natural problems. This proposal addresses two
fundamental questions in&lt;br/&gt;Complexity Theory, and seeks to employ the
tools developed in these&lt;br/&gt;investigations to attack significant open
problems in Algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first question concerns the
power of randomness, which is used&lt;br/&gt;pervasively in modern algorithm
design, cryptography, large-scale&lt;br/&gt;simulation in the natural sciences,
and other settings. For certain&lt;br/&gt;problems, efficient randomized
solutions are known but not efficient&lt;br/&gt;deterministic ones, so
randomness may appear to be essential. However, a&lt;br/&gt;striking sequence of
results over the last decade gives strong formal&lt;br/&gt;evidence to the
contrary, by developing a generic procedure that&lt;br/&gt;"compiles" every
efficient randomized algorithm into an efficient&lt;br/&gt;deterministic one
("derandomizes"&lt;br/&gt;the algorithm). A number of powerful tools and methods
have emerged from&lt;br/&gt;this effort, including optimal pseudo-random
generators, so-called&lt;br/&gt;"randomness extractors", and techniques for the
"amplification" of&lt;br/&gt;computational hardness. The objective of this
research is to build upon&lt;br/&gt;and improve these tools, and to use them to
extend the derandomization&lt;br/&gt;paradigm to broad classes of randomized
procedures beyond&lt;br/&gt;"polynomial-time decision&lt;br/&gt;procedures,"
which have been a primary focus until now. Specific goals&lt;br/&gt;include the
derandomization of space-bounded computation,&lt;br/&gt;derandomization of
computation in which nondeterminism and randomness&lt;br/&gt;interact, and
derandomization of procedures relevant to large-scale&lt;br/&gt;simulations,
such as approximate counting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second question concerns
the power of nondeterminism in&lt;br/&gt;space-bounded computation. Savitch's
famous result shows that the power&lt;br/&gt;of space-bounded computation is
only slightly enhanced by supplementing&lt;br/&gt;it with nondeterminism. This
stands in sharp contrast to the situation&lt;br/&gt;with respect to polynomial-
time computation, where the addition of&lt;br/&gt;nondeterminism results in the
(presumably) exponentially more powerful&lt;br/&gt;class NP. It is a
longstanding open problem to improve Savitch's result&lt;br/&gt;and ultimately
show that nondeterminism adds no power to space-bounded&lt;br/&gt;computation.
The PI will initiate a sustained effort to resolve this&lt;br/&gt;fundamental
problem, initially focusing on a novel approach that exposes&lt;br/&gt;the
problem to a broad array of powerful tools from Group Theory
and&lt;br/&gt;Representation Theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wherever possible, the
techniques developed in pursuing these objectives&lt;br/&gt;in Complexity Theory
will be applied to significant problems in&lt;br/&gt;Algorithms. For example,
one goal is to employ ideas that naturally&lt;br/&gt;arise in derandomization to
attack a number of open problems in the&lt;br/&gt;generation of random
structures. The suggested techniques are quite&lt;br/&gt;different from the
currently predominant&lt;br/&gt;method of "Markov chain Monte Carlo"
simulations. Another goal is to&lt;br/&gt;work toward an improved algorithm for
fast matrix multiplication, by&lt;br/&gt;exploiting a special case of the group-
theoretic approach to improving&lt;br/&gt;Savitch's result. Fast matrix
multiplication lies at the heart of many&lt;br/&gt;fundamental problems in
algorithmic linear algebra; an improved&lt;br/&gt;algorithm would have a major
impact in this area and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational plan
encompasses new course development related to this&lt;br/&gt;research,
integration of accessible theoretical and mathematical&lt;br/&gt;components
early in the undergraduate curriculum, and a focused effort&lt;br/&gt;to enhance
interactions between Mathematics and Computer Science through&lt;br/&gt;seminar
series and joint course offerings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities
will involve both undergraduate and graduate&lt;br/&gt;students as integral
participants in the research and teaching&lt;br/&gt;components as appropriate.
The PI will seek to strengthen and expand&lt;br/&gt;ongoing collaborations with
researchers from several disciplines at&lt;br/&gt;academic institutions
(including liberal arts colleges) and industry&lt;br/&gt;research
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities' intellectual merit derives from its
dual goals of&lt;br/&gt;advancing an understanding of the nature of two
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;computational resources (and consequently, broad classes
of problems&lt;br/&gt;that utilize these resources), and resolving core
algorithmic problems&lt;br/&gt;that transcend application
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts are realized through integrated
activities to advance&lt;br/&gt;discovery while promoting innovative teaching
and training,&lt;br/&gt;dissemination of educational materials, and activities
to enhance&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary interaction, as well as encourage
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;involvement in research.&lt;br/&gt;