* 0346669
* Nano-Technology Product-Realization Road Map Workshop; University of Maryland, College Park
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Abhijit Dasgupta, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 40,000.00

University of Maryland, in partnership with various academic institutions and
industry, will organize a workshop to identify the fundamental research needed
for realizing nano-technology products. The National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) has also expressed interest in participating in the planning
and conduct of this workshop. The findings of this workshop will be useful for
developing a Nano-technology Product Realization Road Map, which will enable the
community to bridge the gap between nano- science concepts in the laboratory and
viable nano-technology products for sustainable and affordable commerce. Product
development requires not just novel nano-science concepts (which are receiving
extensive attention across many research centers), but equally importantly,
enabling disciplines and relevant infrastructure. Examples of enabling
disciplines include modeling and simulation approaches needed for design
automation of nano-engineered products, scaling of synthesis and fabrications
methods needed for large-scale nano-manufacturing processes, and metrology
needed for nano- scale characterization. While these disciplines are well
developed for conventional technologies, the unique needs of nano-technology can
only be addressed through fundamental new advances and new infrastructure.
Workshop participants will include mechanical, systems, industrial, chemical,
materials and electrical engineers involved in all of the above aspects of nano-
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Several recent nano-technology workshops have
identified the urgent need for broad-based pervasive research programs that
address the infrastructure needed for nano-engineered product realization. The
consensus in all of these workshops was that rapid developments in the nano-
scale sciences has spurred significant interest in bringing nano- engineered
products to the marketplace, but that the enabling technologies and relevant
infrastructure needed to bring the nano-product concepts to fruition are sorely
lacking. Robust design tools built on clear understanding of material behavior
and failure physics are essential if the nano-technology industry is to become a
large-scale commercial reality. So are quality, consistency, and reproducibility
in high-volume manufacturing process. The third critical engineering enabler is
nano-scale metrology for characterization of materials, processes, and products.
Together, these three enablers will form the critical infrastructural tripod
necessary to achieve and sustain affordable nano- technology commerce. The
intellectual merit of this proposed workshop rests in the new research roadmap
that will be developed for fundamental research in each of these three enabling
disciplines. The broader impact will be realized from the integration of these
roadmaps to benefit nano-technology, and the resulting educational roadmap that
will be developed in the proposed workshop. The workshop is scheduled for late
fall of 2003, after the ASME IMECE conference in Washington DC. The workshop
will be hosted at the University of Maryland. Sessions on nano-scale design
methodologies, nano-manufacturing processes, and nano-metrology will be
organized and facilitated by academic, industrial and government collaborators
in this workshop, potentially including NIST.&lt;br/&gt;