* 0346736
* Collaborative Research: Caterpillars and Parasitoids in the Eastern Andes of Ecuador
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Thomas Walla, Colorado Mesa University
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 06/30/2008
* USD 60,200.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Parasitoids, which are an important component of most
terrestrial&lt;br/&gt;ecosystems, are parasitic animals (mostly wasps, flies,
and nematodes)&lt;br/&gt;that kill their hosts as part of their normal life
cycle. Plants, their&lt;br/&gt;insect herbivores, and the parasitoids that
attack those herbivores&lt;br/&gt;represent more than half of all described
organisms in the world.&lt;br/&gt;"Caterpillars and parasitoids in the Eastern
Andes of Ecuador" consists of&lt;br/&gt;an intensive plant, caterpillar, and
parasitoid inventory at the Yanayacu&lt;br/&gt;Biological Station (YBS) in the
Ecuadorian Andes. The primary objectives&lt;br/&gt;are to: 1) Collect and
catalog the diverse community of caterpillars and&lt;br/&gt;associated
parasitoids at this site and to provide specimens for&lt;br/&gt;systematics
(classification of organisms and their evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;relationships). 2)
Disseminate this information with a searchable database&lt;br/&gt;accessible to
scientists and the public throughout the world. 3) Collect&lt;br/&gt;baseline
natural history information such as specialized associations&lt;br/&gt;between
plants, herbivores, and parasitoids; development rates; and other&lt;br/&gt;life
cycle information for both known and undescribed species. 4)
Provide&lt;br/&gt;the foundation for an identification key to the caterpillars
of the&lt;br/&gt;Ecuadorian Andes. Caterpillar collecting and rearing will take
place in a&lt;br/&gt;cloud forest on the eastern slope of the Andes in Napo
province, Ecuador,&lt;br/&gt;centered around the YBS. Collecting will be
conducted by carefully&lt;br/&gt;inspecting selected plant species along
transects and also by&lt;br/&gt;opportunistically collecting all caterpillars
observed in the collecting&lt;br/&gt;area. Caterpillars and parasitoids will be
reared to adults. Adult&lt;br/&gt;butterflies, moths, and parasitoids will be
distributed to a network of&lt;br/&gt;collaborating specialists for
identification and for descriptions of new&lt;br/&gt;species, revisions, and
evolutionary studies.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed activity
includes&lt;br/&gt;significant advances in insect classification by providing
specimens to&lt;br/&gt;experts as well as providing a critical inventory that
can be used in the&lt;br/&gt;conservation of biodiversity. Forests of the
equatorial Andes are&lt;br/&gt;recognized as a global hotspot of biodiversity
that is being destroyed at&lt;br/&gt;an alarming rate, but conservation efforts
are improving. The current&lt;br/&gt;survey will make an important contribution
towards documenting and&lt;br/&gt;describing the caterpillars and parasitoids of
this threatened area, and&lt;br/&gt;will increase the local value of the Andean
forests by providing&lt;br/&gt;scientific and economic incentives for their
conservation. The ecology and&lt;br/&gt;systematics that are a part of this
study will also be used to address a&lt;br/&gt;variety of basic and applied
questions in ecology and evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;biology, ranging from the
evolution of unique plant-insect interactions to&lt;br/&gt;the conservation and
management of biodiversity. The broader impacts of&lt;br/&gt;this project
include direct involvement of 4 local field assistants, 3&lt;br/&gt;Ecuadorian
students, 3 Ecuadorian senior scientists, 1 postdoctoral&lt;br/&gt;researcher,
at least 12 collaborating insect specialists, and various&lt;br/&gt;graduate and
undergraduate students. Therefore the project
strengthens&lt;br/&gt;international scientific dialogue and relationships. The
overall project&lt;br/&gt;will include enhancements in science education and
research experience&lt;br/&gt;programs for minorities. Finally, the research
will enhance training in&lt;br/&gt;systematics to help stem the decline in
expertise that is currently having&lt;br/&gt;a negative impact on all
disciplines in biology.&lt;br/&gt;