* 0346816
* CAREER:  Giant Nonmarine Sedimentary Basins of China and Intracontinental Tectonics - an Integrated Research and Education Plan in Asia and Western North America
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Bradley Ritts, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 01/31/2006
* USD 213,416.00

Eastern and central Asia is characterized by complex intraplate deformation that
is not related simply to synchronous tectonic plate boundaries. This deformation
is accompanied by the coupled evolution of large, long-lived, nonmarine
intracontinental basins, which are not adequately described by existing basin
models. The processes that link intraplate deformation and concomitant basin
formation, and feedback mechanisms between sedimentation and structural
evolution can be understood better through detailed analysis of distribution,
style and timing of deformation, subsidence and sedimentation. The Mesozoic
Ordos basin and Cenozoic Qaidam basin are excellent examples of such systems
because both are large geologic provinces characterized by thick, relatively
continuous packages of syntectonic sediment that accumulated during deformation
on the margins of, and within, each basin. Thus, these basins provide the
opportunity to document how loci of deformation and sedimentation correlate
through time, and how they may exert influences on each other.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sedimentary and structural history of the Mesozoic
Ordos and Cenozoic Qaidam basin is being documented with a combination of
geologic maps, measured stratigraphic sections, and other basin characterization
such as paleocurrent and provenance analysis, and subsidence modeling. In the
Ordos basin, efforts are focused on Mesozoic basin-margin outcrops in the
northern half of the basin. In Qaidam, studies include a combination of outcrop
geology along the northeast and southwest basin margins, and analysis of seismic
reflection data in the basin interior. In these areas, comparison between
location and kinematics of specific structures and the geometry and provenance
of subsiding depocenters allows the mechanisms that control accommodation space
and sediment supply to be determined. It also provides clues to the ways that
accumulation of thick sedimentary sequences and associated changes in heat flow,
crustal thickness, and lateral distribution of mass affect mechanisms of
intrabasinal deformation. This research is attempting to provide a clearer
understanding of the secular and spatial relationships between intraplate strain
and sedimentation in Chinese basins. This will clarify the structural controls
on how such basins evolve and test whether the dynamic changes in sedimentary
distribution affect the style or location of structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to added insights gained into the history of intraplate deformation in
China and improved models for "Chinese-type" successor basins, this project is a
platform for undergraduate research overseas and increased collaboration with
Chinese co-workers. Analog sedimentary systems in the western United States
provide comparative examples to the basins studies in China, and can be used as
natural classrooms to train undergraduate researchers and translate the lessons
of this research project to the public.&lt;br/&gt;