* 0346745
* CAREER:  Experimental Investigation of the Dependence of Intermolecular Dynamics on Molecular Orientation
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2011
* Richard Loomis, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 02/28/2011
* USD 543,792.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. Richard A. Loomis of Washington University will
investigate the dependence of intermolecular interactions and chemical reaction
dynamics on the relative orientations of the reactants. A combination of
supersonic expansion methods, frequency- and time-resolved spectroscopy, and
time-of-flight ion imaging spectrometry will be used to characterize the
intermolecular potential energy surfaces that direct the outcome of bimolecular
encounters. Initial work will focus on the inelastic, non-reactive dissociation
dynamics of the He + ICl(B) and Ne + ICl(B) pairs to establish a foundation for
the chemical reaction work. The initial list of bimolecular reactions to be
studied includes electronically excited ICl(B) with F2 and H2. This research
will be conducted with graduate students and interested undergraduates.

Prof. Loomis' educational activities will focus on giving undergraduate students
hands-on exposure to difficult and advanced topics early in their careers in an
effort to interest more students in chemistry and chemical science. Quantum
mechanical wave packet projects will be incorporated into the undergraduate
Quantum Chemistry course. In addition, Prof. Loomis will participate in outreach
programs aimed at 1) exposing students in local elementary, middle, and high
schools to chemical phenomena and learning, 2) through visits to small
undergraduate colleges and universities in the Midwest give students an
opportunity to learn about novel research topics and techniques, and 3)
lecturing to international science writers whose interest span broad areas and
concerns in science.