* 0346245
* USArray FlexArray augmentation of a seismic study of the extension paradox at the northwest margin of the Basin-&amp;-Range Province
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Simon Klemperer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 07/31/2006
* USD 113,315.00

Nevada has high topography - even the valleys between the mountain ranges are
at elevations of several thousand feet. Because this average elevation does not
change significantly between the Oregon border and central Nevada, we believe
that the Earth's crust (colloquially, the iceberg floating on the mantle) must
be the same thickness across this region. What is remarkable, however, is that
we have discovered that the amount of extension - the amount of stretching of
the crust by faulting at the borders between the mountains and the valleys -
increases by a factor of about 5 as we go south across this same region. When
the crust is stretched it thins, so why then is the crust not thinner, and the
elevation lower, in central Nevada? This is the "extension paradox" that we are
studying.&lt;br/&gt; We believe the answer may be that the lower part of the
crust is weak enough that it can flow over geological timescales, and that the
lower crust beneath northern Nevada is flowing south to central Nevada, helping
to equalize the crustal thickness and balance the elevations across this region.
We are testing this hypothesis by collecting a new seismic profile that will
measure the crustal thickness and structure in great detail across northwestern
Nevada, a region that has not been well-studied by this method in the past. We
are making use of the latest technology and equipment that has recently been
developed and acquired for the national scientific enterprise by NSF's
Earthscope program. Earthscope, through one of its divisions "US-Array", has
funded the development of a "FlexArray", a large pool of easily transportable
seismographs. We will use this new equipment to study the Earth's crust in more
detail than has previously been possible - we expect to lay out over 1000
seismographs to record the sound waves created by 6 explosions that we will
detonate at precisely controlled times and locations. By measuring the time it
takes for the seismic waves to travel through the Earth's crust from each
explosion to each seismograph, we can build up an accurate picture of the
seismic wave-speed through the Earth, which in turn lets us map out the
different rock types and structures present at depth.&lt;br/&gt; During our
project we are training a group of Stanford undergraduates in the combination
geologic and geophysical techniques required to understand the continents. By
extending the classroom from campus to the Nevadan deserts and mountains, and by
extending theory to practice, we are enriching the education of the next
generation of scientific leaders. We are also working with Bureau of Land
Management and National Forest managers to carry out a safe experiment with no
lasting environmental impact, and in so doing we expect to enlarge public
understanding of scientific methodologies, and public appreciation of local
geology. All our data will be archived with and publicly released through an
Earthscope Data Center; ultimately our new understanding of the crust beneath
northern Nevada will help us and other scientists better understand earthquake
hazard in this region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;