* 0346841
* A Discourse-Pragmatic Analysis of Child Null Arguments in an Obligatory-Argument Language
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Shanley Allen, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2007
* USD 169,062.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Shanley Allen will conduct two
years of research investigating the extent to which English-speaking children's
non-adult-like omission of grammatical subjects and objects (i.e. verbal
arguments) can be accounted for by their sensitivity to discourse pragmatics. A
number of factors, such as given vs. new in discourse and presence vs. absence
in context, have been shown to influence argument realization for adults, and
also for children learning languages in which argument omission is allowed (e.g.
Korean, Italian, Inuktitut Eskimo). The present study will analyze spontaneous
speech in existing videotaped databases from English-speaking and Inuktitut-
speaking children, aged 2-4 years of age, in order to answer the following
questions: (1) Can omitted arguments in an obligatory-argument language
(English) be explained by children's (over-)sensitivity to discourse pragmatic
factors? (2) Does children's sensitivity to discourse pragmatic factors change
over developmental time? (3) Are children sensitive to discourse pragmatic
factors in the same way in obligatory-argument (English) and optional-argument
(Inuktitut) languages? (4) To what extent does the discourse pragmatic account
of argument omission coincide or contrast with the currently prevailing
grammatical accounts?

This research will help to identify the importance of discourse pragmatics in
understanding and explaining how children learn morphology and syntax, a domain
where until recently researchers have largely discounted the influence of
discourse pragmatics. The explicit comparison between discourse pragmatic and
grammatical accounts of language learning will help advance our understanding of
the relationship between theory and data, and of what the crucial vs. incidental
differences are between competing theories.

