* 0346678
* Conservation of the Princeton Collection and Oversize Fossils at the Yale Peabody Museum
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Jacques Gauthier, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 07/31/2008
* USD 374,497.00

Conservation of the Princeton Collection and oversize fossils at the Yale
Peabody Museum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A grant has been awarded to Yale University
under the direction of Jacques Gauthier to conserve fossils in the Yale Peabody
Museum of Natural History's (YPM) Princeton (PU) Collection, to conserve very
large (oversized) YPM specimens, and to enhance databases associated with these
parts of the collection. This grant will enable the Division to raise the
curatorial standards of the collections and make them more accessible to
researchers, staff, students, and the world at large. Orphaned in 1985 when
Princeton University abandoned its paleontology program, the 15,000 PU specimens
have never been properly housed. Especially well known for its South American
mammals collected in the late 1890's, the PU Collection holds representatives of
nearly every major vertebrate clade, including hundreds of irreplaceable
Holotypes. This project will repair broken specimens, line trays with
polyethylene foam, build supports for specimens as needed, including 245
supports for oversized specimens -- thereby improving the physical conditions of
the specimens and their housing. This project will also inventory the entire PU
Collection, as well as all specimens receiving conservation treatment, providing
detailed physical location and element descriptions for each specimen. The
inventory component will, through the YPM website, diversify the kind of data
available and support a new level of utility to the research
community.&lt;br/&gt; The Yale Peabody Museum serves an increasingly diverse
community, both within and outside the University. YPM collections serve as
central foci for these services. Through outreach efforts -- in the form of
behind-the-scenes tours, as well as public lectures, staff participation in YPM
public events, and collaborative science-initiatives with the New Haven and
surrounding public school districts -- the Vertebrate Paleontology Division has
long been a linchpin in the Museum's efforts to educate and involve the public
in both the current and historical scientific worlds. Yale has renewed its
commitment to collecting, collections, and collections-based research, as
demonstrated by the recent opening of a new facility for collections, teaching,
and research, the Environmental Science Center. Only by proper conservation and
continued care of museum collections can the information they hold be made fully
available to the researchers, students, and general public of today, while being
enhanced and preserved for future generations.&lt;br/&gt;