* 0346280
* ACT/SGER:      Modeling the Morphology and Phase Behavior of Organic/Inorganic Nanocomposite Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Anna Balazs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

The goal is to develop new computational and analytical models to determine the
equilibrium morphologies of block copolymer/nanoparticle mixtures that are
confined between two hard surfaces and thereby establish guidelines for creating
nanostructured organic/inorganic thin films through self-assembly. Thin films
that contain layers of organic polymers and inorganic particles can exhibit both
the optical, electrical, magnetic and mechanical properties of the nanoparticles
and the processibility and flexibility of the polymers. In effect, the
interleafing of layers of polymers and inorganic nanoparticles can yield
durable, flexible, and lightweight films with high energy densities. These thin
nanocomposites form materials for fabricating portable batteries, photovoltaic
devices and sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies will have a
broader impact by facilitating the fabrication of technologically important
materials in cost-effective, efficient methods. The results of our studies will
alleviate the need for creating nanocomposite thin films through slow, multi-
step, layer-by-layer (LBL) deposition or adsorption processes. In particular,
the research will provide guidelines for creating spatially ordered
nanocomposites films in a minimal number of processing steps that rely solely on
self-assembly. Furthermore, these films can display a variety of architectures,
not just the lamellar structures that are typically produced by LBL methods. The
fabrication of nanocomposite films with various morphologies can lead to coating
with new functionalities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addressing critical needs
outlined by the ACT announcement, the results of these studies also have the
potential to contribute to national security. As an example, one aim of the
proposed research is to design thin films that contain a periodic array of
particle "nanowires", which are separated by nanoscale polymer domains. Such
lightweight, high energy density materials are vital for the fabrication
portable electronic, photonic and sensing devices that can be used by soldiers
in the field. This award is supported jointly by the NSF and the Intelligence
Community. The Approaches to Combat Terrorism Program in the Directorate for
Mathematics and Physical Sciences supports new concepts in basic research and
workforce development with the potential to contribute to national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;