* 0346610
* NSF-EC Cooperative Activity in Materials Research: Light-Induced Motion in Nanostructured Silicate Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Jeffrey Zink, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 04/30/2008
* USD 443,000.00

This project aims to synthesize ordered nanostructured frameworks containing
molecules that undergo large amplitude motions driven by light, to control the
motion of the moving end of the molecule, and to design functional materials for
applications such as molecular valves and directing the motion of molecules
through nanopores. The research program offers cutting-edge education for both
graduate and undergraduate students. They will learn new concepts about
"nanomachines" (such as a molecular valve) including how to design and assemble
them, provide power to them, and monitor their motion. High school teachers
(with additional support from the NSF RET program) will take new concepts to
their classrooms. The results of the program will be technologically
significant; the availability of light-controlled movement in nanostructured
materials will be useful for a number of applications such as controlled drug
delivery and sensors. %%% This program involves the design and assembly of
functional nanomachines powered by light energy. The framework of the machine is
self-assembled and the moving parts of the machine, molecules that undergo large
amplitude motion, are attached to desired locations on the framework. Two
important applications are proposed. The first is a nano-valve, where opening
and closing the entrance to a container is accomplished by the movement of the
nanomachines attached to the openings. In the second, individual molecules will
be moved through nano tubes by sweeping them with the moving ends of machines
attached to the tube walls. Undergraduate and graduate students and high school
teachers will participate in the construction of the machines. The results will
be technologically significant; the availability of light-controlled
nanomachines will be useful for applications such as controlled drug delivery
and sensors. The project is a collaborative effort with Prof. De Cola at the
University of Amsterdam. This award is co-funded by the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering.