* 0346488
* The Neutral Theory of Biodiversity and Biogeography:  "New Theoretical Approaches"
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Stephen Hubbell, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2008
* USD 366,457.00

0346488- Hubbell, Stephen&lt;br/&gt;Univ of Georgia&lt;br/&gt;The Neutral Theory
of Biodiversity and Biogeography: "New Theoretical
Approaches"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
represents a three-year collaboration between physicists and ecologists to
develop a more rigorous and useful theory for biodiversity and its origin,
maintenance and loss, in ecology. This collaborative effort builds on new
theoretical developments that have arisen in the last two years, some of which
have generated much interest in the scientific community. This grant is an
effort to develop better theoretical tools for estimating the species richness
of natural landscapes and understanding how ecological communities are put
together. Understanding biodiversity, here defined as the abundance and
distribution of species on earth or any region of it, is an objective of
considerable practical and basic science importance and interest, especially
given the current projected rates of species extinction due to habitat loss and
other global change factors. Despite the scientific and technological advances
of today, it is surprising to many people that we still do not know how many
species inhabit the earth, even to the nearest order of magnitude (factor of
10). Likewise, our understanding of actual extinction rates is primitive, and
these rates are largely guesstimates based on rules of thumb derived from
patterns of how species richness increases with area sampled. This said, there
is little scientific doubt that we face a serious anthropogenic extinction
threat. Better theory and sampling designs are urgently needed for developing
realistic policies for the protection and management of species and the
environments they need to survive.&lt;br/&gt;