* 0346054
* Geomorphic and geochronologic study in and near Grand Canyon: Testing landscape responses to climate change and exploring the paleo-longitudinal profile of the Colorado River
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Joel Pederson, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2007
* USD 248,913.00

&lt;br/&gt;The response of landscapes to climate change and the incision of
elevated terrain are fundamental yet incompletely understood issues in
geomorphology. The Grand Canyon landscape contains an unusually well-preserved
and exposed record of both of these greater processes. Ongoing work by our
larger research group indicates that strong landscape responses to Milankovich-
scale climate changes have been superimposed on longer-term incision rates of
~150 m/my in eastern Grand Canyon, and that variable incision rates along the
length of Grand Canyon can be related to Quaternary faulting. Our detailed
mapping and initial dating of the Quaternary stratigraphy in eastern Grand
Canyon has resulted in a new conceptual model for dryland responses to climate
that includes complex linkages and out-of-phase relations between hillslopes,
tributary streams, and the mainstem Colorado River during middle-late
Pleistocene climate changes. A picture is emerging of regional incision that is
relatively active and spatially variable, and that exposes a rich record of
landscape responses to climate change. We propose research that combines
optically-stimulated luminescence, in situ cosmogenic nuclide, and U-series
dating with detailed field-geomorphic research on the spectacular hillslope and
alluvial stratigraphy at three key locations at the head, within, and at the
terminous of Grand Canyon. Our fieldwork and geochronology in eastern Grand
Canyon has led to two research emphases and related hypotheses we propose to
address. First is local catchment responses to climate. Our working conceptual
model of landscape responses to climate in eastern Grand Canyon (included in a
manuscript recently submitted to GSA Bulletin) is more specific and detailed
than previous models. It highlights the unique responses of drylands and is
pertinent to the changes predicted with global warming. We propose to test
&lt;br/&gt;and refine this model by investigating the predicted time-
transgressive aggradation and incision moving down and up tributary streams,
which we hypothesize is responsible for the unexpected antiphasing of tributary
and mainstem Colorado River aggradation and incision. Our working
hypothesis.that such antiphasing is caused on one hand by a lag time associated
with the production of local sediment supply and the passing of that sedimentary
signal down the catchment, and on the other hand by a delay in the progression
of the signal of base-level fall up the catchment due to locally great sediment
supply.is testable via detailed sedimentologic, stratigraphic, and especially
geochronologic study. The second research emphasis is the bedrock incision of
the Colorado River along its regional profile. We propose to add long-term
incision rate determinations at two new study sites at key points along the
length of the Colorado River to complement our existing data in eastern and
western Grand Canyon. Comparison of &lt;br/&gt;the alluvial stratigraphy,
deposit composition, and incision rates along this 450-km transect of the
&lt;br/&gt;Colorado are basic to recording the river.s long-profile evolution
and testing for hypothesized knickzones or waves of incision passing through the
fluvial system in response to neotectonic forcing at the active Hurricane-
Toroweap fault zone or much older drainage capture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
spectacular preservation and exposure of the complete hillslope-tributary-
mainstem Quaternary &lt;br/&gt;stratigraphy at the three study sites, in
combination with the use of three complimentary geochronologic methods, will
elucidate the complex linkages between the local landscape and a continental-
scale river and their responses to climatic and tectonic perturbations. In
addition, this research will provide an enlightening comparison of the three
dating methods, and will help complete the emerging understanding of landscape
evolution of this famous area. Our involvement of researchers and students from
diverse institutions, training of beginning scientists, and framework for
communicating results to the public via the National Park Service insure that
the proposed research will have broad impact.