* 0346854
* Multi-Scale Modeling of Fine-Scale Structure and Droplet Spectral Evolution in Cumulus Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2009
* Steven Krueger, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 02/28/2009
* USD 279,170.00

This project will use models of clouds to study how mixing affects the size
distribution of cloud droplets in cumulus clouds. It is part of the broader
"Rain in Cumulus over the Ocean" (RICO) experiment, a collaborative experiment
involving more than 15 institutions that plans to observe properties of trade-
wind cumulus clouds in December 2004 and January 2005 and then analyze those
measurements for several years. A central goal of RICO is to understand the
processes leading to precipitation in tropical cumulus clouds, and an important
question to be addressed is how cloud droplets collide and grow to raindrop
size. One candidate explanation is that mixing increases the range of droplet
sizes present in the cloud and so increases the rate of collisions among
droplets of different size. This project will investigate that possibility and
others through use of a modeling technique that embeds a one-dimensional
representation of the fine-scale structure within a three-dimensional model of
larger-scale cloud structure. In this way, the investigators obtain realistic
trajectories and cloud fields while also simulating the fine-scale structure
produced by turbulence. With this model, the investigators will evaluate the
relative importance of several potential contributors to the broadening of
droplet size distributions. As part of this work, they will also evaluate and
improve the large-eddy simulation (LES) model that produces the three-
dimensional cloud fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected long-range impact of
RICO and of this project is that the effects of trade-wind cumulus clouds and of
rain from warm clouds will be represented more accurately in weather and climate
models, leading to improved predictions of rainfall. The research will also
result in an assessment of the relative importance of various processes that
cause cloud droplet size distributions to broaden, and it will lead to new
techniques for representing fine-scale turbulent fields in models of cumulus
clouds. The project will also contribute to graduate education through
participation by the investigators in the RICO Graduate Student Seminar Series
and through training of graduate students as they participate in the research.