* 0346688
* RUI: Student Research in T Cell Xeno-Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Peter Eden, Marywood University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 05/31/2007
* USD 120,422.00

&lt;br/&gt;Protective T cells in the immune system discriminate between self and
non-self tissues, through the T cell receptor (TCR). Small protein fragments
(peptides) known as "minor antigens" and found on the cell surface are
recognized by T cells as either self or non-self, which can trigger a T cell-
mediated immune response. These minor antigen peptides originate from within the
cell, processed from protein precursors and presented by the major
histocompatibility complex, giving T cells powerful immunosurveillance
capabilities. Despite high TCR specificity, T cells recognize orthologue
antigens, aka xenoantigens, from other species. As little is known regarding
species-specific differences in antigen processing and presentation, a better
understanding of the rules governing xenoantigen processing, presentation and T
cell recognition is needed. Findings by the PI and others have shown that mouse
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) raised against specific mouse minor
histocompatibility antigens (e.g. H4 and H7) recognize human orthologue minor
antigens. However, when extended to mouse CTLs specific for the hydrophobic H47
antigen, such human cells were not recognized. Preliminary results indicate that
these human cells transcriptionally express a "human H47-like" gene. Moreover,
the predicted human H47 protein contains a peptide motif similar to the mouse
H47 peptide antigen; when synthesized and loaded onto cells in a CTL lysis
immunoassay, the mouse CTLs recognized this human peptide as foreign and killed
the cells. This project will determine the molecular basis of this species-
specific H47 antigen processing/presentation difference i.e. whether the species
discrepancy is based in sequence/cleavage, or if human cells lack specific
antigen processing machinery needed to ultimately present this particular
antigen precursor. Students enrolled in research-related courses or in the new
B.S. Biotechnology major at this small liberal arts university will confirm
human H47 translational expression using western blotting, will construct
H47-based mini-genes, and will transfect human and murine cells with the
H47-based expression constructs as well as murine antigen processing gene
constructs. CTL testing of transfectant cells will identify H47 processing and
presentation status. Undergraduate student participation in this research will
provide technical and conceptual expertise, and will prepare the student
researchers for careers in modern
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;