* 0346556
* CAREER:  Women and Students of Color in Doctoral Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Abbe Herzig, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 06/30/2009
* USD 635,601.00

This project will examine factors affecting the participation of women and
students from groups underrepresented in doctoral programs in the mathematical
sciences. The investigator will conduct case studies of five doctoral programs,
a survey, and indepth interviews with students and faculty.&lt;br/&gt; No
research has systematically and broadly examined the experiences of
underrepresented groups in doctoral mathematical sciences. By looking at this
question through both the institutional and individual perspectives, this
project expects to increase understanding of what it takes to succeed in
doctoral mathematics, the obstacles faced by women and students from
underrepresented groups, and the actions some programs have taken to help
students succeed.&lt;br/&gt;The research and educational activities are guided
by theory that learning is comprised of three parts: acquiring knowledge,
engaging in practices, and developing a research identity. The investigator has
first-hand knowledge of doctoral mathematical sciences, through her experiences
as a graduate student in mathematics and statistics and her previous research on
doctoral student attrition. &lt;br/&gt;The researcher has developed a network of
mathematicians who do related work, who have agreed to make resources available
for this project (such as access to populations of students in mathematics).
Experts in research methodology, diversity issues in mathematics, post-graduate
mathematics education, online surveys, and assessment have agreed to be
available to this project as advisors or as consultants. The investigator has
experience with both qualitative and quantitative research methods, and has
managed complex, long-term projects through her prior work in research and
industry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Both the research and educational plan are
focused on issues of diversity in mathematics education. One explicit goal of
the research project will be to develop concrete recommendations that
mathematics faculty and policymakers can follow to increase the diversity of
doctoral students who enroll in and graduate from doctoral mathematics programs.
Results will be disseminated within the mathematics community. The investigator
has begun working in this regard, through conference presentations and the
development of publications suitable for a mathematical audience. The
persistence framework described in the proposal, the quantitative persistence
measures developed through the project, and the research findings, may well
inform efforts in other STEM disciplines to recruit and retain a more diverse
student body. If this research is successful, then it will increase our
understanding of the factors important in the success of women and students
underrepresented in STEM, the obstacles faced by some groups of students, and
what faculty and other interested parties can do to improve the participation
and success of these students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigator's
educational work will include training pre-service secondary teachers to be more
aware of and responsive to diversity issues, leading them to teach in ways that
engage children of all backgrounds in mathematics and mathematical thinking. In
addition, the investigator will be a leader in a project to develop a mentored
learning community for undergraduates in mathematics, with a goal of attracting
more students, and in particular a more diverse population of students, into
mathematics and mathematics-related disciplines. Through each of these efforts,
the investigator aims to lead future cohorts of undergraduate students to an
improved sense of what mathematics is and how it can be used, and to help them
discover the excitement and value of mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;