* 0346164
* Further Studies of the Phenomenology and Physics of the Lightning Discharge
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2010
* Martin Uman, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 04/30/2010
* USD 1,140,700.00

These investigators will study a number of topics related to the lightning
discharge, primarily using a facility they have developed in which a wire
trailed from a rocket causes lightning to strike their observing facility. They
will study such features of lightning as the attachment process (the initial
process that determines where lightning will strike) and upward unconnected
discharges that are often produced when lightning strikes a nearby location.
These latter discharges are thought to be responsible for many fires and other
damage in the vicinity of lightning strikes, as well as injury to humans. The
investigators will measure the currents in a grounded structure that are
produced when lightning strikes nearby and will use imaging cameras to study the
discharge process at their instrumented site. They also will use rocket-
triggered lightning to measure nitric oxide (NO) production by lightning. NO is
a trace gas that affects many important chemical processes in the atmosphere,
including ozone production. Previous estimates of the global importance of NO
production by lightning have varied substantially, from a minor to a major
source, so the investigators hope to use direct measurements in the lightning
channel to reduce this uncertainty. A recent additional discovery at their
observing facility has been the production of X-rays and other energetic
radiation produced by a rocket-triggered lightning. They will continue studies
of the nature of this radiation, which promises to provide new information on
the energetics of lightning and on the breakdown process. They also plan an
evaluation of the ability of the National Lightning Detection Network to detect
and locate lightning, because some of their earlier studies have suggested that
there are discrepancies in detection efficiency and location that now can be
studied accurately using new GPS timing at their site.

The work will involve extensive collaboration with international scientists and
an active program of graduate education. The investigators will continue to host
events for high school science, make their research available through a
distance-learning program, incorporate their research results into a course on
lightning, and maintain a very active program of outreach activities that makes
information about lightning available to the general public. Some aspects of
their expected results, especially those associated with upward unconnected
discharges, have important connections to public safety. The facility that they
have developed will continue to serve as an important focal point for the
community and will contribute to the research of many investigators throughout
the country and the world.