* 0346272
* SGER:   Physical and Biological Consequences of a Hydrocarbon Spill on the Ice Cover of Lake Fryxell, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* John Priscu, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 02/28/2007
* USD 75,034.00

Taylor Valley in the McMurdo Dry Valleys of East Antarctica is the site of a
long-term ecological research (LTER) project. The pristine Taylor Valley has
three major closed basin perennially ice-covered lakes (Hoare, Fryxell and
Bonney). On January 17th 2003, a Bell 212 helicopter crashed on the 5 m thick
ice cover of Lake Fryxell, resulting in the spill of ~730 liters of diesel fuel
as well as small amounts of synthetic lubricants and hydraulic fluids. An
immediate response from personnel based at McMurdo Station allowed initiation of
clean up efforts within four days of the crash. However, at least half of the
spilled fluids could not be recovered owing to the condition of the ice and the
unavoidable close of the field season in early February, precluding further
access to the lake site. These fluids will remain trapped in the ice until the
next spring (Dec 2003) melt season starts. The site will become accessible in
November 2003 when ice cores and water samples can be collected for detailed
analyses. Members of the McMurdo Dry Valleys LTER research team have submitted
three SGER proposals (0346316, 0346272 and 0347219) to better document the fate
and transport of hydrocarbons within the lake ice and water. The goals of the
coordinated research effort are to understand the physical, chemical and
biological changes that have occurred since the spill and what, if any, the
longer-term impact of the spill will be. Results will also provide important
information for the improvement of accident response policies in the Dry
Valleys.&lt;br/&gt;This component of the project will conduct a variety of
physical and biological experiments to determine the fate of hydrocarbons within
the ice and their influence on biological activity and diversity. Undergraduate
students, graduate students and postdoctoral students will participate in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;