* 0346240
* Understanding Volcanic Sources Through Improved Inversion of Deformation and Gravity Data
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Paul Segall, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 12/31/2006
* USD 225,301.00

An important goal in studying volcanoes is to determine the size and shape of
magma reservoirs. How deep are they? Are they stock-like, or roughly equi-
dimensional bodies, sills, or lacoliths? It is also important to determine the
size, shapes, and locations of conduits through which magma is transported to
the surface, and how precursory seismicity and deformation are controlled by
magma volume and chemistry. Ideally, it would be possible to distinguish between
periods of unrest that lead to eruptions versus those that end with intrusion,
as well as the size and explosivity of future eruptions. Distinguishing between
unrest caused by shallow hydrothermal activity from that generated by magmatic
processes is critical in some silicic systems such as Long Valley Caldera and
Yellowstone. The increasing amount and quality of geodetic data that Earthscope
will make available in the next decade will help address these questions,
however improved methods are needed to analyze these
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is addressing these issues by developing
new inverse methods to determine the location and shape of magmatic reservoirs
from deformation data. Rather than assume a particular source shape, the
researchers are developing methods to solve for the magma chamber geometry from
the data. Previous work utilized distributed point sources to model magma
chambers without physical motivation. The present study looks instead for a
closed surface with uniform pressure inside an elastic earth as a representation
of a magma chamber. They invert for the best fitting set of point sources and
then seek an equivalent pressurized cavity that causes the same surface
deformation. This yields a physically motivated model, based on observed
deformation that is in principal completely
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, this project is employing time
dependent inversion techniques to estimate the temporal and spatial evolution of
the magmatic system. These methods, collectively referred to as Network
Inversion Filters, are capable of imaging the spatio-temporal evolution of
dikes, and faults. Simultaneous inversion of deformation data and repeated
gravity measurements permits researchers to estimate the density of subsurface
fluids. This can allow one to discriminate reliably between magmatic and aqueous
fluids as causes of deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;