* 0346494
* SGER: Aptamer-based Nanogels: Chemosensory Transducers and Sensors for Homeland Security
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2004
* Ponisseril Somasundaran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2004
* USD 54,925.00

Somasundaran, Ponisseril Columbia University "SGER: Aptamer-based Nanogels:
Chemosensory Transducers and Sensors for Homeland Security"

Recent events have necessitated development of advanced sensors for rapid
detection of toxins and microbes. It is the principal investigator's aim to
develop smart aptamer (oligonucleotides of modest size) based polymeric nanogel
platforms that would sense external perturbations, and respond appropriately.
The investigator will incorporate DNAzymes (self cleaving aptamers) into
nanogels so that they will release a pre-loaded antidote or produce a detectable
signal upon binding of a toxin. The interfacial and colloidal properties of the
synthesized nanogels will be studied using fluorescence spectroscopy, light
scattering studies and ultra centrifugation while their delivery processes at
the interface between nanogel and ligands will be studied using surface plasmon
resonance spectroscopy in real time.

Broader Impact: This nano-scale research project has been envisioned and
conceived as a strongly interactive and collaborative program between the
participating PI's in different disciplines---chemical engineering, biology and
chemistry. It has potential applications in as diverse areas as microelectric
circuits, sensors, nano-computers, cosmetics and bio-mimetic devices.
Undergraduate students from a diverse body will have an opportunity to
participate in this on-the-horizon technology through Columbia's current
educational programs and focused outreach activities.

