* 0347877
* CAREER:     Visual Analysis of High-Dimensional Motion:    A Distributed/Collaborative Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2012
* Ying Wu, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 01/31/2012
* USD 475,000.00

This project is about analyzing high-dimensional motion (HDM) from video. HDM
refers to various complex motions with high degrees of freedom, including the
articulation of human body, the deformation of elastic shapes and the multi-
motion of multiple occluding targets. The goal of this project is to overcome
the curse of dimensionality embedded in this challenging visual inference
problem, by systematically pursuing a new distributed/collaborative approach
that unifies various HDMs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Substantially different from
centralized methods, the new approach distributes HDM into a networked
representation of subpart motions, based on Markov network models. Then the
prohibitive HDM inference tasks can be effectively and efficiently fulfilled by
the "collaborations" among the distributed but mutually constrained small-scale
visual inference processes, as revealed by the proposed theoretical study of
this model and implemented by the proposed collaborative particle network
algorithms. This new approach is expected to be significantly more efficient,
more scalable and flexible, and more robust. This project has impact on
intelligent video surveillance by making possible fast and accurate human
tracking and detection techniques, and significantly benefits the research of
human-computer interaction and medical imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is linked to educational activities aiming at the promotion of learning
and innovation through (1) developing an integrated curriculum for visual
computing and statistical modeling; (2) motivating students to explore the
unknown frontiers via innovative course projects and real-world applications;
(3) outreaching to other related research communities via conferences and
websites; (4) disseminating the research to the general public, female and
minority students by creating Vision OpenHouse events.