* 0347078
* CAREER:  Quantum Complexity and Polynomial Approximations of Boolean Functions
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2010
* Yaoyun Shi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 02/28/2010
* USD 399,999.00

This project investigates two different but intertwined lines&lt;br/&gt;of
research: (A) quantum computational complexity, and, &lt;br/&gt;(B) polynomial
approximation of Boolean functions and its &lt;br/&gt;applications in quantum
and classical complexity. The goals are: &lt;br/&gt;(1) to develop fundamental
mathematical tools for analyzing the &lt;br/&gt;inherent power and limitations
of quantum computing, and (2)&lt;br/&gt;to enrich the connections of polynomial
approximations of Boolean&lt;br/&gt;functions with quantum and classical
complexity theory, as well &lt;br/&gt;as to develop fundamental techniques to
solve the corresponding &lt;br/&gt;approximation problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards these tow goals, a wide range of problems in both
quantum &lt;br/&gt;and classical complexity, as well as related approximation
&lt;br/&gt;problems are being investigated, with techniques drawn from
&lt;br/&gt;approximation theory, harmonic analysis, matrix analysis,
&lt;br/&gt;convexity, etc.. Direction (B) is also part of the PI's longer
&lt;br/&gt;term objective to develop a theory of polynomial approximations
&lt;br/&gt;of Boolean functions, which at its current stage still has
&lt;br/&gt;fundamental obstacles to overcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
on polynomial approximations of Boolean functions &lt;br/&gt;would provide
powerful tools from classical mathematics for &lt;br/&gt;computer science, and
promote collaborations between the two&lt;br/&gt;communities from approximation
theory and theory of computation.&lt;br/&gt;Quantum computing promises
revolutionary, far-reaching impacts &lt;br/&gt;on the society through its
paramount superiority over current &lt;br/&gt;technologies in the efficiency and
the security of information &lt;br/&gt;processing. This project could contribute
significantly to the &lt;br/&gt;foundations of quantum information
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;