* 0347285
* CAREER:     Distributed Coordination Strategies for Mobile Autonomous Agents
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Ali Jadbabaie, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

CAREER: Distributed Coordination Strategies for Mobile Autonomous Agents

Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania
This proposal is aimed at developing tools for analysis and design of
distributed algorithms for co-ordination of groups of mobile autonomous agents.
Such coordination algorithms have appeared in various disciplines in different
contexts, ranging from biological sciences (aggregation and social cohesion in
animal species) to systems and control theory and collective robotics
(cooperative con-trol of multi-vehicle systems), and from statistical physics
(non-equilibrium phenomena in many degree-of-freedom dynamical systems) to
computer graphics (artificial life, simulated flocking). We plan to develop a
unified theory which provides a provably correct analysis and synthesis of
distributed coordination and collective synchronization among a network of
mobile agents with a changing topology. Several key problems are formulated and
road-maps for obtaining efficient and scalable solutions to the problems are
discussed. The proposed research plan utilizes tools from algebraic and spectral
theory of graphs, control theory and theory of dynamical systems. Intellectual
Merit: Distributed coordination problems such as collective synchronization and
flocking are ubiquitous in complex biological, engineering, and physical
systems. Such prob-lems arise in control theory, physics, biology, social
sciences, power system networks and in time synchronization in sensor networks.
The common feature of all of the above problems is that a set of (possibly
mobile) agents are interconnected using simple nearest neighbor rules in a
network with a topology that is time varying. We plan to develop a unified
framework which allows us to study these problems and synthesize coordinated and
cooperative systems of multiple agents. Moreover, this study will provide a
justification for the so called emergence of collective behavior from simple
local interactions, a phenomenon which has been observed across complex
engineer-ing and natural systems. Broader Impacts: The proposed research will
impact the study of complex engineering systems, ranging from operation and
joint coordination of unmanned air, ground, and underwater vehicles as well as
coordination of a network of unmanned robots to perform search and rescue
operations. The research will also impact other emerging applications in
homeland security, defense, trans-portation, wireless communication, and
electric power networks, which require networks of agents to be capable of
multi-user communication, collaborative information processing, and distributed
computation, actuation, and control. The research plan is also accompanied by an
active educa-tion plan consisting of undergraduate and graduate level course
development, which will provide a framework for studying problems involving
dynamic systems over networks. The plan is designed to involve undergraduate
students in research and provide them with a well-defined plan of study to help
motivate them to pursue an advanced degree. It would also bring research across
several areas of science and systems theory together in a single unifying
framework.