* 0347324
* CAREER: Integrating Bacterial Diversity into Environmental Change Research and Education
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Jennifer Martiny, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 01/31/2007
* USD 682,755.00

Microbes are often ignored in environmental research and education. This gap
hinders scientists' ability to predict how ecosystems will respond to
anthropogenic disturbances such as nutrient inputs, land-use changes, and global
warming. A CAREER grant has been awarded to Dr. Jennifer Hughes of Brown
University to pursue activities that incorporate microbial diversity science
into environmental education, and to investigate how much the composition of
bacterial assemblages in the environment matters to the way an ecosystem "works"
- for example, how it cycles nutrients and decomposes wastes. There are many
hurdles to answering this research question. For instance, little is known about
how the composition of bacterial communities varies within and across similar
habitat types in different regions of the planet, making it difficult to decide
how to sample bacterial communities, let alone study how they affect the
environment. In addition, there are few methods developed to conduct experiments
on bacterial communities directly in the field. To address these challenges, Dr.
Hughes will combine molecular methods such as DNA sequencing with traditional
ecological field experiments. She will first document patterns of bacterial
diversity across salt marshes on three continents. She will then use this
information to test how bacterial communities respond to disturbances such as
nitrogen deposition and whether changes in bacterial composition translate into
changes in ecosystem processes.

This project will be conducted in coastal marshes, an ecosystem that is
literally and figuratively at the boundary of a variety of environmental,
social, and political problems. Perhaps most importantly, salt marshes act as
filters, buffering open waters and economically important fisheries from
pollutants. At the same time, these marshes are one of the most threatened
ecosystems in the United States. The results of Dr. Hughes' project are an
important step towards predicting how further coastal development will change
the way marshes work. In addition, the research will provide one of the largest,
systematic datasets on bacterial distribution across geographic scales,
providing a useful baseline for future sampling and experimental design in other
ecosystem types. The research also includes the development of a new community
based, problem-solving course entitled "Microbial Diversity and the Environment"
at Brown University developed in tandem with a new environmental science course
at a local high school, with joint field trips between the two groups. The
courses will strengthen the connections between Brown students, the local
community and Rhode Island agencies, as the students' projects will address
environmental problems in Rhode Island in collaboration with agency scientists.