* 0347030
* CAREER: Data-Driven Instructional Systems-- Accessing How School Leaders Develop Local Capacity to Use Data to Influence Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2010
* Richard Halverson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 05/31/2010
* USD 792,590.00

This proposal studies how leaders build data-driven instructional systems (DDIS)
by developing new programs and using existing school functions to create local
school systems responsive to changes in student assessment scores. The recent
demand for schools to respond to external accountability measures challenges
school leaders to create school instructional systems that use data to guide the
practices of teaching and learning. For example, leaders who establish
structures for teachers to discuss achievement data, consider and experiment
with research-based teaching practices, link teacher evaluation to student
performance, and/or building a financial system to reward successful teaching
are able to intentionally create and exploit the systemic interconnections of
school functions to create local DDISs.&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to
develop a new understanding of how to access, document and communicate the
knowledge that guides the practice of successful instructional leaders. This
work is grounded in prior efforts to document the practice of leaders engaged in
the difficult work of constructing professional communities, developing
inclusive teaching practices, and designing and implementing teacher evaluation
programs. As the next step in this research work, investigating DDISs promises
to show how school leaders engage in the daunting task of reshaping their school
culture to meet external accountability demands. The study will contribute to
how we think about the relationship between leadership, school reform,
accountability, and leadership preparation&lt;br/&gt;Three component activities
will furnish educational experiences: (a) the development and dissemination of
multimedia cases of practice, (b) insights for how to better teach and design
administrator preparation and professional development courses, and (c) graduate
student development. A key outcome of the research and a central feature of the
education plan will be to develop multimedia cases to make the knowledge that
guides DDIS development public. These cases will serve as foundation for
reconsidering how to teach leaders-in-training and how to help graduate students
recognize and document the central features of leadership practice. The work
proposed is consistent with the goals of the university and department to
investigate new methods for understanding and communicating school leadership
practices.&lt;br/&gt;