* 0347887
* CAREER: Costs and benefits of problem solving in small groups: An integrated plan for research and education
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Jennifer Wiley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 04/30/2010
* USD 543,746.00

The proposed program of research explores the effects of group size on problem-
solving. The investigator will systematically look at the processes and outcomes
of individuals working along as well as colloborations by dyads and triads as
they engage in scientific problem solving activities in which undergraduates are
asked to reason about data, evidence, and theories in intact psychology classes.
In this manner, the investigator's research program is integrated with her
classroom instruction plans for her courses on research methods in education and
computer science. The investigator also proposes to conduct a parallel set of
laboratory-based studies looking at reasoning about plate tectonics and
volcanoes in an attempt to generalize the findings across domains and topics.
The central goal of the project is the identification of the specific aspects of
collaborative contexts that lead to learning gains and those that do not.
Drawing on the literature in social psychology, the investigator has identified
four aspects of group problem solving that are implicated in a loss of
productivity: changes in motivation and effort, potential for evaluation and
conflict, task coordination and representation, pooling of resources. The
investigator hopes to produce guidelines for the design of effective
collaborative activities that should not only foster learning within her own
classes, but have implications across a range of domains and topics in
education. The investigator's educational plan includes using her own studies to
refine her current undergraduate courses in methods in psychology, and adapting
them for use in her course in Computer Science and educational methods classes.
In her role as an advisor in the Honors College, she also plans to engage a
group of undergraduates as researchers in her lab. &lt;br/&gt;