* 0347960
* CAREER:  Integrating Behavior and Demography in Marine Mammal Conservation
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2010
* Leah Gerber, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 03/31/2010
* USD 550,500.00

Integrating Behavior and Demography in Marine Mammal Conservation
&lt;br/&gt;Leah R. Gerber, Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individual differences in behavior and social
status can in theory determine the rate of population change and thus the threat
that imperiled species face in the real world. Dr. Leah Gerber will integrate
theories from behavioral ecology with quantitative techniques in demography to
examine the effects of reproductive behavior on extinction risk for California
sea lions (Zalophus californianus) in the Gulf of California. Dr. Gerber plans
to develop an empirical research program to test hypotheses regarding the degree
to which the demography of sea lions depends on three commonly studied groups of
behavior-conspecific attraction, territoriality and parental investment. She
will also develop a theoretical research program that links behavioral data
collected in the field to models that describe the demography of sea lions and
more generally of populations of conservation concern. Finally, she will use
empirical data combined with her previous work on risk assessment to develop a
general framework for integrating behaviors and the demographic consequences of
these behaviors into estimates of extinction risk. Findings from this basic
research will provide practitioners with guidelines for understanding when
behavior should be an important component of a particular management strategy.
Dr. Gerber's research will achieve broader impacts through undergraduate
training and curriculum development, graduate and post-doctoral mentorship,
outreach and communication of results to the general public and by fostering
research and teaching collaborations with Mexican undergraduate institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;