* 0347203
* CAREER: Analysis of the Coiled-coil Interactome
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Amy Keating, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2010
* USD 812,465.00

The research objective of this project is to use computational methods to link
the molecular properties of protein-protein interactions to their broader
biological roles in the genome. The project aims to demonstrate that a
structural understanding of protein interaction motifs can contribute to the
interpretation of high-throughput studies of protein-protein interactions, and
can lead to specific and testable hypotheses about protein associations and
function. The work tests this idea using the alpha-helical coiled coil, a common
and important interaction motif, as an example. The specific research objectives
are: (1) To build a database containing the coiled-coil sequences from numerous
genomes, along with the properties of the coiled coils, the functions of the
proteins, and other annotation; (2) To combine these data with structural
considerations to validate high-throughput protein-protein interaction studies
and to predict coiled coil-mediated interactions; and (3) To experimentally
verify putative coiled coil mediated interactions predicted to have important
biological roles.

Broader Impacts: Dr. Keating's research and teaching at MIT are carried out in
the emerging areas of computational and systems biology. These fields will have
a tremendous impact on science and society in the next several decades. The
sequencing of the human genome, as well as that of important pathogens, crops
and scientific model organisms, has provided an opportunity for fundamentally
new kinds of research combining biology, computer science, math, engineering and
other quantitative fields. This interdisciplinary approach promises a deeper
understanding of biology, as well as breakthroughs in biotechnology and
molecular therapeutics. It is critically important to develop foundational
methods for this kind of science and to provide appropriate training for
undergraduate and graduate students who want to work in this area. The research
described above, coupled with Dr. Keating's active role in CSBi, MIT's
educational, research and outreach initiative in Computational and Systems
Biology, will bring us closer to these goals.