* 0347682
* CAREER: Sphingolipid-Dependent Steroid Hormone Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Marion Sewer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 04/30/2009
* USD 529,900.00

Steroid hormones serve as a major form of communication between different organs
and tissues, thereby allowing cells to respond in a coordinated manner to
changes in the internal and external environments. In the adrenal cortex, the
biosynthesis of these hormones is tightly regulated by the trophic hormone
adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) via a cAMP signaling cascade. Exposure of
steroidogenic cell types to sphingolipids (SL) has been shown to both increase
and decrease steroid hormone biosynthesis. However, the mechanism(s) by which
SLs alter steroid hormone secretion is unknown. Preliminary studies using mass
spectrometry have found that ACTH (and cAMP) shifts the cellular SL profile and
that SLs increase steroidogenic gene expression, suggesting that SLs may play a
role in ACTH/cAMP-stimulated steroid hormone biosynthesis in the adrenal cortex.
Because steroid hormones enable the body to respond to a wide variety of
external stimuli, maintain homeostasis, and undergo developmental and cyclic
programs, further investigation into cellular pathways that alter steroid
hormone biosynthesis is warranted. Both molecular and biochemical techniques
will be employed to examine this novel mechanism by which ACTH/cAMP utilizes SL
metabolism in the regulation of adrenocortical steroidogenesis.

Broader Impacts: The primary goal of graduate training in the biological
sciences is to teach students how to perform, evaluate, and communicate
hypothesis-driven research. Furthermore, studies have shown that the earlier
pre-college students engage in scientific discovery, the more likely are they to
consider careers in the biological sciences. Thus, in addition to increasing our
understanding of the pathways that control steroid hormone biosynthesis,
carrying out the studies outlined in this project will facilitate the mentoring
and training of both graduate and undergraduate students. This project has two
additional key objectives: 1) to train students how to assimilate, critique, and
communicate data and 2) to expose high school students to careers in academic
research. These objectives will be achieved through the development of a course
in data analysis and presentation and by engaging high school students in
laboratory-based research.