* 0347712
* CAREER:Supporting Design Exploration, Prototyping and Testing of Creative Augmented Reality Experiences
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Blair MacIntyre, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2009
* USD 545,000.00

This project will explore early design support for creative uses of augmented
reality (AR) in the arts and design. The primary goal is to advance the state of
the art by enabling designers to work directly with AR as a new medium for
dramatic experiences. The PI will identify and support appropriate design
activities for AR experiences, create design tools that support these
activities, and solve the fundamental technical problems to support the creation
of these tools. The tangible manifestation of this research will be a system
called DART (the Designers Augmented Reality Toolkit), and the primary impact
will be increased understanding of the design and creation process of
experiential AR systems, which offer tremendous promise for creating in-situ
educational and dramatic experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To these ends, the PI
will focus on two design activities: rapid prototyping using informal content to
promote reflective design, and experience testing using Wizard-of-Oz simulation.
A primary contribution of this work will be to understand the computational
abstractions necessary to support prototyping in the space between paper
storyboards and fully working experiences. The PI believes that working with
"computationally active" informal content in real physical spaces is the key to
rapid design of experiential AR systems, and that dealing with the interactions
between the physical and virtual worlds is what distinguishes AR design from
other interactive system design. The PI expects the AR technologies and design
tools he will create will provide the scaffolding necessary to allow both
researchers and domain experts to push the limits of application design.
Designers interested in any AR application domain will benefit greatly from the
ability to rapidly prototype their ideas, and DART will extend Macromedia
Director, the de facto standard for authoring multimedia content, to support the
design, testing and deployment of AR experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact. Beyond the AR community, the tools to be developed in this project will
be useful to non-AR designers in any field that involves simulated or physical
space, such as VR, theater production, architectural visualization, or urban
planning, even if the final content will not be delivered using see-through
HMDs. The PI intends to freely distribute the technology created in this
project, so as to empower a broad class of designers who have been unable to
pursue their interests in these new media because of the expense of equipment
and the difficulty in using the technology. The research will also provide a
novel educational experience to those undergraduate and graduate students (in
Media Studies, Computing and other disciplines such as Architecture and
Industrial Design) who will be working together in the multi-disciplinary
project teams in the PI's classes and on their own research projects. The PI
further intends to explore how DART might be used for teaching some introductory
computing concepts to non-CS students.