* 0347038
* CAREER: Development of Chiral Nucleophilic Carbenes for Use in Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Tomislav Rovis, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2008
* USD 577,000.00

Professor Rovis is developing a family of chiral carbenes, derived from amino
acids, which place chirality proximal to the carbene carbon. The target chiral
triazolylidene carbenes will be explored as nucleophilic catalysts in the
Stetter reaction and other nucleophile catalyzed processes. Professor Rovis will
also assess the behavior of these carbenes as ligands to modify the reactivity
of transition metals in new reaction manifolds, including activation of acidic
C-H bonds by rhodium carbene complexes and the direct activation of acidic X-H
bonds (X = N, O, etc.) by Lewis basic metal complexes. Professor Rovis will
introduce concept mapping to the organic chemistry curriculum, particularly
targeting enhanced understanding and performance by non-
chemists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this CAREER award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the teaching and research program
of Professor Tomislav Rovis, of the Department of Chemistry at Colorado State
University. Professor Rovis is developing a novel class of compounds designed to
mediate selective transformations of various types of organic molecules. These
studies will lead to the development of new and effective methods for the
construction of more complex organic structures, providing powerful tools for
the synthesis of compounds displaying desired chemical or biological activity.
By introducing concept mapping to the organic chemistry curriculum, Professor
Rovis will exploit the power of this technique, in which graphic images are used
to illustrate connections between related topics, to enhance understanding and
performance by students from non-chemical disciplines. Rather than simply using
concept mapping as an assessment tool, Professor Rovis will actively involve
students in the instructional process, empowering them to apply concept mapping
in their other studies.