* 0347315
* Collaborative Research: Brain Plasticity and Division of Labor- From Simple to Complex Societies
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2010
* Sean O'Donnell, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 03/31/2010
* USD 288,518.00

Social insects are among the most ecologically dominant terrestrial animals.
Their success is largely attributed to division of labor among the workers that
make up their colonies. Individual differences in worker behavior are governed
by physiological and anatomical changes in the nervous system, particularly in
the brain. However, the dynamic properties of brain neurons that influence
worker behavior are poorly understood. The goal of this project is to study how
changes in brain neurons are associated with division of labor among social
insect workers, focusing on neural plasticity in the mushroom bodies (MB). MB
are structures in insect forebrains that are involved in learning and sensory
integration, and the MB may play an important role in regulating division of
labor. &lt;br/&gt;As a first step toward understanding the evolution of MB
effects on behavior, the relationships of MB neuroanatomy and worker behavior
will be compared between a wasp species with small, simple societies
(Mischocyttarus mastigophorus) and a species with larger, more complex colonies
(Polybia aequatorialis). Three main approaches will be used. In the first study,
MB neurons that are associated with individual differences in task performance
will be identified. In the second study the effects of age on MB neuron
plasticity and worker behavior will be measured. In the third study, colonies
will be manipulated to induce changes in worker behavior, and associated neural
changes will be measured. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed projects include graduate and
undergraduate training opportunities, and will provide inter-institutional
training experiences. They will also promote education for Americans and local
residents in Costa Rica, including biology guides (Monteverde Cloud Forest
Reserve), and students on graduate and undergraduate field courses. Ongoing
investigations in Monteverde will enhance the visibility of basic investigation
at this important tropical research and conservation site. The research findings
may also have relevance to the control/management of social insect pests and
beneficial insects.&lt;br/&gt;