* 0347499
* CAREER:     Discriminative and Generative Machine Learning with Applications in Tracking and Gesture Recogniton
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2010
* Tony Jebara, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 01/31/2010
* USD 889,088.00

This project aims to develop a tighter integration of generative (e.g., Bayesian
networks) and discriminative (e.g., support vector machines) machine learning.
These two types of learning are typically not integrated in current practice and
are often seen as competing approaches; however, such integration is crucial in
complex multi-disciplinary domains, such as vision, speech, and computational
biology, where scientists have real expertise and exploitable knowledge about
elaborate systems yet also need machine learning to achieve optimal performance
for specific tasks. This project's integrated generative-discriminative
framework will allow practitioners to flexibly design and structure a given
learning problem using generative tools like Bayesian networks and then to
maximize the performance of these models using discriminative methods like
maximum entropy and probabilistic kernels. This framework will be used in
computer vision tracking applications and in classification of gestures. In a
laparoscopic robotic surgery platform, the methods will be used for classifying
surgical drill movements and predicting surgeon dexterity level. The project's
unified approach will be used to create a more comprehensive machine learning
course experience for students, complete with online class materials, visual
demonstrations and software toolkits.