* 0347056
* CAREER:  Structural Basis for the Chloroperoxidase-Catalyzed Enantioselective Transformations
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Xiaotang Wang, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 09/30/2005
* USD 525,000.00

This CAREER award supports research by Professor Xiaotang Wang of Jackson State
University to determine the structural basis for chloroperoxidase-catalyzed
enantioselective transformations. Assignments for all hyperfine-shifted proton
resonances of the heme and heme-pocket amino acids of chloroperoxidase (CPO)
will be made by a combination of two-dimensional NOESY and COSY techniques to
determine connectivities. Highly deuterated CPO samples will be purified to
facilitate resonance assignments. Three and four dimensional NMR experiments
will also be attempted with 15N- and/or 13C-labeled CPO samples to help assign
resonances and develop a structural characterization of CPO in solution.
Detailed structural characterization of the CPO-substrate complexes will then be
carried out through enhanced nuclear relaxation, internuclear NOE, saturation-
transferred NOE, heteronuclear single or multiple quantum correlation, optical,
and fluorescence spectroscopic methods. These results will be combined to
develop a clear picture of the interactions between CPO and its various organic
substrates, thereby providing the structural basis for the CPO-catalyzed chiral
transformations. These results will be used in the design of mutants that can be
used as new and cost-effective enzymes for making important chiral
synthons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Wang's education plan introduces modern
research techniques and innovative evaluation methods into courses in order to
keep students abreast of the current knowledge of chemistry and enhance their
understanding of chemical principles. New course material (Computers in
Chemistry Laboratory Instruction, CCLI) will be adopted for the general
chemistry laboratory course. In addition, a new graduate course, special topics
in inorganic chemistry (bioinorganic chemistry), will be developed. A summer
research program for high school students will also be undertaken.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how chloroperoxidase generates chiral
transformation could enable biotechnological applications of metalloenzymes,
especially in the design of new enzyme catalysts for synthesizing chiral
materials of industrial and medicinal importance. The education plan will
develop both research and new courses in bioinorganic chemistry at this
minority-serving institution.&lt;br/&gt;