* 0347573
* CAREER: Adaptive Neuromorphic VLSI for Improving Accuracy and Precision: Modeling Attention for Bat Echolocation
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2004,01/31/2011
* Timothy Horiuchi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2011
* USD 399,981.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0347573&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of Maryland College
Park&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Horiuchi ,Timothy&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Adaptive Neuromorphic VLSI for Improving Accuracy and
Precision:&lt;br/&gt;Modeling Attention for Bat Echolocation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Echoes are a major part of our daily
auditory lives, yet very few of us are even aware that we use them constantly to
understand the space around us. Echolocating bats have made these echoes their
primary sense (i.e. sonar), demonstrating agile flight in complex forest
environments and successful insect capture in flight; all in darkness. Because
the brain represents a computational engine that far surpasses any single man-
made computer in both capabilities and power consumption, we are interested to
understand the principles of neural computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For a
number of years we have been constructing custom analog integrated circuits that
mimic the basic neural processing of bat echolocation in an effort to
demonstrate these principles on a small flying vehicle, requiring real-time
performance, miniaturization, and power efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
'neuromorphic' very-large-scale-integration (VLSI) approach (which implements
neural computations by mimicking its structural morphology), offers advantages
in size and power, but often lacks needed precision and flexibility. This has
been one of the main concerns about this research field's long-term viability.
In this proposal we pursue three main goals: 1) to expand the use of learning
and adaptation techniques at the circuit level to increase computational
precision and accuracy at the system-level, 2) to explore the use of 'virtual'
wiring to mimic large-scale wiring changes akin to neural development, and 3) to
adapt existing neural models of spatial attention for use in sampled sensory
systems (e.g., sonar) to guide this learning process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this research and our educational plan we hope to
raise awareness to the rich acoustic cues around us and how we as humans and the
machines we build can learn to make use of them.&lt;br/&gt;