* 0347675
* CAREER: Analysis of Signalling in Arabidopsis Carpel Patterning
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2010
* Frans Tax, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Alexander McClure
* 01/31/2010
* USD 706,667.00

The goal of this research is to understand the signaling networks that regulate
pattern in the Arabidopsis fruit. Classical experiments indicated a key role for
intercellular signaling events during the development of the fruit in plants,
but the signals and receptors involved have thus far not been identified. The
aims of this proposal are to understand how fruit size and pattern are regulated
in Arabidopsis. Using a screen of insertion mutants in Arabidopsis, mutants have
been identified in four receptor kinase genes that share a common phenotype of
extra organs in the fruit. The analysis of the phenotypes of the null alleles of
these genes suggests these receptor kinases are critically important for
establishing the developmental axes of the fruit. Because of the observed,
shared phenotypes among the receptor mutants, a search was initiated for
available mutations in potential ligands which revealed that brassinosteroids
may play a role in cell signaling in the fruit primordia. The preliminary data
suggests a lateral inhibition model of cell signaling in the floral meristem
that produces the fruit. The specific aims of this proposal are: (1) to identify
more components of this signaling network using genetic screens, (2) to
determine if the receptor kinases are involved in lateral signaling through
analysis of their expression patterns and characterization of the mutant
phenotypes at the cellular level, and (3) to test the role of brassinosteroids
in fruit patterning by using biochemical intermediates, mutants that are blocked
at individual steps and an inhibitor of brassinosteroid
biosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;In the instructional portion of this project, several
molecular-biology computer-lab modules will be developed. These are designed to
accompany a lecture course for undergraduates in molecular biology, and one
module will later be modified for public school outreach. The goals of these
modules will be to teach basic concepts in molecular biology and to increase
awareness of how biological technology affects our daily lives. One module will
compare the traditional plant breeding approach with transgenic approaches,
including both experimental methods and analysis of the economic and biological
implications of developing crops. This module will teach students about the
biology underlying the food they consume and prepare them for their future in
both personal and political decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: The results of the proposed experiments will tell us how fruit size and
pattern are regulated in Arabidopsis, and can be applied to understanding the
regulation of fruit size in other plants. In domesticated crop plants, changes
in the homologs of some of these genes may be responsible for the diversity in
fruit size and morphology. This concept of the interplay between classical plant
breeding, molecular genetics and the development of transgenic plants forms the
basis of the educational part of the proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of this work: The proposed research, testing a model for signaling
events that regulate patterning in Arabidopsis fruit, is interdisciplinary,
combining genomics, genetics, molecular biology, and development. The
experiments will provide training opportunities for undergraduates, graduate
students and postdoctorals. The experiments also form the basis of some of the
ideas for developing computer modules to accompany a molecular-biology lecture
class. One of these modules will be redesigned with the input of teachers to be
included in an ongoing outreach program to teach high-school students about
plant-breeding strategies and genetically modified organisms. All modules
developed for courses will be made available on the Internet for students and
teachers. Both the Tucson public school and University of Arizona student
populations provide opportunities to reach students from underrepresented
groups.