* 0347319
* Magnetic Oxide Nanoparticles Templated By the Self-Assembly of Block Copolymers
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Peter Kofinas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 09/30/2008
* USD 162,000.00

CTS-0347319&lt;br/&gt;P. Kofinas, University of Maryland College
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this renewal proposal to a previously
obtained CAREER award, is to incorporate half metallic nanoparticles into the
self-assembled domains of microphase separated diblock copolymers and to
synthesis spherical and cylindrical functional nanostructures exhibiting
improved magnetic properties. Ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) of
norbornene and its derivatives has proved to be a very effective way of
synthesizing metal-functionalized block copolymers of narrow polydispersity. The
block copolymer microphase separation can be effectively used as a template to
confine nanoparticles of inorganic materials within one of the nanodomains. The
self-assembled nature of the domain structure in block copolymers allows control
over the shape and size and dispersion of 10-500 angstrom
nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We plan to carefully synthesize specific
families of polymer templated nanocomposite compounds in bulk and thin-film form
under controlled conditions, establish their structure, chemical stoichiometry,
and degree of order, and then correlate the magnetic properties with the
structural-chemical parameters. A unique combination of conventional and
magnetic neutron scattering will be used to establish the relationship between
the polymer self-assembly and the magnetic properties will be conducted for a
broad class of ferromagnets that will be incorporated into the self-assembled
polymer nanodomains including known half-metallic systems such as CrO2, spinels
such as NiFe2O4 and layered ferrites such as Ba2Fe6O19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the proposed research relate to magnetism in nanometer
systems, a fascinating topic in fundamental science, which is also closely
related to the advancement of the state-of-the-art technologies in
microelectronics since magnets are vital components of electronic devices. As
the dimension of microelectronic system continually shrinks and demands for
small-dimension components increase, the understanding and controlling magnetic
properties of small length scale magnets such as nanoparticles becomes
increasingly crucial. Nanocrystalline oxide spinels are of interest both for
fundamental studies in magnetic properties that have found numerous applications
in high frequency devices, memory cores and magnetic recording
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pursuit of this research will result in training
of a new generation of undergraduate and graduate students and build research
infrastructure in an area of vital importance to future technical developments
in the polymer and microelectronic industries. The education activities to be
undertaken include undergraduate and graduate teaching, graduate student
advising, and various opportunities in undergraduate research involvement and
mentoring, as well as the development of an interactive web page. Middle school
teachers and students will also be exposed to aspects of nanoparticle research
through RET and REU supplements, which will be requested if this proposal is
funded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;