* 0347609
* CAREER: Experimental Analyses Relating Host Contact and Parasite Community Structure
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2010
* Matthew Gompper, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2010
* USD 595,042.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This work supports an integrated research and education
effort that aims to (1) better understand interactions between parasitic
organisms and their hosts and (2) train students to address the depth and
complexity of wildlife disease issues. &lt;br/&gt; Parasites can dramatically
influence populations of organisms, and indirectly influence entire communities
or even ecosystems. How changes in the behavior and ecology of hosts influence
the parasites of individual animals as well as entire populations is poorly
understood. This project supports a study of several common wildlife species
that addresses how changes to the environment that result in animals coming into
contact with one another influence the likelihood that these animals will become
infected with parasitic species, including parasites of economic and public
health importance.&lt;br/&gt;The education component of the study focuses on
better integration of the fields of ecology and health sciences. This will be
accomplished by (1) training students in ecological parasitology, (2) the
creation of a consortium for studying wildlife diseases amongst currently
existing programs at the University of Missouri, and 3) structuring a system of
internships for undergraduate and graduate students to become involved in
research in disease ecology.&lt;br/&gt;