* 0347933
* CAREER: User-centered Adaptive Information Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* ChengXiang Zhai, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2010
* USD 522,000.00

Information Retrieval (IR) refers to finding information from large amounts of
text, and is among the most useful technologies for overcoming information
overload. For example, Web search engines are now essential tools for everyone
to find information on the Web. Existing IR systems are inherently non-optimal
because the retrieval decision is made primarily based on the current query and
the document collection without considering information about the user and
search context. This project seeks to eliminate this limitation of the existing
retrieval methods and formally develop a new retrieval paradigm called user-
centered adaptive information retrieval (UCAIR), in which user information and
search context are both exploited to improve retrieval performance. This project
includes research on: (1) developing a new UCAIR framework based on Bayesian
decision theory; (2) developing new language models to exploit user information
and search context to improve retrieval accuracy; (3) developing new retrieval
methods to optimize the long-term retrieval utility over an entire retrieval
session; (4) developing new retrieval methods to leverage user similarities to
better infer one particular user's information need based on information about
other similar users; and (5) developing prototype UCAIR systems for searching
the Web and bioinformatics literature. The project will advance the state of the
art of IR through developing a unified formal framework for UCAIR, a variety of
retrieval methods for exploiting user information and search context to improve
retrieval accuracy, which will directly lead to more effective information
retrieval applications in all domains. The research results will also enhance
the current IR curricula, improving education of information technology
workforce. The project Web site http://sifaka.cs.uiuc.edu/ucair/ will be used
for research results dissemination.