* 0347627
* MIP. Temperature Adaptation of Autotrophic Carbon Metabolism in Ecologically Diverse Hot Spring Synechococcus: An Integrative Study of Extreme Photosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Scott Miller, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2007
* USD 302,064.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Scott R. Miller of The University of Montana to
investigate the mechanisms of physiological adaptation among members of a
closely related group of photosynthetic hot spring bacteria that differ in
temperature tolerance. Because organisms cannot perform equally well in all
possible environments, understanding both the limits to performance and how
physiological differences develop among microorganisms remains a fundamental
goal for the study of microbial diversity. Proteins that affect performance can
generally either be more stable at higher temperatures or work faster at lower
temperatures, but not both. This project specifically addresses the
contributions of this trade-off at the protein level to the physiology and
thermal ecology of these bacteria for a key protein in the photosynthetic
process: ribulose bis-phosphate carboxylase (Rubisco): (1) Rubisco stability and
function at different temperatures will be determined by physiological,
biochemical and biophysical approaches for modern-day versions of this protein
isolated from these bacteria; (2) specific ancestral versions of Rubisco that
represent incremental steps in the evolution of this protein during the
diversification of these bacteria will be constructed genetically using a
targeted mutational approach; (3) stability and function of these ancestral
Rubisco versions will be determined to test whether particular compositional
changes during its evolution have conferred stability at higher temperatures
and/or a decreased rate of performance at lower temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;