* 0347218
* CAREER: Chemosensory Behavior in Plant-Microbe Association
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Gladys Alexandre, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 04/30/2006
* USD 365,000.00

The colonization of the plant root surface by the plant-growth promoting
nitrogen-fixing bacterium Azospirillum brasilense is likely to be dependent on
chemotaxis toward root exudates. However, the molecular mechanisms governing
chemosensory behavior in most plant-associated bacteria are still poorly
understood. This research project focuses on establishing the molecular basis of
the chemosensory behavior in A. brasilense and its role in wheat root
colonization. First, the function of the unique conserved domain of the central
chemotaxis regulator CheA in sensing and behavior will be elucidated (research
objective 1). Next, the function of novel chemoreceptors in behavior will be
identified (research objective 2). Finally, the contribution of the general
chemotaxis machinery and individual chemoreceptors in the establishment of the
Azospirillum-wheat association will be determined (research objective 3). The
outcome of the proposed research will enhance understanding of diversity in
signal transduction in prokaryotes and directly benefit the field of
biofertilizer design. The results obtained can be used for developing strains
with improved abilities to colonize the rhizosphere of agronomically important
plants, such as wheat. Sensing and behavior in bacteria are uniquely suited for
broadening the educational experience of college students and enable the
development of research-based educational materials for K-12 students.
Undergraduate students (education objective 1) and K-12 science teachers
(education objective 2) will be provided with research opportunities in the
ongoing project. A module on "Microbial Sensing" will be implemented in the NSF-
funded Bio-Bus project that provides inquiry-based learning opportunities and
hands-on experiments to Georgia's K-12 students (education objective 3).