* 0348204
* CAREER:     Low Coherence Light Scattering for Biophotonics
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Adam Wax, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 01/31/2010
* USD 440,750.00

0348204&lt;br/&gt;Wax&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER Development Plan focuses on
utilizing optics knowledge from the field of photonics for biomedical
engineering applications. The goal of the research plan is to develop new
applications of low coherence interferometry (LCI) for detecting light scattered
by cells and tissues as a method of determining their structural and functional
features with sub-wavelength sensitivity. Optical techniques offer the
advantages of being non-invasive, non-ionizing and readily implemented by
simple, cost-efficient means while avoiding the need for fixatives and staining
agents and their associated artifacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan
is based on three activities: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To further develop Angle-
resolved LCI (a/LCI), a method for measuring cell morphometry in situ, the
efficacy of which already has been validated in the laboratory. The a/LCI
technique has great potential as an early-cancer diagnostic that will be
realized by implementing and applying robust a/LCI instruments for both clinical
and laboratory investigations of cells and tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The
validation and development of Fourier-domain LCI, a novel method for probing
sub-surface structure in biological tissues using optical spectroscopy. This
approach is a simpler optical scheme than a/LCI but to date has only been
demonstrated on tissue phantoms. Further experiments will help to evaluate its
potential capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. The development of a novel
microscopy scheme based on using an actively stabilized interferometer to
measure the phase of scattered light for cell biology applications. This
technique will enable precision measurements of the biophysical properties of
cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education plan will incorporate photonics into
the biomedical engineering curriculum by developing a new Biophotonics course
and new teaching materials. The specific activities include development of a
modern microscopy course, incorporation of Biophotonics into existing BME
courses and development of independent Biophotonics projects for students
ranging from high school to the graduate level. The activities will take
advantage of a new Biophotonics teaching laboratory that will house state of the
art equipment for instructional use. The education program also will benefit
from the help of the outreach program at Duke University that will enable
introduction of Biophotonics to high school students, through independent
projects and to underrepresented groups by involving visiting students in
research projects in the principal investigator's laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;