* 0348981
* CAREER:  Langmuir Circulation--Internal Wave Interactions
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Gregory Chini, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2010
* USD 477,602.00

0348981&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project is an integrated program of
research and education that will improve our understanding of the oceanic mixed
layer, attract students to technical disciplines, and equip such students with
critical thinking strategies. The intellectual merit of the research program
derives from the formulation and first-principles analysis of simplified ocean
models to investigate the role of Langmuir circulation-internal wave
interactions in mixed layer-pycnocline coupling. Langmuir circulation is a
convective motion, consisting of a system of counter-rotating, roughly wind-
aligned vortices, that dominates the observed kinematics of the upper ocean.
Recent theoretical, computational and observational evidence suggests that the
largest vortices, which rapidly re-distribute mass, momentum and energy
throughout the mixed layer, may interact with internal gravity waves propagating
in the pycnocline. The remarkable observations of Farmer motivate the process
studies and provide high-quality data for model comparisons. A complement of
primary and secondary stability studies, asymptotic analyses and two-dimensional
numerical simulations will be used to establish whether Langmuir circulation-
internal wave coupling can alter mixing and transport within and beneath the
surface layer, e.g. by modifying the growth rate or stability of the vortex
system, or by increasing small-scale internal-wave activity within the
pycnocline. These theoretical studies should provide a useful foundation for
future large-eddy simulations and observations of mixed-layer-pycnocline
coupling under realistic oceanic conditions. The objectives of the educational
program are to provide training for high school science teachers, to encourage
students to pursue technical careers and to better enable these students to
think critically about fundamental technical concepts by promoting active,
integrative learning. These goals will be achieved through an approach largely
centered around the theme of Fluid Waves in Technology &amp; the Environment. A
host of opportunities will be created for high school, undergraduate and
graduate students to participate in project-based learning experiences,
including: research in theoretical oceanography, construction and use of hands-
on wave demonstrations, and development of analytical-numerical models of
nonlinear wave propagation in the versatile computing environment MATLAB.
Additional pedagogical reforms, including the use of regular concept quizzes and
writing assignments, will be implemented in the thermal-fluids courses taught by
the principal investigator. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
CAREER development plan include its potential: to improve mixed-layer
parameterizations used in numerical modeling of weather, climate, biological
processes and pollutant dispersal; to foster networks among theoretical,
computational and observational oceanographers; to provide training for
undergraduate and graduate students in theoretical oceanography; to provide
authentic science experiences for high school students through teacher training;
to incorporate improvements in pedagogy into the classroom; and to provide a
firm foundation for the principal investigator to make a lifetime of integrated
contributions to teaching and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;