* 0348913
* Functions and Interactions of the Arabidopsis phyB/D/E Phytochromes
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Robert Sharrock, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 04/30/2009
* USD 687,000.00

Plants sense the environmental light cues that control their physiological and
developmental processes through the activities of specific photoreceptor
molecules. Three basic types of plant photoreceptors have been identified: the
red/far-red (R/FR) light sensing phytochromes and the blue light sensing
cryptochromes and phototropins. All of these receptors are found in multiple
forms in plants and this proposal explores the functions and interactions of
members of the R/FR-activated phytochrome family. Phytochromes are known to
regulate diverse responses throughout the plant growth cycle, including seed
germination, seedling de-etiolation, leaf expansion and stem elongation, shade-
avoidance, and flowering time. These responses contribute to a large number of
ecologically and agriculturally important plant traits; hence, an understanding
of the molecular mechanism of phytochrome signaling is likely to have
application across many areas of integrative plant
biology.&lt;br/&gt;Phytochromes are soluble chromoproteins that exhibit R/FR-
photoreversible conformational changes and biological activities. The model
plant Arabidopsis contains five different phytochromes, phyA through phyE. Among
these, phyA is abundant in dark-grown plant tissue, is strongly down-regulated
by light, and regulates responses to prolonged FR and very low fluence R. The
phyB-phyE phytochromes are lower in abundance, less light-labile, and function
together to regulate plant responses to prolonged R light and the ratio of R to
FR. The overall goals of this proposal are to achieve a better understanding of
the individual functions of the phyB-phyE phytochromes, the genetic and physical
interactions between these photoreceptors, and the molecular mechanisms through
which they control cellular signaling pathways. &lt;br/&gt;The first objective
is to use chimeric phyB/D apoproteins to identify regions of phyB and phyD that
have diverged to yield their disparate sensing/signaling activities and to
investigate how this divergence has affected their mechanisms. The second
objective is to further elucidate the recently discovered binding interactions
among the phyB-phyE phytochromes. The third objective is to assess the role of
phyD and its physical and genetic interactions with phyB in regulation of floral
organ elongation and fertility. The fourth objective is to isolate mutations in
phyB that interfere with dimerization and to use these mutations to evaluate the
importance of quaternary structure to phytochrome photochemistry and biological
function. &lt;br/&gt;Challenges in science education facing Montana State
University and other universities in predominantly rural areas include
geographical and cultural isolation of rural students, notably minority and
women students, limited access to role models and mentoring relationships, and
lack of opportunities to participate in enrichment programs. The goals of this
proposal are to provide improved access for undergraduate and graduate students
to individual research experiences, interaction with the broader national and
international scientific community, participation in scientific meetings and
discussions, and enhanced classroom/laboratory resources.&lt;br/&gt;