* 0348125
* CAREER: Formation and Reactivity of Nanoscale Corrosion Products - An Integrated Research and Education Plan
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Peter Vikesland, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 06/30/2010
* USD 400,000.00

0348125&lt;br/&gt;Vikesland&lt;br/&gt;The career development plan has been
broken down into two primary components: a research plan describing experiments
to examine the formation and reactivity of nanoscale corrosion products and a
teaching plan that is designed to reinvigorate the pedagogical environment of
the Introduction to Environmental Engineering class at Virginia
Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to evaluate the role
that nanoscale corrosion products play in determining the reactivity of the
granular iron based treatment schemes used for the remediation of organohalide
contaminated subsurface environments. The results from the proposed studies will
be used in the development of an improved conceptual model of the phenomena
responsible for contaminant remediation within granular iron systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using Iron Corrosion to Remediate Contaminated
Groundwater&lt;br/&gt;The discovery that chlorinated solvents readily react with
reduced iron has led to rapid acceptance of in situ iron Permeable Reactive
Barriers (PRBs) as the cleanup method of choice for many contaminated sites.
Although the exact mechanisms involved have not been fully elucidated, field
demonstrations indicate that the reactions can be rapid under environmentally
relevant conditions. At the current time, over eighty field-scale PRBs employing
iron as a reactive material for treatment of contaminated groundwater have been
installed. Questions remain, however, concerning the relative reactivities of
the numerous types of iron used in these walls. A key variable that dictates the
applicability of iron PRBs as a remediation technique is the organohalide
degradation rate. These rates are a function not only of the identity and
concentration of the organohalide undergoing remediation (i.e., chlorinated
alkanes vs. chlorinated alkenes, but also of the groundwater composition (i.e.,
pH, ionic content), the quantity of iron present, and its structural makeup. The
quantity, or concentration, of iron is important because contaminant reduction
requires either direct electron-transfer between the contaminant and the iron
surface or indirect electron-transfer via surface evolved reactive intermediates
(e.g., H2). Observed reaction rates, as evinced by pseudo-first-order rate
coefficients (kobs values), typically scale linearly with iron concentration, a
result indicative of surface mediated reactions. The type or composition of the
iron metal used for organohalide remediation also significantly affects iron
reactivity. Observed differences in the reactivity of various types of iron were
historically attributed primarily to variability in their surface areas. Recent
reports have suggested, but never experimentally documented, that this
additional variability results from fundamental differences in the composition
of the iron substrates.