* 0348679
* CAREER: Strongly Correlated Spin Liquid in Frustrated Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2009
* Oleg Tchernyshyov, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award supports theoretical research and education on strongly
correlated electron systems with a particular focus on spin liquids in
geometrically frustrated magnets. Strongly correlated electrons are a
challenging frontier of condensed-matter physics. As exemplified by the
fractional quantum Hall effect, their low-temperature properties are different
from those of Bose and Fermi liquids. Frustrated magnets represent another class
of electronic systems with strong correlations. With magnetic order disrupted by
competing interactions, the low-temperature state of these magnets is a
disordered spin liquid, in which the motion of spins is highly correlated. The
nature of the quantum ground state and elementary excitations in two and three-
dimensional spin liquids is a long-standing problem. Theoretical
characterization of spin liquids in frustrated magnetic systems comprises the
research part of the project. Specifically, the PI will (1) obtain a theoretical
description of the spin-liquid state and its instabilities observed
experimentally in several frustrated magnets; (2) characterize low-temperature
properties of idealized models of frustrated magnets, such as the Heisenberg
antiferromagnet on the pyrochlore lattice; (3) investigate the occurrence of
chaos in classical dynamics of frustrated spins and its consequences on their
quantum properties. Integration of numerical simulations into physics courses is
the main educational component of this CAREER development plan. The goal is to
increase the effectiveness of the learning process by bridging the gap between
theoretical contents of a course and relevant experimental situations. To this
end, numerical simulations will be made an integral part of homework. By solving
a problem and running a simulation as an independent check of the results, the
student will observe the interplay of several key theoretical concepts in a
realistic physical setting. To ensure easy access and cross-platform
compatibility, the simulations will be produced in the form of Java applets. %%%
This CAREER award supports theoretical research and education on strongly
correlated electron systems with a particular focus on spin liquids in
geometrically frustrated magnets. Strongly correlated electrons are a
challenging frontier of condensed-matter physics. As exemplified by the
fractional quantum Hall effect, their low-temperature properties are different
from those of Bose and Fermi liquids. Frustrated magnets represent another class
of electronic systems with strong correlations. With magnetic order disrupted by
competing interactions, the low-temperature state of these magnets is a
disordered spin liquid, in which the motion of spins is highly correlated. The
research component of this award seeks to elucidate the nature of spin liquids
and study novel phenomena involving spin liquids in several frustrated magnets.
Integration of numerical simulations into physics courses is the main
educational component of this CAREER development plan. The goal is to increase
the effectiveness of the learning process by bridging the gap between
theoretical contents of a course and relevant experimental situations. To this
end, numerical simulations will be made an integral part of homework. By solving
a problem and running a simulation as an independent check of the results, the
student will observe the interplay of several key theoretical concepts in a
realistic physical setting. To ensure easy access and cross-platform
compatibility, the simulations will be produced in the form of Java applets. ***

