* 0348783
* PECASE:  Mercury Methylation in Sulfate-Reducing Biofilms
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2009
* Jennifer Jay, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 01/31/2009
* USD 497,943.00

0348783 Jay Mercury (Hg) contamination of food chains is a worldwide problem,
posing public health threats even in pristine areas. In aquatic systems, mercury
methylation is a key process, whereby less-toxic inorganic mercury is
microbially transformed to methylmercury, which is a potent neurotoxin with a
strong tendency to magnify in concentration in food chains. While the process of
mercury methylation is critical to understand if we are to predict or mitigate
impacts due to mercury contamination, the factors controlling its rate are
extremely complex. Sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) have been shown to be the
primary mercury methylators in a wide range of aquatic systems, and
bioavailability of mercury to the bacteria, as well as the activity of
particular species of sulfate-reducing bacteria present, have both been shown to
be important factors in controlling the rate of mercury methylation.

Intellectual merit: This work addresses fundamental questions regarding the
environmental factors controlling mercury methylation. This work will elucidate
the effects of mercury speciation on methylation in reducing environments, the
importance of the strain of sulfate-reducing bacteria, and the effects of
biofilm formation on methylation in sulfate-reducing biofilms. Results from the
educational innovations in service-learning will also be made available to the
public via the literature and web-accessible documents.

Broader impacts: Results from the proposed work are necessary for accurately
modeling of the fate of mercury in the environment. Information gained can be
extended to the study of other contaminants in biofilm systems, both natural and
engineered. This work may also be directly applicable to wetland restoration and
lake management decisions. The PI is currently working with the UCLA Center for
Experiential Education and Service Learning (CEESL) to develop an innovative
service-learning course in which UCLA students will learn and then teach wetland
functions in grade 6 classrooms to economically disadvantaged students of Los
Angeles. The teaching unit to be developed will involve four in-class laboratory
sessions and will culminate in a field trip for the grade 6 students
(accompanied by the UCLA students) to Ballona Wetland. A teacher training to
support the wetland science curriculum will be given by the PI each summer.