* 0348433
* CAREER:Modeling, Control and Stability Investigation of Multiple Power Converter Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2004,11/30/2009
* Enrico Santi, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 11/30/2009
* USD 396,557.00

Switching power converters act as quasi-ideal power interfaces between a supply
and a load and can provide tightly regulated DC and variable frequency AC power
as needed. Power distribution systems consisting of extensively interconnected
networks of power converters are becoming increasingly common. The problem of
stability and performance of multi-converter systems is a nonlinear multi-loop
control problem and it is relevant to many important emerging applications such
as electric cars, electric ships, and alternative energy systems using fuel
cells and supercapacitors. These systems present special challenges for design
and reliable operation because they are prone to stability problems caused by
interactions among converters. Existing control methods focus on control of a
single converter. In contrast, an objective of this project is to explore
coordinating control strategies taking a systemic point of view. Novel nonlinear
control techniques such as synergetic control and dynamic phasors will be used.
Another objective is to use active filters and adaptive techniques with online
monitoring of system stability. A third objective is to develop design-oriented
stability criteria for both DC and AC case starting from existing single-
converter stability criteria. The methods to be employed include theoretical
investigation of the nonlinear multi-loop control problem at hand,
identification of relevant example systems, synthesis of appropriate
coordinating controllers using synergetic control and other linear and nonlinear
control approaches, and verification of performance through simulation and
laboratory experimentation on small-scale systems. The project integrates
research and education and includes curriculum development and participation of
undergraduate and high school students.