* 0348066
* CAREER:  Investigations of Breaking Waves and Fluid-Structure Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Jannette Frandsen, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 05/31/2006
* USD 185,942.00

CAREER: Investigations of Breaking Waves and Fluid-Structure Interactions
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The designs for large civil engineering structures
(LCES), e.g., long-span suspension bridges, guided &lt;br/&gt;towers/masts,
hydraulic/wind driven turbines, deep water risers and offshore fixed/floating
platforms are usually governed by wave and/or wind loading. The objective of
this project is to educate students and advance research in water waves and
fluid-structure interactions (FSI) in relation to the analysis and design of
LCES. In particular, the aim is to advance computational modeling of breaking
water waves and high Reynolds number (Re) flows because model-scale tests used
in today.s design cannot reproduce full-scale structural behavior. Due to this
fact, the most common vibrations problems on LCES are those induced by vortex
shedding, that is, both wind flow and wave/current loads. &lt;br/&gt;Although
previous investigations have been done, unresolved issues remain to be
investigated of the &lt;br/&gt;interactions of density stratified multiphase
fluids and fluid-solid mechanisms. This is especially true when &lt;br/&gt;the
free-surface becomes unstable and breaks and for fluid structure mechanisms with
high Re. This project &lt;br/&gt;is concerned with these interactions as they
could be responsible for loss of structural integrity and even
&lt;br/&gt;failure. To this end, numerical models can prove to be valuable tools
in analyzing and understanding the &lt;br/&gt;mechanisms of free surface
instabilities and FSI. However any method that can provide aid should be used,
&lt;br/&gt;including, theoretical, experimental and/or computational methods.
But computational model development &lt;br/&gt;is prioritized mainly because it
is believed that new discoveries can be made in free-surface instabilities and
&lt;br/&gt;high Re incompressible flows around bluff-bodies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: A principal challenge to be addressed
is that of moving interfaces, as well as the &lt;br/&gt;multitude of scales in
the flow. The project is concerned with investigations of breaking water waves
and &lt;br/&gt;vortex induced resonance problems of LCES. This project is driven
by the following core ideas: &lt;br/&gt;1) Extending the Lattice Boltzmann (LB)
equation to model breaking ocean waves numerically; &lt;br/&gt;2) Numerically
predicting vortex induced resonance on LCES using an extended LB formulation;
&lt;br/&gt;3) Developing an interdisciplinary FSI course. Civil engineering
students will especially benefit; &lt;br/&gt;4) Using a virtual reality
laboratory in teaching and research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The LB approach,
which is based on statistical mechanic concepts, obeys Navier-Stokes equations.
It &lt;br/&gt;has been used extensively in molecular dynamics and physics but
has not been developed in relation to LCES. To the PI.s knowledge, this is the
first time a LB model is being developed to simulate breaking &lt;br/&gt;ocean
waves and their interactions with LCES. It is also the first time a LB
formulation contains FSI, turbulence and nonlinear free-surface model
capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;The fundamentals of the model approach have several
attractive features, especially with regard to free-&lt;br/&gt;surface breaking
waves, FSI and parallel solver development. The unsteady flows of interest are
highly three-dimensional and are further complicated by the interaction with a
fixed or oscillating structure. Therefore, to improve the learning process for
students and researchers at all levels, emphasis on visualization programming in
a virtual reality laboratory to analyze the results of the models is proposed.
Furthermore, as a supplementary project component, the computational models will
be validated with planned flow field measurements and visualization experiments.
Free-surface physical experiments are planned and will mainly comprise
monitoring sloshing motion in tanks. The bluff-body aerodynamics experiments
will focus on simultaneous measurements of structural movement and the wind
field. Collaborators will also provide data from both computational and physical
experiments. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Although the research part
of the project focuses on one particular fluid formulation, the &lt;br/&gt;core
idea of this project evolves around improving methods of design of LCES through
detailed modeling &lt;br/&gt;of fluid flows and the coupling between fluid and
solid. The career development plan of the PI has, &lt;br/&gt;however, highly
interdisciplinary contents making it applicable beyond civil and mechanical
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;FSI and wave dynamics modeling are important topics in
many disciplines, such as computer science; &lt;br/&gt;astrophysics; biomedical
engineering and earth science. The computational models proposed herein will
&lt;br/&gt;apply to these other fields of science. It is the PI.s career goal to
model problems and contribute in these &lt;br/&gt;other areas as well when the
computational fluid dynamics groundwork related to LCES has been explored.
&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, wave dynamics and FSI research and education is
important to society as it could save &lt;br/&gt;lives by avoiding structural
collapse. A project of this kind also plays an important role in energy
&lt;br/&gt;development, economic development and in the nation.s balance of
payments problems.