* 0348484
* CAREER:     Towards Near-Real-Time Site Characterization:     Advanced Computational Methods and NEES-Based Validation Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Loukas Kallivokas, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2009
* USD 439,451.00

The research component of this CAREER project aims to fill gaps in the methods
for geotechnical site characterization. The focus is on overcoming shortcomings
in both the experimental and computational aspects. With regard to the
experimental component, the primary impediments concern the high cost of
deployment of a grid of multiple sensors at a site, and the lack of wide
frequency spectrum exciters. With regard to the computational component, it
addresses the bottleneck in geotechnical site investigations arising primarily
from problems with methods for the solution of the dynamic inverse problems. To
this end, the project will utilize the NEES (Network for Earthquake Engineering
Simulation) mobile shakers at the University of Texas-Austin. This is combined
with the use of recent advances in partial-differential-equation-constrained
optimization methods that permit the systematic treatment of either time-
dependent or time-harmonic inverse problems. Given the advances in hardware
architectures, it is conceivable that large sites can be profiled by on-site,
near-real-time processing in the next 4 to 5 years; this constitutes the
ultimate target of the research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this
CAREER program is: a) To develop the capability for the site-specific rapid
imaging of the skeletal properties of a soil mass by coupling in-situ non-
invasive experimental and computational methods; b) to develop the computational
framework and experimental protocols that will allow near-real-time profiling of
large sites, including in-situ adjustments of field arrays to optimize inversion
procedures; c) to develop the methodology for profiling soil near-surface and
in-depth by exploiting both micro-tremor records and active-source records; d)
to seek to validate the approach by profiling a local site; and e) to migrate to
the educational curriculum the experimental and computational techniques to be
developed, aiming at training the next-generation of engineers in seismic hazard
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses a problem central to on-
going seismic modeling endeavors that aim at the mitigation of seismic hazards,
with far-reaching and clear societal benefits. Beyond this, a successful outcome
will have broad implications to a wide range of problems of practical interest
to geotechnical and earthquake engineers, while opening the possibility for
remote robot-driven site characterization. The PI plans to involve under-
represented groups in the research activities, while the educational plan aims
to broaden the traditional civil and geotechnical training program with the
multi-disciplinary content of the research program. Outreach activities are
planned that target both the general public and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;