* 0348622
* CAREER:    Strategies to Improve Goods Movement:    Operational Choice in Routing
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Karen Smilowitz, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 08/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) research proposes to provide
funding to develop operating strategies for goods movement. In particular, the
research explores the impact of introducing operational choice into vehicle
routing and scheduling. The research considers a diverse set of applications in
routing for goods movement in both industry and non-profit agencies, including
intermodal drayage operations and interlibrary loan delivery, with the common
theme of developing and evaluating innovative strategies. These applications
involve similar core optimization problems involving vehicle routing and
scheduling with operational choice and illustrate the inherent tradeoffs from
introducing increased choice. Allowing more flexibility in transportation
systems can lead to increased logistics efficiency; yet, introducing flexibility
in modeling and solution phases is challenging, as the scope and complexity of
the optimization problems expand. This project will design and analyze
algorithms to solve the resulting optimization problems. Longer-term plans
include the study of broader issues related to the value of choice in terms of
efficiency gains, as well as the complexities of introducing choice into
difficult problems. The educational components of this CAREER program include
hands-on student learning, interactive coursework, and programs that foster
diversity in engineering. This proposal includes initiatives to promote student
involvement in transportation research for women and
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will improve the
efficiency of distribution systems for goods movement in a variety of
applications. In addition, the results of this career program can be extended
well beyond transportation. The main output of this research will be a set of
methodological tools that can be used by others for different
applications.&lt;br/&gt;