* 0348068
* CAREER:     Impulsive Molecular Modulation for Generating Broadly Tunable, Tailored Femtosecond Laser Pulses
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Randy Bartels, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2010
* USD 399,668.00

0348068 Bartels

The motivation of this CAREER proposal is to establish an integrated research
and educational program that will study the basic science of impulsive molecular
modulation (IMM) to improve ultrafast laser technology while training students
in the fundamentals of ultrafast optical science (UOS). The goal of the proposed
work is to develop IMM as a method of creating a single source of tailored,
femtosecond light pulses that are continuously tunable from < 200 to > 3000 nm.
To achieve this goal, we will study the physics of IMM and push the coherence
excitation to its fundamental limits. The research described in this proposal
will explore the basic science and limitations of IMM. We will also study the
non-time-stationary transients in the nonlinear optical susceptibility produced
by IMM for direct pulse shaping during frequency conversion. This technology
will provide multiple phase-coherent, shaped, broadly tunable fs laser pulses.
The versatility of this source will allow simultaneous laser control over
nuclear and electronic motion in molecules and the testing of coherent control
techniques over a large spectral range. The integrated educational activities
will be focused on distilling the core principles of UOS and IMM for students at
grade-school through graduate educational levels. To encourage the participation
of minority students in science, I will develop optical demonstrations that
elucidate the core principles of UOS and develop curiosity and excitement about
optics. These demonstrations will be used for recruiting of potential minority
students in partnership with existing minority outreach programs at CSU and K-12
outreach. More rigorous optical demonstrations in undergraduate engineering
courses will illuminate the use of Fourier transform theory and linear systems
to current optics research. Finally, in an effort to improve graduate optics
training in Colorado, I am developing a shared educational platform for course
exchange between Colorado higher educational institutions. This program will
distribute the teaching among faculty members while increasing course
availability for students and facilitate rapid dissemination of research
discoveries between institutions to a broad base of students.

