* 0348637
* CAREER:  Coordination of Dynamic Networks - A Hybrid System Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Rafael Fierro, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 03/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Career development plan includes significant research,
educational, and outreach components. The&lt;br/&gt;research component is
focused on developing novel and systematic methodologies for the analysis,
design,&lt;br/&gt;and implementation of cooperative dynamic networks. A dynamic
network consists of spatially distributed&lt;br/&gt;dynamic nodes (e.g.,
autonomous vehicles, mobile sensors) which are coordinated by common set of
goals and&lt;br/&gt;possible dynamic interaction between the nodes. There are
many applications where a dynamic network may&lt;br/&gt;be more suitable than a
single vehicle, especially where a distributed system of sensors is
advantageous. Yet&lt;br/&gt;without coordinating the movement of the nodes or
without managing the information the nodes retrieve,&lt;br/&gt;any advantage of
dynamic network deployment may be lost and damaging collisions or interference
may&lt;br/&gt;occur.&lt;br/&gt;This research will be integrated into curriculum
development designed to provide research opportunities&lt;br/&gt;for
undergraduate students with emphasis on attracting and retaining
underrepresented minorities. The&lt;br/&gt;outreach component will support on-
going educational programs designed to target K-12 institutions,
and&lt;br/&gt;the Native American populations of
Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit New Developments in complex networks of
interacting systems like teams of au-&lt;br/&gt;tonomous vehicles/robots for
homeland security, search and rescue operations, disaster relief
operations,&lt;br/&gt;multi-targeting/multi-platform battlefield groups,
unmanned air vehicle systems, intelligent highway/vehicle&lt;br/&gt;systems,
wireless surveillance networks, and elsewhere place severe demands on the design
of cooperative&lt;br/&gt;control schemes and communication strategies in the
presence of changing environment. The large-scale in-&lt;br/&gt;terconnected
nature of such systems requires logic-based supervisors with increased
capabilities for dynamic&lt;br/&gt;planning, optimality and that guarantees
performance subject to constraints, con ict resolution,
failure&lt;br/&gt;handling, and other decisions. To facilitate the design of
this class of systems the following key research&lt;br/&gt;challenges will be
addressed:&lt;br/&gt; Development of computationally efficient algorithms for
distributed model predictive control.&lt;br/&gt; Derivation of novel algorithms
for cooperative optimization based control.&lt;br/&gt; Development new
methodologies that enable goal directed sensing by fusing the information
from&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous sensors over the dynamic network, and providing the
required information for each node&lt;br/&gt;to plan and control its
mobility.&lt;br/&gt; Designing adaptive robust controllers that take into
account the uncertainties on the dynamics of the&lt;br/&gt;robotic
network.&lt;br/&gt; Experimental verification and validation of the proposed
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact Ensuring that the above Career research
thrusts have the broadest impact on society,&lt;br/&gt;they should be integrated
with a coherent educational and outreach plan. It is well-known that robotics
pro-&lt;br/&gt;vides an excellent platform for getting students interested in
science and engineering. This proposal includes&lt;br/&gt;educational components
targeted at high school, undergraduate, and graduate students. The proposed
work&lt;br/&gt;includes:&lt;br/&gt; Mentoring activities that include under-
represented students in Science, Mathematics, Engineering
and&lt;br/&gt;Technology (SMET) with the objective of retaining them in
electrical and computer engineering.&lt;br/&gt; A robotic extension program will
be designed to stimulate the interest of Native American children
to&lt;br/&gt;increase their appreciation and understanding of science,
technology, and engineering, in an informal&lt;br/&gt;learning
environment.&lt;br/&gt; Seek industrial/governmental partnerships to transfer
technology. Besides publications in refereed&lt;br/&gt;conference and journals,
new courses such as Computer Embedded Systems, Robotics and
Perception,&lt;br/&gt;and Control Hybrid Systems will be introduced into the
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt; Software tools, algorithms, demos and results will be
available on the web.&lt;br/&gt;The educational and research components of this
Career proposal build upon previous and on-going work&lt;br/&gt;and existing
equipment supported by Oklahoma State University.