* 0348397
* CAREER:  A Systems Approach to Materials Processing
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Martha Grover, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2009
* USD 453,099.00

This CAREER grant combines research and educational initiatives in the area of
developing a systematic approach to materials processing, specifically, a
systems approach for dealing with atomic scale dynamics.

Research:

The research program focuses on materials processing that occurs at a surface,
through deposition or removal of material. The specific research goals are: (1)
develop a multiscale interface model that is informed by atomic scale models;
(2) design an estimation and control strategy that interprets limited sensor
data using atomic scale models; and (3) demonstrate a systems approach to
materials processing in experiments, with metalorganic chemical vapor deposition
(MOCVD) of yttria-stabilized zirconia, using emissivity-correcting pyrometry.
The research program will demonstrate a systems approach to surface processing
that should be applicable to a wide range of materials and processes, enabling
process design for new materials with optimized properties, as well as
improvements in manufacturing repeatability and efficiency. Beyond materials
processing the PI plans to demonstrate a methodology for engineering complex
atomic scale systems, from quantum computation to metabolic engineering.

Broad Impact:

Complementing the research plan is the PI's commitment to demonstrating the
importance of mathematics in everyday life to high school students. She is
developing course modules for Marietta High School. She is also working on a
college-level course titled "Emerging Applications of Control" to educate
college students in the broad applicability of control concepts and their
relevance in the sciences.