* 0348169
* US-Egypt Workshop on Laser Chemistry and Applications to Materials and Biomedical Research
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Mohamed Samy El-Shall, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/2005
* USD 37,786.00

0348169 &lt;br/&gt;ElShall&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a "US-Egypt workshop on Laser Chemistry and Applications to Materials
and Biomedical Research" scheduled to be held in March 2004 in Cairo, Egypt. The
organizers are Dr. Mohamed El-Shall, Department of Chemistry, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, Dr. Mostafa El-Sayed, Professor of
Chemistry, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia and Dr. Hany El-
Nazer, President of the National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. The objectives
of the workshop are to: 1) discuss the state of the art of laser technology in
research in both countries; 2) address the fundamental science and technology of
laser chemistry; the applications in materials including nanostructures, thin
films, terahertz spectroscopy, nonlinear optical properties, material shaping,
surface modifications and applications in biomedical research, including
characterization and imaging of tissues, and 3) stimulate cooperative research
in the field of lasers between American and Egyptian scientists. Areas of
fundamental science and technology of lasers to be covered will include
spectroscopy, photochemistry, materials applications, nonlinear optics,
nanostructures, and thin films. Areas of research to be addressed are: 1. lasers
and properties, applications in fundamental science. 2. applications to
materials and 3. applications in biological and medical sciences. The final
session will include a panel discussion of the outstanding problems in the
fields of particular interest for development in Egypt, and the plans for joint
projects and research collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This is an
interdisciplinary workshop with participants and speakers from chemistry,
physics, materials science, engineering, biological and medical fields. It will
allow scientists from the U. S. and Egypt to exchange experiences, ideas, and
information and to build collaborations to promote laser technology with
potential mutual benefits. The synergism produced by bringing together the
researchers in these areas is expected to enhance the collaboration between the
two countries and to take the field of laser science and technology a step
closer towards realizing its enormous potential for novel technologies, and to
economic developments involving the private sectors in Egypt and the US. Support
is planned for 15 prominent U.S. researchers who will address important issues,
and who will help define future joint research. This project is being supported
under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
engineers in both countries to carry out these joint scientific activities, with
partial support from the Division of Materials Research. &lt;br/&gt;