* 0348773
* Nyack Microbial Observatory Project
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2004,10/31/2010
* William Woessner, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2010
* USD 1,286,955.00

Drs. James Gannon, William Holben, Jack Stanford and William Woessner of the
University of Montana have been funded to establish the Nyack Microbial
Observatory project. Beginning in the Bob Marshall Wilderness of Montana and the
southern part of Glacier National Park, the Middle Fork of the Flathead River
flows through narrow canyons until it reaches the glacier-carved Nyack Flood
Plain. The floodplain is home to numerous wildlife species, including threatened
grizzly bear, gray wolf, and bull trout, but their invisible essential partners,
the microbes, are no less important. As the river enters the upstream end of the
valley, 30 percent of the flow enters a shallow aquifer (hyporheic) before
eventually re-entering to the river channel down stream. An abundance of large-
bodied insects with life cycle stages uniquely tied to the hyporheic habitat
have been discovered here. This terrestrial to aquatic interface can be
visualized as a pristine food web where nutrients washed from the forest floor
are "re-packaged" into microorganisms and then transferred to aquatic insects,
which, in turn, are consumed by fish, and so on up the food chain. Hyporheic
habitats, found throughout the world, are critical to nutrient cycles that
maintain and rejuvenate all of life in the river corridor. Despite their
importance, the microorganisms of the hyporheos are largely unknown.
Understanding who they are and what controls their diversity and abundance is
the overarching goal of the Nyack Microbial Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
separate NSF Biocomplexity project has mapped the Nyack hyporheic boundary in 3
dimensions and has installed approximately 100 sampling wells. Using this
infrastructure, the Nyack Microbial Observatory will explore the hyporheic
community to quantify, cultivate, and characterize novel microorganisms and
measure factors that shape the microbial community and link microbial diversity
to higher organisms. We seek a broader understanding of floodplain/river health
as mediated by flux of water and materials through the river and its floodplain
aquifer. The 5 year project will use a suite of innovative molecular,
microbiological, and hydrological tools to monitor microbial communities across
seasons and along this unique hyporheic gradient. It will also strengthen ties
between microbiologists and ecosystem scientists so that they can better
understand organismal interactions and processes across many scales.
Undergraduate and graduate students alike will be trained in a multidisciplinary
environment in which microbial diversity science is closely linked to geology,
landscape ecology and ecosystem function.