* 0348889
* CAREER:     Gas Phase Thermochemical Properties of Amino Acids and Fundamental Investigations of the Extended Kinetic Method
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* John Poutsma, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2010
* USD 438,320.00

&lt;br/&gt;In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. John Poutsma of the College of William
and Mary will conduct an integrated teaching and research program in the area of
gas phase chemistry. The research consists of two major thrusts: 1) Fundamental
investigations of collision energy and entropy effects in the entropy-corrected
and standard form of the kinetic model, and 2) the thermochemistry of protein
and non-protein amino acids in the gas phase. In the first of these studies, a
series of compounds with known thermochemistry will be investigated in order to
determine the strengths and limitations of the entropy-corrected extended
kinetic method for the prediction of reaction entropies. These studies will be
performed in two collision energy regimes: 1) The low-energy multiple-collision
regime of the ion trap instrument, and 2) the higher energy, single-collision
regime in a flowing afterglow-triple quadrupole instrument. These latter studies
will be conducted with Prof. P. Wenthold at Purdue
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the second area, the intrinsic
thermochemical properties of twenty common protein amino acids (PAA) as well as
a variety of naturally occurring non-protein amino acids (NPAA) will be
determined. The properties of the NPAAs will be determined relative to their PAA
analogs. The experimental work will be accompanied by gas-phase density
functional calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Poutsma will develop a new
course on computational chemistry designed for senior undergraduates and
master's students. In addition, mass spectrometry experiments will be introduced
in laboratories for both lower and upper division courses. Prof. Poutsma will
also participate in the College's new Chancellor's Academy summer program for
high school students by teaching classes in environmental science.&lt;br/&gt;