* 0348338
* CAREER:      Functional Replacement of Neural Tissue in a Model Organism - Research and Education in Neuroengineering
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Robert Butera, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 05/31/2010
* USD 433,633.00

0348338&lt;br/&gt;Butera&lt;br/&gt;A primary goal in neuroengineering is the
development of "replacement parts," engineered constructs of semiconductor
circuits and/or living tissue that are capable of restoring, modifying, or
enhancing neural function. Most research on this topic is focused on either
small defined neural circuits in invertebrates or the large scale dynamics of in
vitro or in vivo mammalian neural circuits. The objective of this integrated
research and education plan is to forge a middle ground between the above two
extremes: to develop a "replacement ganglion" for a simple organism with a well-
studied nervous system (the marine mollusc Aplysia Californica). Efforts are
focused on the characterization and development of a functional hardware
replacement, and intentionally are not focused on the implant and
biocompatibility aspects. Objectives will be accomplished through five inter-
related aims broken down into 3 categories: education (E1 and E2), research (R1
and R2), and technology development (T1).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;E1: Development
and testing of course modules for teaching "critical thinking" skills to
undergraduate engineering students. The assumption is that most efforts at
improving engineering education do not directly address this issue, and that
such skills are critically necessary for multidisciplinary fields where
engineers interface with life scientists, such as neuroengineering. The
investigators plan to address this issue by adapting existing critical thinking
exercises and texts to engineering students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;E2:
Development of complementary laboratory modules for teaching electrophysiology
fundamentals to engineering students. This aim will fill some gaps in the
existing literature on undergraduate physiology labs, with a bias towards
teaching engineering students. Fitting within the constraints of a typical 3
hour engineering lab, these lab modules must be compact, portable, and capable
of being implemented from start to completion in 3 hours or less.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;R1: Characterization of behavioral states and correlation
with abdominal ganglion activity in Aplysia Californica. This objective has
three studies: the development of a behavioral monitoring system, design of
algorithms called behavioral phenotyping, and the use of this monitoring system
with concurrent in vivo recording of neural activity passing in/out of the
abdominal ganglion. The investigators hypothesize that a set of model parameters
(the phenotype) can define normal physiologicsal behavior and this model can be
utilized to identify pathological behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;R2: Design and
implementation of a real-time model of the input/output properties of the
abdominal ganglion and interfacing to freely behaving Aplysia. This objective
has three studies: in vitro characterization of the input/output properties of
the abdominal ganglion, the development of a real-time model of these
input/output properties (on the architecture to be designed in aim T1) and the
testing of this model by interfacing to a freely behaving Aplysia. The
investigators hypothesize that normal physiological function of the autonomic
systems controlled by the abdominal ganglion is reflective in the animal
exhibiting "normal" behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;T1: To develop a novel real-
time computational platform capable of processing up to 8 channels of
simultaneous input/output, with sufficient computational power to implement both
"black box" kernel-based as well as biophysical neuron models that model the
dynamics of an entire neuron population. This architecture is designed for
flexibility in model/circuit specification and the ability to handle multiple
channels of high throughput data, and is based on the use of field-programmable
gate arrays (FPGAs). &lt;br/&gt;