* 0348585
* CAREER: Synthesis, Surface Functionalization and Charge Carrier Injection in 1D Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Moonsub Shim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 02/28/2010
* USD 703,519.00

This CAREER project aims to elucidate intentionally and unintentionally
introduced chemical groups' effects on the electronic properties of carbon
nanotubes. In particular, effects of oxygen adsorption and chemical oxidation on
charge carrier injection and photo-induced processes will be investigated.
Variations in synthesis and fabrication procedures to be developed for these
studies will be utilized in creating surface modifications to control optical
and electrical properties and to create organized nanostructures of various
chemical compositions. Expected outcomes include insights into chemical
reactivity and electronic properties of nanotubes, and fundamental materials
science knowledge and insights into relatively unexplored areas of
optoelectronics and photochemistry of carbon nanotubes. Understanding how
electronic properties are affected by surface functional groups is expected to
be useful in rational design of organized nanostructures and developing
nanotube-based sensor technology. Synthetic efforts to control chemical compo-
sition and electronic properties may also lead to new nanoscale materials. %%%
The project addresses fundamental research issues in electronic materials
science having techno-logical relevance. The educational program will enrich
undergraduate curricula and research opportunities. Improvement of existing
topics and introduction of new topics for courses on introductory materials
science and engineering and nanoscience will be carried out. By developing a new
online version of an introductory materials science and engineering course,
which will be available to students at Clark Atlanta University and other
minority-serving institutions, en-hanced course availability for students of
underrepresented groups will be provided. Research opportunities created for
undergraduate students at the PI's laboratory will directly integrate research
into the educational process. The PI's graduate students will participate as
teaching assistants for the on-line course and as research mentors providing
them with important mentoring experiences and awareness of diversity issues.
Research and educational collaborations with faculty at Clark Atlanta will
promote diversity and interaction between institutions. The educational program
outlined here will be an integral part of a partnership between the PI's
department at UIUC and Clark Atlanta University and will create infrastructure
and resources to enhance education and research. Multifaceted challenges to be
directly tackled here will provide ample educational opportunities needed
especially for researchers in emerging cross-disciplinary fields. ***