* 0348800
* CAREER: Direct Imaging of the Flow of Light in Plasmonic Nanocircuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Mark Brongersma, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 02/28/2009
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;In the current information age, the ever increasing need for
reliable, high speed, high data-rate information transport is undeniable. A new
class of photonic devices, known as plasmonic nanocircuits, may provide an
opportunity to propagate and manipulate information at the nanoscale,
complementing functionality that is obtained in conventional photonic and
electronic devices. In such circuits light is guided by and manipulated in 1-and
2-dimensional metallic nanostructures below the diffraction limit. For the
successful realization of these nanocircuits, our group will to build a setup
with which the flow of light can be studied at any location in the circuit. The
application of this technique is not limited to plasmonic nanocircuits but can
be applied to a variety of conventional photonic devices. The development of
this technique will therefore give essential guidance to the designers and
process engineers who will make the photonic device structures of the future.
The technique also provides new ways to perform highly sensitive, non-
destructive materials characterization and spectroscopy with subwavelength
spatial resolution on metal films. This would significantly expand the
capability of conventional optical microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In synergy
with this research component, this proposal will enable a substantial
educational and outreach program. Education and research will be integrated by
(1) providing my students (undergraduate, masters, and graduate) with exciting
and valuable research opportunities at Stanford and in Industry in a rapidly
developing new research field, (2) starting a new secondary-school outreach
program to help young students start a career in science and technology, (3)
trying to attract underrepresented minority students (particularly African
Americans, American Indians, Hispanic Americans as well as others who add
diversity to Stanford's School of Engineering) to work in my research group
through the Engineering Diversity Program at Stanford, (4) feed new research
results back into two courses that I am currently developing. &lt;br/&gt;