* 0348742
* Model Institutions for Excellence - Phase III
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Juan Arratia, Universidad Metropolitana
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 03/31/2008
* USD 2,950,000.00

The MIE Phase III project will fulfill the plan which builds upon Phase I and II
accomplishments, raises UMET to the next level of capability, and completes the
process of institutionalizing and disseminating its model and best practices to
other institutions. UMET will continue strengthening its academic program
curriculum and disseminating the MIE curriculum development process to SUAGM SEM
departments using institutional resources. UMET will continue hiring additional
faculty with advanced degrees in selected areas, enhancing faculty content
knowledge in SEM areas, delivering improved student-centered instructional
programs, stimulating faculty research capability, developing an improved
infrastructure for SEM research and educational improvement grants, improving
its ability to assess faculty performance, and giving financial support to
faculty completing doctoral degrees. UMET will continue to improve the student
support/research infrastructure by involving undergraduate students in research,
providing pre-college students with a greater appreciation of the benefits of
careers in SEM and the academic preparation needed to pursue SEM studies,
conducting a coordinated set of activities to attract better prepared students,
and providing sufficient academic support services to retain them through
graduation. UMET will construct a new science laboratory building and enhance
the computer networking capability for all SEM faculties in SUAGM. UMET will
build on the comprehensive foundation established during Phase I and II of the
MIE Project by completing the institutionalization. At the conclusion of Phase
III, UMET will have an institutionalization process in place that guarantees
full funding for each of the components initiated by MIE. These include: the
academic program, curriculum development and evaluation, faculty development and
support, Student Support Center, pre-college programs, scholarships, student
internships and undergraduate research, and laboratory upgrades and maintenance.
UMET will have the capability to disseminate the NSF/UMET/MIE model. The project
will be managed under the direction of Dr. Arratia, who reports to the
Chancellor of UMET.&lt;br/&gt;