* 0348147
* CAREER:  Reinforced Biopolymers for Nanocomposite Construction and Materials Science and Engineering Curriculum Development
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Darrin Pochan, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 01/31/2009
* USD 440,000.00

In this proposed Career award research effort, biopolymers, specifically
polypeptides or biodegradable polyesters, will be used as the matrix materials
for nanocomposite (NC) construction. The intellectual merit of the proposed work
is that both significant fundamental and technological research accomplishments
in the area of polymer nanocomposite materials are possible by using biopolymers
as matrix materials. Fundamental: A) One can rigorously explore the effect of
polymer conformation on nanocomposite formation through secondary structure
transitions available in polypeptides (e.g. random coil to rigid-rod a helix).
B) One can controllably observe the effects of nanoscopic filler addition on the
semi-crystalline phase behavior of polymer matrix material, effects that will
significantly affect the ultimate NC properties. Therefore, both conformation
effects on NC formation and reinforcement phase effects on polymer
crystallization will be directly probed. Technological: the use of biopolymers
as the matrix material offers the intriguing possibility of introducing inherent
biological properties (e.g. biodegradability, antimicrobial activity) into the
NC material for biomedical or environmentally benign uses. These materials could
range from possible commodity (antimicrobial packaging) to specialty/biomedical
uses (tough, biocompatible implant materials).&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
extends to the chosen filler for nanocomposite construction in that traditional
and exploratory reinforcement materials also provide both fundamental and
technological research goals. Fundamental: the use of both 2-dimensional
platelet vs. 1-dimensional fibrillar fillers will provide a direct comparison of
the effectiveness of the two geometries as adequate NC reinforcement material.
While significant work has been performed on 2-d inorganic fillers providing a
wealth of literature results with which to compare these biopolymer-based
composite results, more recently investigations into the efficacy of carbon
nanotubes in polymer matrix reinforcement have also been performed. While the
platelet filler to be studied herein will be inorganic clay materials, both
hydrophilic and hydrophobically modified, the fibrillar reinforcement will be
accomplished by self-assembled b-sheet peptide fibrils, a nanostructure
traditionally familiar only to the biological science community. Technological:
Peptide fibril reinforcement will provide the opportunity to produce stiff,
tough, semicrystalline nanocomposites that are potentially 100% biocompatible
and biodegradable due to the inherent peptide chemistry of the reinforcement
phase. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed work are due to the
interdisciplinary nature of the proposed research project, the proposed
scientific outreach, and the integration of research topics into new courses
proposed to be developed by the PI. One of the most important, broader impacts
of this proposed work is the interdisciplinary research education of the
graduate students who will perform the research. A modern MSEG department must
reflect current interdisciplinary research paradigms and topical material in the
classroom environment in order to properly educate and train students interested
in materials. Towards this end, a new, advanced polymer science and engineering
course will be developed that integrates the physical property assessment
results from the Pochan lab NC research effort with classroom lecture material
inspired by courses recently developed and taught by the PI. This new course
would be part of an ongoing, aggressive effort by the entire faculty in MSE at
the University of Delaware (UD) to design and implement a totally new, 21st
century materials curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;