* 0348596
* Collaborative Research: Examination of Diverse Anaerobic Methane Oxidizing Archaea and Associated Syntrophic Relationships Using High Resolution Molecular and Isotopic Methods
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Victoria Orphan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2008
* USD 250,000.00

The characterization of methane-consuming microorganisms and the factors that
control their activity on the micro scale is important in our understanding the
biogeochemical cycling of methane on a global scale. The world's oceans are one
of the largest sources of methane, yet only a fraction of this greenhouse gas is
released into the atmosphere because it is consumed by microorganisms in anoxic
marine sediments. Cross-disciplinary investigations have recently shown that the
process of anaerobic oxidation of methane (AOM) is mediated by novel uncultured
Archaea, the ANME-1 and ANME-2, in syntrophic association with sulfate-reducing
bacteria. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is studying methanotrophic Archaea
(including ANME-1 and ANME-2) from methane seep environments and pure cultures
of Methanosarcina acetivorans and Methanococcoides methylutens (close cultured
relatives of the ANME-2) using a series of experiments combining fine scale
molecular RNA-based and isotopic analyses. The objectives are aimed at
identifying the microbes responsible for and understanding the process of AOM
through three broad areas of research. The goals of this research are: (1) to
characterize the diversity and metabolic versatility of microorganisms
responsible for AOM by expanding and refining the current database on the
natural carbon isotopic composition of cells in methane-rich sediments, (2) to
develop constraining thermodynamic models of AOM by identifying where active
cells reside in natural ANME-2/Desulfosarcina consortia, (3) to elucidate
metabolic aspects of AOM by constraining intermediates of the process and by
identifying possible vitamins and co-factors involved. These cross-disciplinary
studies are hypothesis-driven investigations aimed at understanding the
underlying mechanisms and syntrophic relationships of methane-oxidizing
microbial cells and consortia through combined cell-specific molecular and
isotopic analyses. This research will generate a unique high-resolution isotopic
data set that will serve as a basis for modeling the thermodynamics of AOM as
well as assist in defining the complex interactions between microorganisms
involved in the cycling of methane. This approach is highly complementary to
ongoing studies of anaerobic methane oxidation by geochemists and
microbiologists and provides a unique perspective to assist in elucidating this
globally important, but poorly characterized process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
education and outreach program will expand interest in geomicrobiology at the
grade school, undergraduate, and graduate level. This project will provide team-
oriented graduate education in microbial geobiology, engaging undergraduates
through existing programs aimed at increasing diversity in the sciences, and
building on existing infrastructure aimed at K-12 teacher education.
Specifically, the PIs are contributing to the annual PSU teacher's workshop by
teaching a session on the important role microbes play in regulating climate on
Earth. Through connections with Dr. Benita Bell from Bennett College, a
historically Black women's college in Greensborough, North Carolina, the PIs are
introducing underrepresented students to the field of geobiology through a
workshop during Space Science Week at Bennett. At the graduate level, the
project will provide educational opportunities to graduate students at Penn
State and Caltech. &lt;br/&gt;