* 0348058
* CAREER:  Electron Fluid Dynamics in a Hall-effect Accelerator:  Using Fundamental Research to Enhance Education and Technology
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Lyon King, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 04/30/2010
* USD 448,254.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Hall-effect accelerators (HEA's) are plasma fluid devices
that utilize crossed electric (E) and magnetic (B) fields to eject a low-density
ionized gas. HEA's are used primarily in two applications: (1) as highly
efficient plasma thrusters for spacecraft and, (2) as broad-beam gridless ion
sources for material processing. Historically, electron mobility in HEA's has
been shown to be 1,000 times greater than predicted by classical plasma theory,
yet an explanation for this discrepancy is absent. It is the hypothesis of this
project that the widely accepted view of electron motion in an HEA is
fundamentally flawed, and that recognition of this flaw may shed light on the
mobility anomaly. The PI has undertaken an exhaustive set of fundamental
electron fluid dynamics experiments to be conducted in a novel electron-plasma
trapping apparatus with the goal of understanding the fluid motion and cross-
field mobility in HEA-like field configurations.&lt;br/&gt;The program is
training graduate students for careers as international science leaders through
collaboration with Russian and US partners: two graduate students will spend
one-month in Moscow performing research with Russian collaborating partner
TsNIIMASH, and will spend one-month at the Redmond, WA, research facilities of
industry collaborator Aerojet-General Corporation developing an improved HEA
device. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has a high potential for broad
impact. Successful elucidation of the observed anomalous electron mobility in
HEAs could have significance in technological areas ranging from materials
processing to spacecraft propulsion and in new applications, such as controlled
nuclear fusion. The program also provides a range of educational contributions;
it involves graduate students supervising undergraduate students, who in turn
supervise high-school students. Placing participants in supervisory roles
intrinsically draws them into a deeper understanding of the research, while
motivating their in-class studies. This mechanism enables the broadest
participation of educational groups in a hierarchical learning environment and
can affect many students. The research proposed will form long-lasting
partnerships between collaborators in Russia, US industry, university and high-
school staff, and the larger professional community through conferences and
dissemination of results at local, national, and international
venues.&lt;br/&gt;