* 0348048
* Mood and Learning: How Feelings Influence Task Preparations
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Karen Gasper, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 05/31/2006
* USD 120,000.00

This program of research examines how people's feelings influence the way in
which they prepare for an upcoming task. Specifically, it examines the
hypothesis that mild feelings of negative affect may foster task preparations by
promoting actions that result in people trying to be prepared, but may also
hinder task preparations by resulting in people not feeling prepared. Through
the process of investigating this hypothesis, this project also will integrate
two lines of research (research on affect and information processing with
research on affect and motivation) into a single framework. This framework could
potentially elucidate how feelings alter preparations and more importantly help
identify effective techniques that foster teaching, training, and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments focus primarily on how to promote
creativity and achievement, because these two domains play a central role in
education, business, and the government. Using research on affect in information
processing as a guide, this work examines the knowledge effect, which is the
hypothesis that compared to happier moods, sad moods may promote a sense of
uncertainty that results in individuals a) seeking out and b) adhering to
information that c) appears relevant to the issue at hand (activities associated
with being prepared). Thus, workers who feel upset about an upcoming task may
seek out relevant information and follow it in order be prepared -- practices
that promote positive outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, acquiring
information to be prepared does not mean that one feels prepared. When people
prepare for a task, they also assess their skills and abilities. Using research
on affect and self-regulation as a guide, this work examines the assessment
effect, which is the hypothesis that compared to happier moods, sad moods may
promote a sense of uncertainty that results in individuals being less able to a)
assess the usefulness of information, b) accurately assess their skills, and c)
persist when challenged (activities associated with feeling prepared). Thus,
workers who feel upset may doubt their ability to assess their skills, to
identify erroneous information, and to meet challenges -- practices that hinder
positive outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;