* 0348398
* Magnetometers along the Eastern Atlantic Seaboard for Undergraduate Research and Education (MEASURE-II): A Ground-Based Plasmasphere Monitor Array
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2009
* Mark Moldwin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* kile baker
* 11/30/2009
* USD 764,975.00

This project will study to propagation of Ultra-Low Frequency (ULF) waves in the
magnetosphere and ionosphere and will study the behavior of the inner
magnetosphere and the plasmapause. It will expand and continue the operations of
the ground-based magnetometer array known as the Magnetometers along the Eastern
Atlantic Seaboard for Undergraduate Research and Education (MEASURE). The
MEASURE array is designed to exploit several techniques to determine the natural
frequencies of ULF waves propagating in the inner magnetosphere. The array will
be expanded to include higher latitudes, allowing the measurements to routinely
determine the location of the plasmapause, even under relatively quiet magnetic
conditions. The magnetometer data will be coupled with measurements of the total
electron content (TEC) in the ionosphere and inner magnetosphere by utilizing
low earth orbit (LEO) satellites and GPS signals. The coupled measurements will
make it possible to invert the data using tomographic techniques to produce a
new model of the particle density of the plasmasphere as a function of magnetic
conditions.

In addition to the fundamental scientific research, the project also contains a
strong educational component, covering educational activities from K-12 to
undergraduate and graduate levels. The research undertaken by this project also
involves international collaborations with other magnetometer chains including
magnetometers in Canada and in South America and Antarctica.