* 0348045
* Collaborative Research: Microbial communities at the Cariaco Redox Interface: Coupling of Sulfur, Carbon and Metal Cycles
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Andrei Chistoserdov, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2009
* USD 238,832.00

Project summary The interface between oxic and anoxic environments plays an
important role in cycling of many elements in the ocean, particularly those with
several redox states, including carbon, sulfur, nitrogen manganese and iron. The
interface lies within a redox transition zone where reduced (sulfide, reduced
metals, organic) and oxidized (oxygen, nitrate, metal oxides) chemical species
coexist in opposing concentration gradients. Many important reactions in the
transition zone are biologically mediated (e.g., sulfide oxidation and MnO2
reduction) and these reactions support microbial populations unable to exist
anywhere else. The Cariaco Basin is the world's second largest pelagic anoxic
systems and is the only large, truly marine, permanently anoxic basin. It is
also the site of the international CARIACO (CArbon Retention In A Colored Ocean)
time series program, which is examining long-term variability in ocean
productivity and sedimentation. The major long term goal of this project is
discovering and characterizing yet undescribed microorganisms in the redox
transition zone of the Cariaco Basin at the CARIACO time series site, and laying
groundwork for understanding their significance in carbon, sulfur and metal
cycling. The following experimental objectives are being pursued: 1. Describing
the prokaryotic community with the highest feasible vertical resolution within
the redox transition zone using 16S rRNA libraries/T-RFLP or DGGE techniques; 2.
Designing oligonucleotide probes targeting specific groups of prokaryotes in
each of the three microbial guilds (aerobic, microaerophilic and anaerobic) on
the basis of 16S rDNA libraries. Using fluorescent in situ hybridization with
these probes (FISH) and samples collected during first two years of the project
to test whether prokaryotes found in 16S rDNA libraries/DGGE gels are
numerically dominant within their respective guilds; 3. Identifying autotrophic
components of the three guilds using a combination of 14C autoradiography with
in situ hybridization; 4. Characterizing the three guilds by the diversity of
ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase and citrate liase genes; 5.
Producing concentration profiles of sulfide, thiosulfate, sulfite, elemental
sulfur, MnII and MnO2, dissolved and particulate Fe, and FeS to interpret
possible biogeochemical properties of these Cariaco guilds; 6. Isolating
prokaryotes with novel types of metabolism--chemoautotrophs oxidizing sulfide
and thiosulfate using manganese oxide or iron oxide/hydroxide as electron
acceptors and creating enrichment cultures of other metabolisms: (a) aerobic
sulfide oxidizers, (b) (micro)aerophilic metal oxidizers, (c) anaerobic
denitrifying sulfide oxidizers, (d) anaerobic MnO2/S0 reducers (Geobacteraceae
and physiologically similar bacteria) and (e) S0 and sulfite/thiosulfate
disproportionating bacteria; 7. Identifying enrichment (or pure) cultures by
FISH with probes designed from 16S rDNA libraries. 16S rDNA and CO2 fixing genes
from these isolates are being compared to the molecular information (16S rDNA,
CO2 fixing genes, FISH) from their respective guilds to validate their
importance in nature. Physiological properties of isolated bacteria are being
studied for their ability to grow on potential electron donors, acceptors, and
sources of carbon. This project includes a substantial educational component, an
international collaboration with Venezuelan scientists (Simon Bolivar University
and Fundacion La Salle de Ciencias Naturales) and close collaboration with the
ongoing CARIACO project funded by NSF. At least two graduate students and two
undergraduates are being trained during the course of the project. Collaboration
with one of the leading Latin American institutions is offering continuing
opportunities to recruit students of Venezuelan origin and opportunities for
forming formal collaborations.