* 0349921
* Dissertation Research:  The Science of Small Things: The Botanical Context of German Bacteriology, 1840-1910
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Lynn Nyhart, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2007
* USD 12,000.00

This is a Science and Technology Studies dissertation improvement grant. The
project will consider the contributions of plant physiology to the development
of bacteriology in nineteenth- and early twentieth-century Germany. The
researcher will use funds from the grant to support five months of archival
research in Berlin with travel to other archives. The researchers will examine
the changes in research paradigms that began in the 1840s and characterized
academic botany by the 1860s. Ultimately, it is expected that these changes
became the methodological basis for a bacteriology whose roots were grounded in
botany rather than in scientific medicine. Although histories of public health
and medical triumphs continue to dominate the history of bacteriology, its
development owed a significant debt to botanists-- a claim that offers a
powerful alternative to a historiographical concern with pathogenicity and
conquering disease. Developing this alternative allows plant physiology to
enrich an otherwise exclusively medical narrative. More important, studying the
history of bacteriology as botany illustrates the need to examine the history of
biology through the communication networks and methodologies that united botany,
zoology, and medicine, rather than as a series of independent histories of
distinct, independent disciplines. This approach offers a unique analytical
model which, if extended to a broader biological context, has the power to
construct an inclusive history of biology that prioritizes the nuanced
relationships between its component sciences rather than perpetuating ingrained
assumptions of distinct boundaries between biological and medical, plant and
animal. The shift from descriptive botany to a laboratory-based, physiological
study of plants that stressed cellular investigation was crucial in providing
the intellectual medium for the growth of botanical bacteriology.