* 0349354
* CAREER:    Single-Electron Transistors as a Laboratory for Strongly-Correlated Electron Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2009
* David Goldhaber-Gordon, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2009
* USD 457,000.00

An outstanding challenge in correlated electron systems is to build an
experimental realization of an arbitrary interesting Hamiltonian. Materials
physicists traditionally tailor complex materials to achieve desired electronic
properties. The present project's approach is complementary: instead of
developing new and exotic materials, work with materials whose properties are
simple and well-established, such as 2-dimensional electron gases in GaAs-based
semiconductor heterostructures. Then use nanolithography&lt;br/&gt;to carve them
into arbitrary structures of coupled electron droplets, designed to match a
Hamiltonian of interest. Finally, voltages on local gate electrodes can be used
to tune every important parameter. This project will engineer nanostructures to
display novel many-body ground states, notably a two-channel Kondo system built
from a pair of coupled electron droplets. Undergraduates will be substantively
involved in every stage of this research, preparing them for graduate school or
a broad range of industrial jobs. In addition, a new course will be created to
educate students about the physics of electrons at the
nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Materials physicists often design complex
materials to achieve desired electronic properties. The present project's goal
is similar, but its approach is complementary: instead of developing new and
exotic materials,&lt;br/&gt;work with materials whose properties are simple and
well-established. Then use tools borrowed from the semiconductor industry to
carve these simple materials into complex patterns which can confine electrons.
Multiple ultrafine metal wires (twenty nanometers in diameter, or thousands of
times narrower than a human hair) can then be used to shift the confined
electrons around and hence to tune the electrical behavior of the system.
Despite the simple starting materials, the novel geometries will result in
never-before-seen electronic properties. Undergraduates will be substantively
involved in every stage of this research, preparing them for graduate school or
a broad range of industrial jobs. In addition, a new course will be created to
educate students about the physics of electrons at the nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;