* 0349040
* CAREER:     Assembly of Nanoparticles:      Size, Shape, Spatial, and Sensory Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Chuan-Jian Zhong, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2009
* USD 481,000.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry makes
this Career award to the State University of New York at Binghamton to study
nanoparticle-structured materials and their sensing applications. With this
award, Professor Chuan-Jian Zhong will investigate mediator-template pathways as
a general strategy for assembling nanoparticles. Factors that control the size,
shape, and interparticle spatial properties of assembled units will be assessed,
and applications of the materials in chemical sensing will be explored. Initial
focus will be on thioether mediators and tetraalkylammonium templates for the
assembly of metal, alloy and oxide nanoparticles. The project will examine a
variety of mediator and template systems by manipulating functional groups and
chain lengths. The PI will also develop new course modules centered on
nanoscale-chemistry for integration into the undergraduate and graduate
curriculum and provide summer research opportunities to local high school
teachers and students.

Strategies based on mediator-template chemistry will be developed for assembling
nanoparticles into different shapes (e.g., spherical, cylindrical, cubic,
hexagonal, etc.) and sizes. Factors essential to controlling the separation
distances between nanoparticles and the dimensions of assembled units on scales
ranging from several nanometers to a few micrometers will be identified. The
materials will be employed for use in gas and microfluidic sensing devices. The
research and education plan will train teachers and provide hands-on experiences
for students at the high school, undergraduate and graduate levels that develop
cutting-edge technological skills.