* 0349804
* Aspects of Pluralism in the Foundations of Mathematics
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Geoffrey Hellman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Fixed Amount Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2005
* USD 81,000.00

This proposal is to develop the PI's ongoing investigation into non-trivial
examples of pluralism in the foundations of mathematics involving seemingly
incompatible but viable approaches. Two main loci of such multiplicity are (1)
the choice between classical and constructive logic (renouncing certain
classical principles) in the formulation of analysis, differential geometry,
etc., and (2) differing ontological frameworks as in the single fixed universe
of set theory as contrasted with the multiple universe approach of category
theory (CT) and related varieties of structuralism. Of particular interest under
(1) is "smooth infinitesimal analysis" (SIA) which develops a non-punctiform
conception of the continuum, with infinitesimals whose square is 0. Constructive
logic must be used to avoid inconsistency, but the results are striking
simplifications of classical analysis and a vindication of early proofs in
calculus, long thought to be discredited. Problems of interpretation, however,
arise due to the banning of certain classical inferences involving identity.
Whether such apparent conflicts are genuine or merely apparent, and, in the
latter case, how reconciliation is to be achieved, are important questions that
this project will address and try to resolve. Concerning (2), although set
theory with a fixed universe is traditionally taken as the background framework
for developing mathematical theories, category theory's claims to provide an
alternative, more general and adaptable framework deserve serious
attention.&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to clarify the status of CT as an
autonomous alternative, as well as its relation to other structuralist
approaches (e.g. the PI's modal-structuralism) that, like CT, also provide for
"multiple universes" of mathematical discourse. Progress on these questions can
help shape the general understanding of the nature of mathematics as well as its
relation to other sciences, which exhibit analogous kinds of
"pluralism."&lt;br/&gt;Concerning the broader impacts of this research, it
should promote a conception of mathematics as a much more multi-faceted body of
knowledge than is widely thought, both among scientists and the public. This can
be reflected in mathematical education in a wide variety of contexts, most
immediately at the college level. The PI's work illustrates the importance of
tolerating, and even promoting, a multiplicity of seemingly conflicting
approaches, which are not only useful but may even be necessary for
comprehending a rich and complex subject matter. At the same time, as the
particular mathematical theories focused on here well illustrate, there need be
no sacrifice of rigor or other relevant intellectual standards in the pursuit of
these multiple approaches. This project can help promote tolerance of pluralism,
while maintaining appropriate standards of logic and evidence, in a wide variety
of contexts, within and beyond the academic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;