* 0349256
* CAREER:Biomolecular Flexibility: Facile Characterization of Equilibrium and Dynamical Behavior
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Andrea Markelz, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 04/30/2010
* USD 619,644.00

Biomolecules, such as proteins, are large molecules with well defined shapes.
These shapes must change in order for the biomolecule to perform its biological
tasks. If a biomolecule is flexible, it can easily change its shape. If it is
too rigid, the shape can not easily change, and this can interfere with the
biomolecule's function. Reasons for protein flexibility to change can include
binding of another biomolecule, changes in environment such as water content or
temperature and mutations in the biomolecule's chemical composition. It is
important to be able to rapidly measure a biomolecule's flexibility. Currently
established methods to measure biomolecular flexibility are time consuming and
require special facilities. We have found that when we do something to change
the flexibility of proteins they appear different when examined with light that
is in the terahertz (1012 Hz) frequency range. The terahertz frequency range is
just above the frequencies at which cellular phones operate. Recently compact
measurement systems working at these frequencies have been developed, thus our
aim in this work is to establish a new measurement technique that can be
accessible to all researchers and allows rapid assessment of protein
flexibility. In addition we intend to apply this technique towards understanding
mechanisms of signal transduction. The development of a table-top flexibility
characterization tool will assist in rapid advances in proteomic research and
drug design. The program includes an outreach component which aims to 1) expose
the general public to good science, bad science and how to tell the difference
and 2) change public preconceptions of who scientists are by having
presentations made by young women of a variety of ethnic and economic
backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Divisions of
Physics and Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and
by the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;