* 0349849
* Support of the Workshop Entitled Transport Phenomena in Micro- and Nanodevices
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2004
* Mohamed Gad-el-Hak, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 10/31/2004
* USD 25,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:
CTS-0349849&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TYPE: INVESTIGATOR INITIATED&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATORS: M. GAD-EL-HAK&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: VIRGINIA COMMONWEALTH
UNIVERSITY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SUPPORT OF THE WORKSHOP ENTITLED TRANSPORT
PHENOMENA IN MICRO-AND NANO-DEVICES&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interest in micro- and
nano-electromechanical systems (MEMS and NEMS, respectively) has experienced
explosive growth during the past few years. The rapid progress in fabricating
and utilizing MEMS and NEMS has not been matched by corresponding advances in
understanding of the unconventional physics involved. Providing such
understanding is crucial to designing, optimizing, fabricating, utilizing and
controlling improved minute devices. This international workshop has the primary
objective of improving fundamental understanding of the physics of transport
phenomena in micro- and nano-devices. Partial support from the National Science
Foundation will facilitate the attendance of several American students and other
researchers who would otherwise be unable to attend. The workshop will be held
in the Island of Hawaii during the period 17-21 October 2004. The meeting will
bring together a small but select group of researchers interested in all aspects
of transport phenomena in MEMS and NEMS. That is the transport of mass,
momentum, energy and quantum particles in devices with characteristic lengths as
small as 1 micrometer and 1 nanometer, respectively. A unique aspect of this
workshop is bringing together two communities that have not interacted much in
the past, those of quantum transport and classical transport. The broader impact
resulting from the proposed activity lies in its focus on rapidly advancing
micro- and nanotechnologies. The fundamental understanding that the workshop
provides will result in potential advances in areas such as: micro- and nano-
systems involving particulate and other multiphase flows, mixing, combustion,
energy conversion, computing, biochips, photonics, microfabrication involving
transport phenomena, such as spin coating and etching, quantum dots and
circuits, electronic transport through organic and inorganic materials,
molecular electronics, control of electronic wave functions in molecules,
quantum computations, and single-electron devices. Selected papers and a roadmap
for future research will be published in the form of a hard cover book or a
special issue of Physics of Fluids and will be made widely available to the
research community&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jointly funded by the CTS programs of
Fluid Dynamics &amp; Hydraulics, Particulate &amp; Multiphase Processes, and
Thermal Transport &amp; Thermal Processing.&lt;br/&gt;