* 0349521
* Higher Order Grammar
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Carl Pollard, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2007
* USD 129,530.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Carl Pollard will conduct two
years of research on the specification and implementation of Higher Order
Grammar (HOG), a new formal framework for theoretical and computational
linguistics intended as a successor to Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar
(HPSG). The research is also expected to have significant consequences for other
formal linguistic frameworks such as lexical-functional grammar (LFG), type-
logical grammar (TLG), and possible-worlds semantics. HPSG, developed by Pollard
and others in the 1980's and 1990's, is still one of the most widely employed
formal linguistic framweworks, but has many undesirable features that arise from
its highly nonstandard and idiosyncratic mathematical foundations, which make it
unnecessarily difficult for nonspecialists to learn and use, and which create a
barrier to collaboration with colleagues in adjacent disciplines (especially
mathematics, logic, and computer science). While preserving the underlying
model-theoretic (or constraint-based) approach characteristic of HPSG, HOG seeks
to eliminate these problems by shifting to more established and better
understood mathematical foundations, namely intuitionistic propositional logic
(IPL) and its associated proof theory.

Of particular interest in connection with meaning is the fact that the notion of
POSSIBLE WORLD is definable in the HOL, enabling propositions to be treated as
primitives and worlds as defined (the reverse of the situation in the standard
Carnap-Kripke-Montague tradition); this setup gives us all the worlds we need
(but no impossible worlds), while at the same time leading to novel and
surprisingly simple solutions of longstanding semantic conundrums familiar to
philosophical logicians (such as the logical omniscience (or granularity)
problem and the Hesperus-Phosphorus problem). Attention will also be given to
the syntax-phonology interface, working from the hypothesis that phonological
interpretation can be treated as formally on a par with semantic interpretation
(in terms of categorical logic,the syntax-semantics and syntax-phonology
interfaces are both partial logical endofunctors).

