* 0349345
* CAREER:  Structure and Dynamics with Solid-State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2004,11/30/2009
* Leonard Mueller, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 11/30/2009
* USD 459,200.00

In this CAREER award, supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Leonard J. Mueller will conduct research, at
the University of California, Riverside, on (1) the development and application
of a two-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance method for establishing through-
bond connectivity in disordered solid materials using scalar coupling-driven
correlation and (2) the development of carbon-13 correlation spectroscopy at the
natural abundance level. The latter method is being incorporated into the
standard operating system release of pulse programs by Bruker
BioSpin.&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of the CAREER plan is aimed
primarily at recruitment and training of undergraduate researchers,many from
underrepresented groups, and matriculating these students into graduate programs
in chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop new tools
for the study of organic solids, using magnetic resonance methods. The project
will involve undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral researchers. Some of the
undergraduate researchers working in Prof. Mueller's laboratory include
participants of the California Alliance for Minority Participation in Science
(CAMP) program. In addition, Prof. Mueller involves undergraduates from the
nearby Claremont Colleges (PUI's) in his research.&lt;br/&gt;