* 0349928
* AFRICA AS A LIVING LABORATORY: Science, Nature and Imperial Development in the Tropics 1860-1960
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Helen Tilley, Princeton University
* Fixed Amount Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2009
* USD 140,530.00

This project seeks to explore three related questions. First how did
the&lt;br/&gt;"Scramble for Africa" in the latter half of the nineteenth century
affect European scientific communities and disciplines? Second, what were
scientists' roles during the period of imperial rule in tropical Africa and what
kinds of studies did they produce? Finally, how did scientific knowledge impinge
upon and influence colonial practices and plans for economic development? The
project will concentrate most fully on the British Empire and its dependent
African territories - particularly present-day Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Zambia,
Ghana, Nigeria, and Gambia - but it will also draw upon literature relating to
German, French, Belgian, Portuguese, American, and South African activities in
order to situate the arguments in a transnational and inter-imperial context. A
primary aim of the project is to produce a monograph that offers a detailed
historical account of the ways in which science, empire, and development
intersected in Africa in the century between its conquest and its
decolonization.&lt;br/&gt;Tropical Africa was one of the last regions of the
world to experience formal European colonization, a process that coincided with
the advent of a range of scientific disciplines as well as technologies and
research methodologies. Historical actors, in fact, referred to the continent as
a "living laboratory" in which imperial powers ought to embark upon scientific
study and experimentation. The research for this project will explore three
loosely overlapping historical periods: 1860 to 1914, which corresponds to the
period of European exploration, partition, and conquest; 1900 to 1940, covering
the establishment of colonial states, their attendant technical services, and a
range of scientific expeditions sent out to survey the continent; and 1940 to
1960, including the effects of the Second World War and the tension between
economic models developed in the inter-war and post-war periods. Within this
framework, close attention will be paid to four arenas of scientific research:
environmental, medical, racial, and anthropological.&lt;br/&gt; This cross-
section should reveal the multifaceted and often unpredictable effects
colonization had on scientific epistemologies and, in turn, that science had on
colonialism. It should also highlight the centrality of field sciences not only
to African imperial processes, but also to the gradual codification of
"ethnosciences" as a legitimate realm for European inquiry. The resulting
monograph will place tropical Africa in the foreground rectifying its hitherto
neglected position in studies of science and empire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;