* 0349635
* Synthetic and Mechanistic Studies of Organometallic Reagents
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Hans Reich, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 03/31/2007
* USD 435,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professors Hans J. Reich at the University of Wisconsin-Madison will continue
fundamental studies on several projects involving main group organometallic
compounds. Organolithium reagents are widely used for forming carbon-carbon
bonds. They are also useful for forming carbon-X bonds, and thus are common
precursors to many other organometallic reagents (B, Zn, Ti, Al, Cu, Ce, Sn, Si,
P, S, Se to name a few) with important uses in synthetic chemistry. The goal of
the research is a mechanistic understanding of important organometallic
reactions. More than perhaps any other class of organometallic compound, the
chemical properties of organolithium reagents are dominated by inter - and
intramolecular interactions with solvents and basic pendant groups, as well as
by aggregation phenomena. The proposed spectroscopic and reactivity studies of
solvation and chelation together with product, selectivity and rate studies will
result in a better understanding of these phenomena, better predictability of
the chemical reactions of organolithium reagents, and expansion of the
applications of lithium reagents. A rapid injection NMR apparatus developed
during the previous grant period is now functional and will be used to examine
the reactivity of individual aggregates of lithium reagents and the individual
conformations (carbonyl E/Z) of electrophiles such as esters, thioesters, and
amides.

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports Professors Hans J.
Reich at the University of Wisconsin-Madison who will provide mechanistic
insight into some chemical reactions and chemical species of great importance to
the design of procedures in synthetic organic chemistry. The work supported by
this grant will also provide a broad background in physical organic chemistry,
organometallic chemistry, spectroscopy, and organic synthesis to graduate and
undergraduate researchers. Professor Reich has developed and will continue to
provide to the scientific community free computer programs useful for NMR
simulations (WINDNMR-Pro) and for graphics and chemical structure drawing
(WINPLT). The program produces drawings that can be converted into web pages or
used directly in presentations. There are about 500 registered users of the
WINPLT program. He will continue to maintain a website that is a reference
source for the chemical community to aid in predictions of all types of
molecular behavior that are affected by acidity. The website has had over
100,000 visitors since its opening in 2001, and currently has about 1800
visitors a week.