* 0349602
* SBIR Phase II:  Authentication of Mobile Video Recordings (MVRs) Based on Real-Time Hybrid Digital Watermarking
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Zhenyu Wu, MY EZ Communications LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2006
* USD 785,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Program Phase II project is aimed
at the refinement and commercialization of the authentication technology
developed during Phase I that enables the deployment of digital Mobile Video
Recordings (MVR) system. A very large fleet of patrol vehicles operated by the
law enforcement community that record events involving contact with civilians
collects MVR data daily. Due to staggering costs associated with operating
current analog, non-indexing system, there is an overwhelming needs for a
computerized digital MVR technology. However, its deployment is hindered by
legal acceptance, because digital medium can be easily altered. Authentication
plays a critical enabling role by providing an effective means to safeguard the
integrity of MVR content. To capitalize upon this emerging trend of digital MVR,
the company proposes as a commercialization strategy to market the innovative
technology in a package in an authenticated acquisition system, consisting of a
digital video camera and a software suite for on-the-fly video watermarking,
off-line MPEG compression and watermark verification. This compact and low-cost
acquisition system leverages on existing in-car laptop for processing and
storage, and is specifically designed to meet stringent operational requirements
set forth by next generation MVR system. It integrates seamlessly with existing
IT infrastructure and computerized MVR management systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MVR has provided an effective way of protecting law
enforcement agencies, their officers and the public they serve. The MVR
authentication provides an enabling technology for the acceptance and deployment
of cost-saving computerized MVR technology for the law enforcement community
nationwide. It allows for safe elimination of the labor-intensive process
associated with safeguarding the integrity of MVR content, because watermarking
is done on the fly and there is no time window at which MVR data are ever
unprotected. With the deployment of digital MVR system equipped with watermark
authentication technology, the costs associated with operating the system will
be greatly reduced allowing for the savings to be redeployed to other law
enforcement endeavors. Within the next three years a comprehensive national
digital facial database will be created to support Homeland Security. As an
integral component of the in-car laptop, this technology will serve as the front
line in capturing the data for submission to the national database.&lt;br/&gt;