* 0349394
* Prairie Analysis Seminar 2003
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Estela Gavosto, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 10/31/2004
* USD 6,000.00

The Prairie Analysis Seminar, a joint project of Kansas State University and the
University of Kansas, will be held in October 2003. &lt;br/&gt;This follows two
successful meetings in October 2001 and 2002. &lt;br/&gt;Further meetings in
October of the coming years are planned. &lt;br/&gt;The topic within the field
of analysis varies from year to year;this year's theme is ``p-harmonic
functions". The conference brings together three leading researchers, Professors
Tadeusz Iwaniec of Syracuse University, John Lewis of the University of
Kentucky, and Juan Manfredi of the University of Pittsburgh to give the main
lectures. Professor &lt;br/&gt;Iwaniec's work on quasiharmonic fields of
unbounded distortion has &lt;br/&gt;applications to non-uniformly elliptic PDEs
including non-isotropic PDEs. Professor Lewis has recently coauthored the
successful resolution of the long-standing Kato-square root problem, and his
past work has included nonlinear potential theory and the study of parabolic
PDEs. Professor Manfredi's recent work is on the infinity-Laplacian and past
work includes contributions to the study of the p-Laplace equation. We expect
the meeting to bring together these and other experts in the &lt;br/&gt;field as
well as newcomers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are no standing
conferences in analysis and only rarely other conferences in this region in the
fall. The organizers have structured the conference in such a way so as to keep
the costs for the host university and participants to a minimum. This allows a
wide range of mathematicians to attend--mathematicians at all stages in their
careers and from a variety of institutions. In particular, we encourage
mathematicians in the early stages of their careers to attend and give a
contributed talk, giving them an opportunity to show their work and increase
their visibility in the mathematical community. The conference has historically
attracted a number of researchers from small universities and colleges
throughout the region. This has fostered fruitful interaction among these
institutions, and between these institutions and ours. It is the intent of the
organizers to continue to work to attract&lt;br/&gt;these researchers. It is the
intention of the main speakers to publish a proceedings of the conference.
Dissemination of this knowledge will be of use to those in the field and related
areas. It is to be emphasized that in all announcements of the meeting, and
through their professional contacts, the organizers encourage
and&lt;br/&gt;particularly support participation of mathematicians early in
their career and of traditionally underrepresented minorities.