* 0349316
* CAREER:  Functional Materials Derived from Molecular Containers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Kevin Holman, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 06/30/2010
* USD 584,597.00

The research objectives of this CAREER program are to develop and investigate
new materials derived from molecular containers--synthetic molecules capable of
completely encapsulating smaller molecular &lt;br/&gt;substrates. The specific
goals are: i) to synthesize a series of new metal-organic "microcavity-within-
micropore" materials using container molecules as ligands; ii) to establish
kinetic and thermodynamic relationships between the unique solution-phase
complexation behaviors of molecular containers and the inclusion properties of
the related materials; iii) characterize the molecular motions of encapsulated
species and investigate recently discovered molecular "implosion" behavior. The
targeted materials should possess enforced microcavities, arising from the
molecular containers, and concomitant microporosity, arising as a consequence of
the engineered frameworks. Of particular interest will be the kinetics of
sorption and/or desorption of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), which are
expected to be governed, in part, by the container-like molecular building
blocks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project is aimed toward the
development and study of a new class of microporous materials to be derived from
so-called molecular containers--synthetic molecules capable of completely
encapsulating smaller molecules. Microporous materials represent an enormously
important class of industrial compounds, and recent years have seen rapid growth
in the discovery of new molecule-based examples that provide the advantage of
structural design. To be studied here are materials that are anticipated to
possess unique "microcavity-within-micropore" structures, with certain improved
physical properties concomitant with the embedded molecular microcavities. Such
studies will have implications for storage of volatile organic compounds (e.g.
fuel and gas storage), chemical separations and purification, as well as more
fundamental aspects of solid-state chemistry. This program also seeks to improve
the training of students by integrating research concepts into the laboratory
curriculum at the &lt;br/&gt;freshman through graduate levels and through the
development of new discovery-based experiments. Additionally, an outreach
program will be instigated--directed toward the general public and various
levels of the scientific community--that provides an experimental forum for
personal and professional development and fosters breadth of knowledge and
expertise in solid-state chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;