* 0349737
* Conserved noncoding sequence (CNS) Bioinformatics
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Michael Freeling, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2007
* USD 638,922.00

The University of California at Berkeley has been awarded a grant to provide the
public an accurate database of conserved noncoding sequences (CNSs) in the grass
family of flowering plants. CNSs are sequences that are highly conserved over
evolutionary time, but that do not encode proteins. The function of many CNSs
involves regulation of gene action. Because rice, a grass, has been sequenced
and maize (corn) has a great deal of useful genomic sequence available, CNSs may
be identified by comparison between the two. Because of the great evolutionary
distance between rice and maize, the CNSs so discovered are expected to exist in
most all of the other 10,000 grass species. These include economically important
crop plants whose genomes have not and will not be sequenced. A CNS database
facilitates research on all grass species by providing useful pan-grass PCR
binding sites, these being particularly useful for genetic mapping and obtaining
important and useful gene regions from wild grass species. It is also important
to learn more about the functions that explain why these CNS sequences have been
conserved over the last 50 million years. Among the broader impacts of this
project is collaboration with Berkeley High School designed to help close the
achievement gaps between students of different socio-economic groups. This
project includes a summer research experience program for high school students
who have done well in advanced placement biology.

