* 0349997
* Cultural Influences on Dynamic Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 07/31/2003,07/31/2006
* C. Dominik Guess, University of North Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2006
* USD 135,796.00

All around the world people face problems in their daily lives and need to make
decisions. In these times of globalization, many people live and work abroad or
work together with people from different countries and consequently need to make
decisions and solve problems together. How does cultural background influence
individuals' problem solving and decision making? Research in Cross-cultural
Psychology rarely investigates these topics, whereas research in Cognitive
Psychology rarely includes cultural variables in the investigation of decision
making. This study will thus bridge a theoretical gap between the two
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on the relationship
between cultural values and decision making. Cultural values - more
specifically, individualistic versus collectivist, and vertical versus
horizontal value orientations - will be measured by means of value orientation
questionnaires. Decision making analysis will focus on different strategies and
decision making success. Four hundred psychology and business administration
college students from Germany and the US (individualistic cultures), from Brazil
and the Philippines (collectivist cultures), and from India (neither
individualistic nor collectivist culture) will participate in the study. To
analyze dynamic decision making, two computer simulations "WinFire" and
"Coldstorage" will be used. In contrast to simple decision tasks, these computer
simulations about forest fires and a broken coldstorage are more realistic and
related to daily life. In decision-making studies, computer simulations have
proved to be systematic, fruitful, and productive methods for data gathering.
The data from the simulations will be collected in individual sessions, saved on
computer files and videotapes, and then analyzed. From a theoretical model,
specific hypotheses will be derived on how decision-making strategies will vary
according to different cultural value orientations. The model will then be
tested with structural equation modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides the
theoretical merit, results of this study will also have relevance to the field
of applied psychology. Findings can be incorporated in educational training
programs for strategic thinking and dynamic decision making as well as for
training programs in intercultural competence and sensitivity. Implications and
relevance for research, training, and practice will be addressed.