* 0349825
* Collaborative Research:  Consequences of Parks for Land Use, Livelihood Diversification, and Biodiversity in East Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Paul Leslie, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2008
* USD 62,917.00

Protected parks remain the main mode of purposeful biodiversity conservation in
most of the world. Surrounding these parks particularly in developing countries,
are landscapes that usually still contain considerable biodiversity but also
have rapidly growing human populations. These are areas of dynamic change in
demography, land use, and land cover, and they are characterized by biological
and socio-political risks not usually found elsewhere. This collaborative
research project will examine the interactions among land use, land cover,
peoples' livelihoods, and biodiversity in landscapes surrounding national parks
in Tanzania and Uganda. While these landscapes remain important habitats for
biodiversity, they are also zones of dynamic demographic and land use change,
often with considerable agricultural expansion and intensification. Little
scientific research has explored the spatial and temporal interactions among
land use, livelihood change, and biodiversity in these landscapes. Two
complementary research questions are the focus of the project: (1) How does the
presence of a park affect agricultural land use and other livelihood strategies
surrounding the park? (2) How do the extent, character and intensity of
agriculture affect biodiversity outside the park, measured by the distribution
of key indicator plant and animal taxa? Two overarching propositions relate to
these: (a) the presence of a park will stimulate processes that lead to
islandization of the park; and (b) the relationship between biodiversity and
agriculture in the landscape surrounding a park is neither dichotomous nor
linear, but will be positive under certain land use conditions and negative
under others. The exploration and verification of these models would have
important scientific and policy implications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
comparative study at two contrasting sites -- one in western Uganda and one in
northern Tanzania. It is interdisciplinary, utilizing social and biodiversity
surveys, ethnographic tools, and analysis of satellite imagery. The intellectual
merit of this project lies in an enhanced understanding of population-
environment relations and land-use and land-cover change as these are influenced
by proximity to protected areas, relationships about which little is known but
which are increasingly important. These issues crosscut concerns in geography,
anthropology, ecology, and conservation biology.&lt;br/&gt;