* 0349091
* CAREER:     Molecular Imaging of Protein Adsorption with Immunoassay-Atomic Force Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Mark Schoenfisch, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 01/31/2010
* USD 545,000.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry makes
this Career award to the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC-CH) to
investigate protein adsorption on surfaces with the aim of shedding light on
molecular level interfacial interactions that influence biocompatibility. With
this award, Professor Mark Schoenfisch will use antibody-modified atomic force
microscope (AFM) tips to obtain images and probe physical properties of proteins
adsorbed to surfaces. The principles of traditional immunoassay will be applied
to build molecular recognition into measurements with the AFM and allow for the
investigation of discrete, specific antibody-antigen interactions. Strategies
for AFM-tip modification and control of non-specific interactions between the
antibody-modified tip and the substrate will be explored. The PI will also
implement programs at both the graduate and middle school levels designed to
advance the participation of women in science. One program will engage women
graduate students with women in the chemical workforce through seminars and
roundtable discussions. Another program will provide middle school age girls
with hands-on exposure to modern chemical analysis methods in a two week summer
camp coordinated with the UNC-CH Morehead Planetarium and Science Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AFM methods will be developed for studying complex
interactions between proteins and synthetic materials. The effects of substrate
surface characteristics on the coverage, orientation and related physical
properties of proteins will be investigated. Focus will be on blood plasma
proteins, such as fibrinogen and fibronectin, which influence the blood
biocompatibility of implant materials. The education plan will provide learning
and mentoring opportunities for young women with the aim of increasing the
participation of women in science. &lt;br/&gt;