* 0350221
* Collaborative Research on the Affective Bases of Social Order
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Edward Lawler, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2006
* USD 91,200.00

This laboratory experiment project examines situations in which three or more
individuals interact and exchange in pairs in order to determine when their
social interactions give rise to stability and social order in the group. The
project builds on an affect theory of social exchange that asserts that if
social interaction produces positive emotions and feelings and individuals
perceive these as emanating from their group affiliation, then a stable order
develops based on these emotions. Two aspects of social structure are
investigated: (i) the basic form of social exchange (contingencies between
exchange behaviors), and (ii) different connections or contingencies among pairs
of individuals (i.e., dyads). The intellectual merits of this research are (1)
the comprehensive contrast of forms of exchange, and forms of connection among
pairs of individuals, that have not been studied in a comparative way; (2)
increased understanding of how emotions mediate the effect of social structure
in producing micro social order; (3) knowledge of which forms of exchange or
type of relational connection promote social order, and (4) the first test of a
new affect theory of social exchange which has broad implications. In the
experiments, three subjects will have the opportunity to exchange valued items
with each other. The first experiment examines the impact of four basic forms of
exchange identified by social exchange theorists: negotiated, reciprocal,
productive, and generalized. The second experiment examines the three forms of
connection between the people in exchanges when: (i) each must exchange with
both of the others (inclusive), (ii) each can exchange with either or both of
the others (null), and (iii) each can exchange only with one of the others
(exclusive). The broader impacts of the project include the production and
dissemination of standardized protocols and software for comprehensively
comparing all four distinct forms of exchange, the enhancement of the PIs'
teaching about how groups develop and come to function effectively (e.g.,
cohesion, teamwork, commitment, conflict management), and the training of
undergraduate and graduate researchers.