* 0350095
* Black Incentive Culture in Washington, DC
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Rayvon Fouche, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2006
* USD 116,995.00

Currently, the scholarly work on African American inventors tends to focus on
the individual effort to conceive of an idea, develop the concept, reduce it to
practice, and then gain a defendable monopoly for that piece of intellectual
property in the form of a patent. This work typically concentrates on the
cultural and technological struggles that a black inventor had to overcome. This
project, however, examines collaborative community relationships that fostered
productive inventive work. This research expands the current study of African
American inventors and provides a broader context from which understand the
lived experiences of black inventors. Instead of studying African American
inventors as individuals disconnected from other black inventors, this project
will study the connections--social, cultural, and material--between African
American inventors in Washington, DC. The researcher contends that at the turn
of twentieth century a small, but active, group of black inventors in
Washington, DC relied on each other, pooled resources, and used each other as
sources of collaborative inspiration. The key member of this group was Henry E.
Baker, an assistant examiner for the United States Patent Office. He provided an
insider's perspective to the patenting process, thereby enabling a group of
African American inventors to successfully navigate the United States Patent
Office. This research will show that African American inventors in Washington,
DC leveraged their collective knowledge and experience a powerful survival
mechanism in a segregated society to create inventive collaborations that
mirrored their African American social and fraternal organization on the day.
This research will (1) describe why and how black inventors lives have been
elevated to mythic black inventors, (3) explain the value of studying the
collaborative work of black inventors, and (4) provide a research plan to
uncover a black inventive community in Washington DC.

