* 0350842
* Theoretical Studies of Dilute Alkali Gases and Amorphous Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Anthony Leggett, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2009
* USD 608,000.00

This grant addresses theoretical questions in two challenging problems in
emerging areas in condensed matter physics: properties of dilute alkali Bose and
Fermi gases and the "universal" properties of amorphous materials.

In the first area, several questions are addressed: (a) the behavior of a
recently discovered state in which not one, but two, orbital single-particle
states are macroscopically occupied; (b) the conditions under which the degree
of Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) may be inferred from Ramsey-fringe type
experiments; (c) the detailed dynamics of the process by which a Bose gas
trapped in an optical lattice in a "Mott-insulator" state converts into a
superfluid (phase-coherent) state when the optical barriers are lowered or
removed; (d) the behavior of a dilute Bose gas in the limit that the s-wave
scattering length tends to infinity; (e) in a dilute two-species Fermi alkali-
gas system having attractive inter-species interactions, to possible limits on
the transition temperature to the BCS state, and/or on the pairing amplitudes.

The second major thrust is more speculative in nature; an attempt is being made
to implement quantitatively a proposal made several years ago concerning the
"universal" behavior of amorphous materials (glasses), namely that this behavior
has nothing to do with the ubiquitous presence in these materials of "tunneling-
two-level systems," which is required by the currently established model, but
rather is a quite generic consequence of the presence at short length scales of
any kind of excitations that are not harmonic and that can be coupled by the
elastic medium.

In addition to these major two projects, work is ongoing on quenching in very
degenerate Fermi systems and on cuprate superconductivity.

The proposed projects are at the intellectual core of modern condensed matter
physics and success will be of fundamental consequence. Likewise, successful
completion of this research will affect many other fields of study. Students
will be trained and the principal investigator is also writing a textbook on
quantum liquids for beginning graduate students. %%% This grant addresses
theoretical questions in two challenging problems in emerging areas in condensed
matter physics - that branch of physics that deals with matter in its solid or
liquid phases. The first area is theoretical studies of the properties of
dilute, ultra-cold gases that condense into a unique quantum phase. Discovery of
this unique phase, predicted many years ago, has earned recent Nobel Prizes.
Much research has yet to be done. The second research area is the strange and
"universal" behavior of amorphous materials (glasses). At very low temperatures
diverse materials exhibit common properties indicating a common mechanism. A
possible model for these common properties will be explored.

The proposed projects are at the intellectual core of modern condensed matter
physics and success will be of fundamental consequence. Likewise, successful
completion of this research will affect many other fields of study. Students
will be trained and the principal investigator is also writing a textbook on
quantum liquids for beginning graduate students. ***

