* 0350363
* Conference Proceedings/Report on "Effective Education Grantmaking" -- 2003 Grantmakers for Education Conference
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2004
* William Porter, Grantmakers for Education
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 03/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

Grantmakers for Education (GFE) connects the work of the broadest cross-section
of philanthropists working in education today and helps foundations and donors
improve their effectiveness. The mission of the organization is to strengthen
the capacity of philanthropy to improve educational outcomes for all students,
which it accomplishes by providing opportunities for foundation leaders to work
together, study issues together, and reflect on their work. One of the key
projects of GFE is an annual conference, which convenes 300 grantmakers each
year. In 2003, the GFE conference explores issues of impact and effectiveness by
examining what education grantmaking has accomplished and how grants can better
leverage change in education (from the early grades through higher education).
Day long workshops (and complementary sessions and site visits) examine
strategies for sustainability, strategies for influencing policy, and strategies
for engaging in successful replication including, prominently, efforts to impact
math and science education

This project supports writing, printing, and distributing a conference
proceedings publication. Education grantmaking is a significant tool for
improving the education system of the nation, especially in mathematics and
science, and the conference (and a report on its proceedings) seeks to make
education grantmaking more effective and have greater impact.

Intellectual merit: Through case studies and discussions with leaders in the
fields of education and philanthropy, conference sessions identify ways
foundation leaders can better change education policies, sustain successful
programs over time, replicate models and thereby impact student achievement
better.

Broader impact: By publishing and disseminating a report on the conference
themes and findings, GFE influences the grantmaking practices of not only those
attending the conference, but also of the broader field of education
philanthropy.