* 0350541
* Public Opinion and Policy Responsiveness in Small Electorates: Institutions and Spending in American School Districts
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Eric Plutzer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2007
* USD 224,638.00

Assessing policy responsiveness, the degree to which public policies correspond
to citizen preferences, is a central challenge to political scientists. However,
one aspect of policy responsiveness -- whether policy responsiveness is enhanced
or diminished by various institutional arrangements -- remains largely
unexplored. The researchers address this by focusing on spending outcomes in
America's school districts. More specifically, they examine how much actual
spending levels correspond to local preferences (after controlling for economic
resources). Because school districts display enormous variation in several key
institutions and their governance arrangements were specifically intended to
enhance or diminish policy responsiveness, school districts represent an ideal
unit of analysis to pursue these theoretical questions. &lt;br/&gt;The
researchers examine how the correspondence between local educational spending
levels and citizen preferences varies by three aspects of institutional design:
fiscal independence, referendum requirements, and rules of electoral
representation. Using data on over 9000 US school districts they show that
reforms resulting from Civil Rights challenges to electoral systems were
successful in improving the policy responsiveness of districts with even small
minority populations. In addition, they show that one innovation championed by
the Progressives -- fiscal independence-- lessens policy responsiveness while
another such reform -- the referendum -- strengthens the opinion-policy linkage.
&lt;br/&gt;To explore these substantive themes, they use Bayesian hierarchical
models to estimate public opinion for various voter types within each state.
These estimates are combined using demographically based post-stratification
weights to estimate public opinion in each school district. The research support
is for (1) refining and validating the estimation method, (2) applying the new
measure to empirical questions on policy responsiveness, (3) adding a dynamic
aspect to the analysis, and (4) generalizing the method to partisanship,
ideology and other policies. &lt;br/&gt;In this stage, the broader value of the
research is its contribution to several literatures by addressing important and
unresolved questions. The analysis of fiscal independence contributes to a
better understanding of American political development and the intention of
Progressives to insulate educational policy making from the public. The analysis
of the referendum will contribute to a growing empirical literature on direct
democracy. In particular, it is possible to test certain aspects of the median
voter model used in these studies because the investigators have actual
estimates of the median voter's preferences. The analysis of electoral systems
will add substantially to literature on racial politics and vote dilution. Prior
studies show that the shift from at-large to ward-based electoral systems
increased the descriptive representation of African Americans (and Hispanics, in
Texas). The investigators go further by seeing whether these gains also led to
increases substantive representation and n policy responsiveness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;