* 0350160
* Dissertation Research: Institutional Innovation in a Malaria Control Partnership in Tanzania: an ethnographic study
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Rayna Rapp, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2006
* USD 12,000.00

This is a Science and Technology Studies dissertation improvement grant. The
researcher will examine the effects of changing dominant health development
paradigms on international collaboration and knowledge production in the context
of an innovative malaria control program in Tanzania. Funds from the grant will
support travel to Tanzania. Funds will also support some equipment purchases.
The focus of the project is an emergent institutional form loosely referred to
as partnership, which is proliferating and transforming the field of
international health. The project will shed light on the global forces that
shape the organization and practice of international health research and disease
control in developing countries; the intended and unintended changes that such
interventions elicit both on the ground and within the wider development
apparatus in which these are embedded; and the production of authoritative
knowledge that is central to and constitutive of (biomedical) science and
development as universalizing endeavors. Through its focus on partnerships as an
increasingly influential yet poorly described organizational form, this project
will also offer theoretical and methodological contributions for studying local
instantiations of globalizing cultural phenomena. The project will also shed
light on a neglected but devastating disease that is a leading killer of (poor)
children and pregnant women. Malaria is the leading cause of death and illness
in large parts of sub-Saharan Africa, but little is known about the
sociocultural meanings of this scourge or its social impact. By providing a
situated perspective on how local people in Tanzania deal with malaria and
respond to innovative institutional responses to control it, this project will
also make important contributions to applied anthropology, health communication
and most significantly, the development of culturally appropriate disease
control programs.