* 0350777
* Improving decision making processes for adaptive environmental risk management
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Jerry Bigham, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2007
* USD 275,000.00

During the process of risk management, individuals as well as groups learn over
time from their successes and also their failures. The principle of adaptive
management is built on this concept; it directly addresses the objective of
learning over time through the design, implementation, and monitoring of
management "experiments." Learning, therefore, takes place through the analysis
of multiple contrasting treatments, some of which succeed while others
inevitably fail. In fact, failure in adaptive management is re-coded as success
to the extent that it provides opportunities for learning, reducing uncertainty,
and improving future outcomes. Yet herein lies the significant barrier to the
implementation of adaptive management. Despite its common-sense appeal and
agreement among scientists about its usefulness for managing complex
environmental risks, the notion of "successful failures" has served as an
institutional, political, and emotional barrier, effectively relegating adaptive
management approaches to the status of principles that seem sound in theory but
also socially unacceptable and politically impractical. Among the common reasons
cited by ecologists and biologists for this history of implementation failures
are four major classes of problems: difficulties faced by agencies when
undertaking a long-run view (e.g., assisting institutional or political agencies
to deal with intertemporal analyses), difficulties in establishing outcomes
(e.g., separating experimental from external influences), difficulties in
identifying and quantifying the predicted benefits of an adaptive approach
(e.g., avoiding catastrophic surprises), and difficulties in balancing uncertain
successes with inevitable failures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These are difficulties
about which the decision sciences should have much to say. However, previous
research has largely ignored the question of how these problems could be
addressed-and, in turn, how the adaptive management paradigm could best be
implemented-in the context of stakeholder-based environmental management
processes. This research will apply the tools of the decision sciences to
explore the consideration of adaptive management initiatives for environmental
risk management; our work aims to: (1) develop and test a decision aiding
approach that encourages value-based tradeoffs related to learning through
adaptive management and (2) understand how people make use of affective
heuristics when evaluating the suitability of adaptive management options for
different classes of environmental problems. To address these objectives, two
closely related lines of research are proposed. One involves developing and
testing structured decision making approaches for adaptive management. The
second element involves experiments designed to learn about integrating
affective considerations and deliberation when evaluating adaptive management
options. The broader impacts of the proposed research lie in the development of
improved approaches for balancing the pros and cons of environmental management
options across multiple ecological, economic, and political/cultural choices.
These approaches should lead to stronger ties between the decision and natural
sciences by linking technical analysis to structured discourse for complex
environmental risk management problems.&lt;br/&gt;