* 0350502
* A Profile of the Variability of the Geosynchronous Magnetic Field Strength and Its Response to the Solar Wind
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Jeff Sanny, Loyola Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* kile baker
* 05/31/2007
* USD 120,000.00

Understanding the response of Earth's magnetosphere to variations in solar wind
parameters is one of the most important and fundamental problems in space
physics. Within the magnetosphere, the location of the geosynchronous orbit is
such that its magnetic field and plasma properties are responsive not only to
solar wind-magnetosphere interactions at the magnetopause, but also to changes
in the inner magnetosphere and the nightside plasmasheet. Fluctuations in the
geosynchronous field associated with magnetic storms, Ultra-Low Frequency (ULF)
magnetic pulsations, and transient events are just three important examples of
how the geosynchronous field can act as a monitor of the effect of the solar
wind. This project will focus on the variability of the geosynchronous magnetic
field in response to the different types of ULF pulsations. The response will be
examined as a function of magnetic local time (MLT) for different geomagnetic
conditions. For each passband, the dependence of the variations in magnetic
field on IMF orientation and solar wind properties such as proton number
density, flow speed, dynamic pressure, and dynamic pressure fluctuations will be
investigated. The resultant database of this survey and the statistical
relationships among the different parameters will provide a better understanding
of how the solar wind influences the magnetosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project includes a tight integration of research and undergraduate education.
Undergraduates at Loyola Marymount University will be provided the opportunity
to participate actively in the research program, thus enriching their
educational experience and providing them with greater preparation for their
professional careers. The Loyola Marymount student population is very diverse
with about 49% being non-white and 58% female. Educational materials based on
this research will also be developed for classroom use. The study will be
performed with collaborators at large research institutions, resulting in a
partnership that will reinforce the excitement of space physics research among
the Loyola Marymount student scientists.