* 0350019
* International Research: Heterokaryosis in a Clonal Population of the Chestnut Blight Fungus
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Michael Milgroom, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 06/30/2008
* USD 48,640.00

This joint research project, headed by Michael Milgroom of Cornell University
and his counterpart, Kiril Sotirovski of the Forestry Institute at Sts. Kiril
and Metodij University in Skopje, will examine Cryphonectria parasitica, known
as the chestnut blight fungus. Fingi have the capacity to maintain nuclei with
distinctly different genetic material in the same individual; this phenomenon is
called heterokaryosis. The chestnut blight fungus appears to be heterokaryotic
in nature, but the mechanism for its origin is not yet known. Together, the
researchers intend to explore the mechanisms responsible for heterokaryosis by
studying it in clonal populations, i.e., those that are asexual and therefore
lack recombination. Populations of C. parasitica in Macedonia are ideal for this
because they have very low genetic diversity and are likely to be clonal.
Therefore, the goals of this project are first to test whether populations are
clonal, and second to screen for heterokaryons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
cooperative research plan calls for analyzing previous collections of C.
parasitica from Macedonia and Greece, and collecting additional samples in
Macedonia, while targeting specific populations for more in-depth study. The
Macedonian research partner, Dr. Sotirovski, is an expert forest pathologist
with extensive knowledge of chestnut trees and C. parasitica in Macedonia. His
expertise is highly complementary to the principal investigator's background in
fungal genetics. Both the researchers and their students will benefit from
shared biological materials, technology and analytical
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chestnut blight, caused by C. parasitica, continues
to be an economically significant disease across North America, Europe and Asia.
Results are expected to improve our basic understanding of fungal genetics and
provide new insight into the biology of forest diseases. Success may lead to
improved methods for biological control of chestnut blight with fungal
viruses.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project in plant population biology fulfills
the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in
the United States and South Central Europe to combine complementary talents and
share research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.
Broader impacts include the introduction of two U.S. students to the
international community of mycologists through research at the Macedonian
institution and direct involvement in the project's field studies of natural
populations.