* 0350533
* Collaborative Research:     Privacy-Sensitive Data Mining From Multi-Party Distributed Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Krishnamoorthy Sivakumar, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2007
* USD 164,203.00

Collaborative Research: Privacy-Sensitive Data Mining from Multi-Party
Distributed Data

A growing number of data mining applications need to deal with data sources that
are distributed, possibly proprietary, and sensitive to privacy. This has
resulted in the development of several privacy-preserving data mining
techniques. Many of these algorithms work using randomized techniques to perturb
the data and preserve the data privacy while still guaranteeing the invariance
of the underlying patterns. This proposal first points out that the popular
naive randomization of the data (more specifically, additive random matrices)
may preserve little data privacy in many cases. It proposes a framework to
understand these data masking techniques using the theory of random matrices to
shows the problems of some existing privacy-preserving data mining techniques
and potential research directions for solving the problems.

This proposal also suggests the development of a collection of randomized
techniques that are provably correct in supporting privacy-sensitive
applications. It proposes a randomized projection-based technique to compute
statistical aggregates from multi-party distributed data. It also suggests
research on a privacy-sensitive distributed Bayesian network learning algorithm
for similar applications. The proposed algorithms will be developed, tested, and
evaluated using a collection of testbeds that the PIs have been developing for
the last several years.