* 0350439
* Genes That Control the Ability of Phytopathogens to Resist the Defense Protein Osmotin
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Ray Bressan, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Rogers
* 04/30/2007
* USD 540,000.00



Phytopathogenic fungi are the predominant cause of agricultural losses resulting
from infectious diseases in plants. Spurred by the need to develop logical
agronomic strategies to control fungi, much attention has been paid in recent
years to understanding natural plant defense mechanisms. Tremendous progress has
been made in uncovering mechanisms by which plants 'recognize' the presence of
the invader. This has been accomplished by numerous studies aimed at uncovering
the natural molecules that fungi and plants use to signal each other's presence.
Once plants sense the presence of dangerous pathogens they respond by making
several proteins that are designed to inhibit or kill the pathogen. One of these
proteins that defends the plant from pathogen invasion is called osmotin. The
goal of this project is to investigate other factors made by fungi that affect
the activity of the osmotin made by the plant. During the previous NSF-funded
project, we utilized Saccharomyces cerevisiae, common baker's yeast, as a model
fungus, because of the powerful genetic resources and tools available for this
model. The goal of the present project is to further understand the importance
of factors in yeast that control osmotin activity. The information gained from
this model fungus can be used to study true plant pathogens, Fusarium oxysporum
(osmotin sensitive) and Botrytis cinerea (osmotin resistant) as pathogen models.
Understanding the bases of activity of these natural defense proteins could lead
to novel strategies to control fungal diseases. Numerous undergraduate students
and high school teachers from underrepresented minority groups have participated
in the investigator's lab in the past, and will be included in the present
project.

