* 0350518
* CAREER:     Vibrational Couplings and Conformational Dynamics of Solvated Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Martin Zanni, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 01/31/2009
* USD 561,600.00

In this CAREER award, supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Martin Zanni will conduct research, at the
University of Wisconsin, Madison, on the development of the technique of two-
dimensional non-linear infrared spectroscopy using femtosecond lasers. The
methods developed will be used to study the vibrational dynamics, couplings and
folding of DNA and RNA oligomers in solution. In addition, he will train
undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students in research and develop an
active outreach collaboration with an inner-city high school in Chicago.

The methods developed by Prof. Zanni may prove to be quite general for studying
the dynamics of complex biological molecules. Besides developing these new
experimental tools, Prof. Zanni will mentor high-school and undergraduate
researchers in his laboratory. He also will begin an outreach program with an
inner-city Chicago high school, the Noble Street Charter School. This school has
a student body that is 95% underreprensented minority. Prof. Zanni will work
with the teachers at the school on a curriculum development plan, incorporating
the instructional materials developed by the Material Research Science and
Education Center on Nanostructured Materials and Interfaces at the University of
Wisconsin.