* 0350015
* Dissertation Research: Managing Diagnostic Uncertainty: An Examination of the Interplay of Technology, Medical Knowledge, and Law in Diagnostic Practice.  The Case of Epilepsy.
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Vincanne Adams, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2006
* USD 7,927.00

This is a Science and Technology Studies dissertation improvement grant. The
project is a comparative, ethnographic analysis of doctors' strategies for
managing competing medical and legal demands faced in diagnosis of epilepsy in
contemporary American medicine. Funds from this grant will support travel to
several conferences. Funds will also support equipment purchases. The researcher
will examine the interplay of technology, medical knowledge, and diagnostic
practice, within a medical context of high uncertainty, where doctors are not
only diagnosticians, but also key players in the legal regulation of driving for
people with epilepsy. Ultimately, the researcher will explore implications of
diagnostic practice for patients. People diagnosed with various seizure
disorders have created support and advocacy groups, which are key sites where
they share medical and legal knowledge, react to their experience of diagnosis,
and work to challenge legal regulation. This research takes these social groups
as an important site for the generation of alternate medical knowledge about
epilepsy in cases where doctor's knowledge is sometimes taken as insufficient by
patients (as well as doctors themselves). The research activities will be
conducted over 16 months, and will include ethnography of: 1.) a comprehensive
epilepsy clinic, 2.) a patient support group (Northern California Branch of the
Epilepsy Foundation of America), and 3.) several branches of the Northern
California DMV Committee that makes decisions to revoke patient's driver's
licenses, as well as participant-observation at a number of key scientific and
medical meetings. This study will attempt to delineate when and how uncertainty
becomes problematic, when and how controversy is closed and when and how it is
left open. By detailing how diagnoses are produced, this study may be used by
patients to inform themselves about the diagnostic process and may contribute to
improved doctor-patient communication.