* 0350301
* SLC Catalyst: Visual Symbol Systems for Deaf and Hearing Learners of English
* SBE,SBE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Thomas Allen, Gallaudet University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 06/30/2005
* USD 119,460.00

The Science of Learning Center in Visual Symbol Systems and English Literacy is
built around the themes of visual learning and visual languages and their role
in enhancing English literacy. In the catalyst phase, three study strands (1.
Neurological and cognitive studies; 2. Linguistic and behavioral studies; and 3.
Educational practice studies) will be defined, and projects will be described
and reviewed in the context of an interdisciplinary catalyst meeting comprised
of leading researchers and educators from each strand. The purpose of the
activities will be twofold: first, synthesize findings and methodologies and
create an agenda for the proposed Center, and second, to establish and nourish
interdisciplinary connections among researchers and educators who work with
populations of students for whom the visual modality has a heightened importance
in their learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed SLC will bring together
scholars as well as educators who work daily with students who demonstrate the
need for visually presented knowledge, especially those who are deaf or hard of
hearing. Within each discipline represented, the quality of research will
improve through the interaction with scholars and educators who bring different
perspectives. The SLC will be housed at Gallaudet University, where for decades,
researchers have sought to describe and understand visual languages and their
appropriate role in educating deaf and hard of hearing children. In the proposed
SLC there will be a particular emphasis on examining aspects of both American
Sign Language and Cued Speech that have broader implications for language
learning and literacy. Because Gallaudet operates model elementary and secondary
schools on campus and has an elaborate network of schools and educational
agencies through its National Missions Programs and Research Institute,
mechanisms for transferring knowledge gained through research into educational
practice will be easily built into the Center structure. Educators, including
those who are deaf and those from underrepresented groups throughout the country
will participate extensively in the activities designed for the catalyst phase.
&lt;br/&gt;