* 0350936
* Presidential Donors' First Reactions to the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 (BCRA):  The 2004 Election Cycle
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* John Aldrich, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2007
* USD 184,411.00

This research exploits a unique opportunity to build on a project two of the
investigators recently&lt;br/&gt;completed, a survey of presidential donors who
gave in the 2000 cycle. The passage of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of
2002 (BCRA) significantly altered federal campaign finance regulations. The
researchers will compare presidential giving in 2004 to that in 2000 to examine
how presidential donors respond to the new rules. This comparison involves both
a panel study of respondents to the 2000 project and a replication of the 2000
project using a separate, representative sample of donors in the 2004
presidential election.&lt;br/&gt;The panel element of this study entails re-
surveying 2,905 respondents who gave to one of 10&lt;br/&gt;presidential
candidates in 2000 - the 9 candidates who raised over $5 million and Ralph
Nader. These respondents, from whom a sizeable data set has already been
collected, comprise a random sample of the 2000 donors, stratified by candidate
and contribution size. The panel format is essential; it is the only way to
assess who contributes repeatedly and who does not, and to measure the motives
underlying the decision (not) to contribute. The replication, which entails
surveying a random sample of 6,000 members of the 2004 donor pool, is equally
important. A new cross-sectional survey is the only way to examine how the BCRA
changes the donor pool in 2004. The panel study measures changes in behavior of
individual donors in response to the BCRA; the cross-sectional replication
measures aggregate change. The investigators will merge the data they collect
with data - available from the Federal Election Commission - that describe the
contributions that each respondent made, its amount, the date it was made, and
the donor's occupation. The results will be compared to the analogous data set
already collected from the 2000 donor pool. Knowledge of the BCRA's provisions
and data collected from the 2000 donor pool make possible examination of this
law's effects. &lt;br/&gt;The project examines three major
questions:&lt;br/&gt;o How does the BCRA affect the transparency of giving? The
BCRA will likely make giving&lt;br/&gt;more transparent, as it increases hard-
money limits and reduces the avenues open to soft money.&lt;br/&gt;o How does
the BCRA affect giving? Will donors give larger amounts to fewer candidates
(and&lt;br/&gt;organizations), or will they simply increase the total amounts
they give?&lt;br/&gt;o How does the BCRA affect the behaviors of different
subsets of the donors pool (e.g. do&lt;br/&gt;Republican donors take greater
advantage of the raised limits than do Democrats? Do those who&lt;br/&gt;do not
give larger amounts become more active in other ways such as working for
campaigns?)?&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The project benefits both the
scholarly and the policy-making communities. It provides&lt;br/&gt;valuable data
at a critical juncture in the history of campaign finance regulation. It also
helps to train the next generation of researchers; its location, focus, scope,
and substance make it particularly suitable for involving both graduate and a
large number of undergraduate students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;