* 0350814
* The Division of Household Labor in Three-Dozen Countries
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Judith Treas, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2007
* USD 99,095.00

SES - 0350814&lt;br/&gt;Judith Treas&lt;br/&gt;University of California,
Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is a cross-national investigation of the
determinants and consequences of gender inequality within the household.
Housework has emerged as an important area of research, because women's unique
family responsibilities have been shown to place them at a disadvantage in the
workplace. Paradoxically, the division of household responsibility does not
conform to a logic based in economic efficiency nor in resource exchange. Gender
overrides the decision-making principles that govern other areas of human
activity. Despite a rich body of research on the individual-level determinants
of the household division labor, research is lacking on the way in which the
broader social context affects couples' task-sharing and influences the impact
of individual-level characteristics on household arrangements. Arguing that
societal gender inequality diminishes the influence of women's resources in the
household, this research considers the micro-level behavior of couples within
the macro-level context of societies. Drawing on the Family &amp; Changing
Gender Roles III module of the 2002 International Social Survey Program (ISSP)
and other recent data, the study has three objectives: 1) To investigate how
partner characteristics, including relative resources, affect gender inequality
in the division of domestic activities within couples in three dozen societies;
2) To construct and evaluate country-level measures of the macro-level climate
of gender (e.g., the degree of male-female political and economic parity,
support for family-friendly policies, intergenerational change in women's
economic roles); and 3) To develop and test theoretically motivated,
hierarchical models that investigate how the broader ideological, political, and
social climate of gender in a country a) directly impacts the gender inequality
of couple's domestic activities, b) tempers the effect of individual women's
resources on their domestic activities, and c) contributes to individual
perceptions of equity, couple conflict, and perceived tensions between work and
home. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will use analyses use cluster analysis,
correspondence analysis, and nested ANOVA to describe and classify three dozen
countries in terms of household domestic patterns. To explore in direct effects
of individual- and country-level variables as well as the impact of their
interactions, a series of two-level hierarchical linear models will be
estimated. Individual-level equations consider the household's demand/need for
housework, individual's time available for housework, resource exchange
measures, gender attitudes, and control variables. Hierarchical models
investigate how national ideological, political, and social climates directly
impact the gender inequality of couple's domestic activities and affect the
influence of individual women's resources. Country-level variables include
measures of societal gender parity, ideology, public policies, institutionalized
career patterns, family structure, and social change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research results contribute to scientific understanding of gender inequality,
help us better understand the impact of public policies on marriage and family,
and encourage cross-national investigation of household behavior.&lt;br/&gt;