* 0350679
* Workshop: Earthquake Engineering and Structural Control Experimentation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2007
* Peter Chang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 07/31/2007
* USD 11,856.00

A workshop is being organized in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area to
introduce&lt;br/&gt;members of the local research community who are interested
in earthquake engineering&lt;br/&gt;and dynamic system control to the newly-
built 6-DOF shake table at the Virginia Campus&lt;br/&gt;of The George
Washington University. The Washington metro area is home to a
number&lt;br/&gt;of institutions of higher education, including The George
Washington University, the&lt;br/&gt;University of Maryland at College Park,
Johns Hopkins University and Catholic&lt;br/&gt;University, and to several
national laboratories, including the National Institute of&lt;br/&gt;Standards
and Technology, the Turner Fairbanks Laboratory, the Naval
Research&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory, and NASA Goddard Research Center. Researchers at
these institutions and&lt;br/&gt;laboratories are involved in work.such as
earthquake engineering, structural damping&lt;br/&gt;and position control, and
vibration control.that could benefit from unique
experimental&lt;br/&gt;capabilities of the shake table.&lt;br/&gt;Each Workshop
participant will present a 15-minute talk suggesting possible
research&lt;br/&gt;that he or she could do on the shake table. Each talk will be
followed by a brief&lt;br/&gt;discussion among all participants about the merits
of, and possible improvements to, the&lt;br/&gt;proposed idea. The Workshop is
designed to allow the group of participating researchers&lt;br/&gt;a maximally,
mutually inspiring, intellectual experience.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A
number of new research ideas for use of the newly-installed
shake&lt;br/&gt;table will be introduced at the workshop. Topics will include
(1) experimental&lt;br/&gt;verifications of analytical prediction, (2) active
and semi-active structural control, (3)&lt;br/&gt;novel sensor technologies, and
(4) dynamic and pseudo-dynamic concurrent testing.&lt;br/&gt;These discussions
are expected to lead participating researchers to individual as well
as&lt;br/&gt;collaborative research projects in the areas of earthquake
engineering and structural&lt;br/&gt;dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: One of
the most effective forums for exploring the capabilities of the&lt;br/&gt;newly
built shake table and challenging the personnel associated with the shake
table&lt;br/&gt;facility is through a workshop on just these topics. The direct
impact of the proposed&lt;br/&gt;Workshop will be to stimulate use of this
modern and unique regional facility, which&lt;br/&gt;provides capabilities of
critical interest to the research community. Other benefits to&lt;br/&gt;come
from the workshop include (1) the pioneering of networking procedures
for&lt;br/&gt;addition of sites to the Network for Earthquake Engineering
Simulation (NEES) grid, and&lt;br/&gt;(2) creating synergy among researchers of
the earthquake engineering community and&lt;br/&gt;those from the structural
dynamics community. Research to be conducted will involve&lt;br/&gt;both
undergraduate and graduate student participation. The results of the workshop
will&lt;br/&gt;be made available through the Internet. This information will be
advertised in venues&lt;br/&gt;such as the NEES Consortium, the National Science
Foundation, and the Earthquake&lt;br/&gt;Engineering Research Council. To
further diversify the thinking going on at the&lt;br/&gt;Workshop, we will
encourage the participation of under-represented groups
whenever&lt;br/&gt;possible.