* 0350120
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Clinicians as Culture Bearers: A Study of the Dying Process in the American Hospital
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2004
* Susan Mckinnon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2004
* USD 11,700.00

While death is not infrequent in the American hospital, a "good death" there is
hard to come by. The death of the patient clearly contradicts the hospital
mission of rescue, stabilization and recovery, but it is seldom described as a
conflict in American cultural values. This dissertation research by a cultural
anthropologist examines the conflict between two American values: the commitment
to saving personal lives and the desire for a death with personal meaning. The
central question is how do conflicting norms, both in American culture and
within the hospital, prevent its clinicians from attending to the restoration of
selfhood to the patient who is approaching death, making it impossible to
achieve "death with dignity?" Using retrospective interviews and participant
observation with clinicians and administrators the student will study two city
hospitals in in a Mid Atlantic city who must mediate between America's
contradictory ideals of rescue and "death with dignity" as they seek to treat
life-threatening illness. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The scarcity of "death with
dignity" in American hospitals receives continued public attention in end-of-
life discussions. The use of diverse hospital sites and contexts in this project
will generate practical findings relevant not only to clinicians in acute care
institutions, but also to those in other facilities where patients die, such as
hospices, long term care and rehabilitation settings. In addition the project
contributes to the training of a young social scientist. &lt;br/&gt;