* 0350185
* Laboratory Studies of Tropospheric Sulfur Chemistry
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Paul Wine, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2008
* USD 784,148.00

This project continues a series of laboratory studies investigating fundamental
properties, behavior and characteristics of the tropospheric sulfur cycle. The
major objective is to further studies of the mechanisms and rates of biogenic
reduced sulfur compounds through gas- and aqueous-phase oxidation pathways.
Sulfur species are abundant in the remote marine lower troposphere and likely
play important roles in biogeochemical cycling, new particle formation and
global climate. Results from this study will offer improved insight on defining
these roles explicitly and in doing so further improve constraints on the global
sulfur budget. Experimental and theoretical elements are involved. Laboratory
kinetic studies will use laser flash photolysis and turbulent flow tube
techniques with detection by a variety of state-of-the-art spectroscopic
measurement/analysis techniques, including Chemical Ion Mass Spectrometry
(CIMS). Some theoretical ab initio mechanistic calculations in parallel and
complementary to the experimental approach will also be conducted. The broader
science impact of this fundamental research will be important to advancing our
understanding of the chemistry and cycling of sulfur in the ambient atmosphere,
with further implications for better assessing the role and impact of such
processes on global climate. The research is highly integrated with education
and outreach. The project supports two full-time graduate students and a number
of undergraduate research assistant paid hourly. Participation in this project
will contribute substantively to their research training and professional
development.