* 0350969
* The Role of Authority and Communication in Cooperation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Andrew Postlewaite, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2008
* USD 293,193.00

This project will use the tools of game theory to provide an improved
understanding of cooperation in large groups. These tools have been used by
others to understand cooperation in small groups. However, the insights from
this work do not provide much insight into what happens in larger groups.

The project has two parts. The first part addresses authority - what it is, how
a person might acquire it, maintain it and use it. The aim is to provide an
understanding of authority that centers on an individual's ability to coordinate
other players' actions. A good model of authority should have several features.
First, an individual has authority when a group of people coordinate their
behavior in response to announcements by that individual. Second, there is a
tension between the incentives of the individual with authority to maintain that
authority and to take advantage of his authority. Third, too much flexibility or
unpredictability can destroy authority. Fourth, authority need not necessarily
come from some special ability or talent. Fifth, authority does not arise from
people simply coordinating on a choice identified by the "authority" figure. The
principal investigators will build models with these features and use them to
analyze authority.

The second part of the project looks at the role of communication between the
members of large groups. Previous work on how groups cooperate over time has
included punishment as a central ingredient. The idea is that people cooperate
because they know that they will be punished by the group for non-cooperation.
However, in a large group, it is not likely that all group members will
immediately know that someone else has chosen non-cooperation. Punishment is
only possible if members of the group communicate. However, the mere possibility
of communication won't ensure cooperation; people have to have an incentive to
tell the truth about others for cooperation to be enforced. This part of the
project will again use game theory to analyze when and how large groups can use
communication to encourage cooperation.

This research will provide a better understanding of how cooperation does and
does not work in large social groups. A central question in economics, and other
social sciences, is why some countries or groups do less well than others. The
variation in performance does not appear to be adequately explained by
differences in available resources, suggesting that differences in social
organization are likely to be important. The focus is on particular aspects of
social organization, authority and communication, as important determinants of
the level of cooperation possible within a society. The work will provide a
foundation for more applied work aimed at understanding differences among
societies by providing models linking social structure to social performance.

