* 0350193
* CAREER:  Steps Toward Ensuring the Quality of the Next Generation of Chemists, and Probing the Size-Dependent Properties of Catalytically Significant Metal Cluster/Adsorbate Compl
* MPS,CHE
* 06/16/2003,06/30/2005
* Caroline Jarrold, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2005
* USD 105,619.00

Jarrold is supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to perform
experiments that systematically probe the interactions between size-selected,
catalytically relevant metal clusters and simple organic adsorbates using anion
photoelectron spectroscopy. The goals are to determine how metal cluster size,
geometry, and electronic structure determine reactivity in these systems. In the
educational part of this CAREER award, local high school science teachers will
engage in summer research at Jarrold's institution, to develop stronger
relationships with university-level scientific material and to learn new
teaching tools. The continuity of the undergraduate chemistry curriculum will be
examined as well, in order to devise and test concrete curricular guidelines for
demographically diverse undergraduate student populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding chemical catalysis has important
ramifications for strategic applications such as the petrochemical industry and
environmental protection processes. Outcomes from the supported reseach will
impact the development of heterogeneous catalysis. The educational projects will
contribute to improving secondary science education in Chicago-area high
schools, and contribute to a more coherent and effective undergraduate chemistry
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;