* 0350803
* Production,  Consumption, and Political Transformation in Late Prehistoric/Early Historic South India
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Carla Sinopoli, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2010
* USD 187,511.00

Since the introduction of agriculture some 5000 years ago, the human inhabitants
of the semi-arid uplands of Southern India have dramatically transformed their
physical and cultural landscapes. Over time, small communities of mobile herders
and farmers settled into larger more permanent communities. By the first
millennium BC, inhabitants of the Tungabhadra Corridor region of Central
Karnataka (Bellary and Koppal Districts) resided in large permanent communities
dependent on the production of agricultural surpluses. These hierarchical
communities were organized into multi-settlement polities centered on large
towns, buried their dead in megalithic stone monuments, produced sophisticated
iron, ceramic, and other craft goods, and engaged in long distance trade
relations across and beyond South Asia. With support from the National Science
Foundation, the "Early Historic Landscapes of the Tungabhadra Corridor"
archaeological project (co-directed by Carla M. Sinopoli and Kathleen D.
Morrison and conducted in collaboration with the Karnataka Department of
Archaeology and Museums) will examine the dramatic changes in economic, social
and political organization that occurred in the region from the first millennium
BCE through the early centuries AD. These changes culminated in the emergence of
the region's earliest state level societies and its entry into the historical
record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international collaborative project focuses on
a 35 square kilometer area along the Tungabhadra River on the edges of the
UNESCO world heritage site of Vijayanagara, capital of South India's largest
historic empire (the focus of the project director's earlier research). Through
a program of regional survey, excavation, and analysis, the EHLTC project
examines large and small settlement sites and the changing agricultural
landscape of the late prehistoric/early historic period. Research focuses on
refining archaeological chronologies and documenting agricultural and craft
production, differential patterns of consumption of locally produced and exotic
goods, and political, ideological, and economic interactions and relations with
Northern India and, through maritime commerce, with Southeast Asia and the
Mediterranean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EHLTC project will contribute to
knowledge on South Asian archaeology and on the development of complex societies
more generally. The international collaborative project also makes significant
contributions to scholarly collaboration, education and training, and to the
public dissemination of archaeological knowledge and preservation efforts.
Project directors work closely with Indian archaeologists and institutions, and
train large numbers of Indian and American students in systematic research
techniques. In a region where the archaeological record is being rapidly
destroyed by population growth and development, the project is committed to both
documentation of sites and local education on heritage and preservation. Museum
exhibits will be established in the local school and museum and a web site on
the project will make the results available to a broader public.&lt;br/&gt;