* 0350103
* The Tragic Sense of Life:  Ernst Haeckel and the Battle over Evolutionary Theory in Germany
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Robert Richards, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2006
* USD 99,998.00

The P.I. proposes to research and write a book with the tentative title The
Tragic Sense of Life: Ernst Haeckel and the Battle over Evolutionary Theory in
Germany. &lt;br/&gt;Prior to the First World War, more people learned of
evolutionary theory through the voluminous writings of Ernst Haeckel
(1834-1919), Darwin's foremost champion in Germany, than through any other
source, including the writings of Darwin himself. Aside from the more popular
spread of evolutionary ideas, Haeckel was responsible for major developments on
the technical side of biology. He trained many of the eminent German researchers
of the next generation (e.g., Richard and Oskar Hertwig, Wilhelm Roux, Anton
Dohrn, Hans Driesch). Relations with his contemporaries was mixed: adored by
some, hated by others. He was in constant contact with Darwin and T. H. Huxley
about a number of issues in evolutionary biology, and he had a rebounding impact
on their own work. Haeckel's theories of human evolution, published before
Darwin's Descent of Man, came to structure the Englishman's account of the
evolution of human mind and its realization in different social groups. Though
Darwin had employed the idea that the development of the embryo recapitulated
phylogenetic history, Haeckel further elaborated the principle and solidified it
in Darwin's usage. Haeckel's work on the principle, which he called the
biogenetic law, involved him in monumental battles in Germany and elsewhere, and
generated charges of fraud concerning his evidence. Haeckel was the first to
employ, in a systematic way, tree-diagrams depicting the phylogenetic history of
organisms. The warfare between science and religion that broke out all over
Europe and American during the last part of the nineteenth century and that is
still fiercely fought today can largely be attributed to Haeckel.s constant
baiting of the preachers and religiously minded scientists, though Mohandas
Gandhi believed Haeckel's work the solution to the wars of religion racking
India. Haeckel was an artist as well as a biologist, and he illustrated all of
his own works. These illustrations had a marked influence on the movement in
Germany called Jungenstil, comparable to our art deco. It has been alleged that
Haeckel's biological theories have contributed to the rise of Nazi biology, and
many, particularly in Germany, still attribute a residual racism to Haeckel's
influence. There is little doubt of Haeckel's impact on biology and larger
scientific affairs during the last half of the nineteenth century and a good
part of the twentieth. &lt;br/&gt;There is no comprehensive study of Haeckel's
work and influence in English, though there are some smaller studies of
individual aspects of his accomplishments. With some exceptions, most of these
English studies (and the recent German ones as well) come to powerfully negative
judgments about Haeckel, judgments that often rely more on ideology than fact.
There are some earlier studies in German, but mostly in the hagiographic vein.
The P.I.'s effort will be to research and write an intellectual biography of
Haeckel, and simultaneously to depict the state of evolutionary theory in
Germany during his lifetime. The strategy will be to examine in particular
Haeckel's personal history, his loves, his hates, his significant relationships,
his artistic talents, so as to consider how more intimate events came to shape
his evolutionary ideas. The book will certainly make judgments about Haeckel's
accomplishments, but judgments controlled by recognizing the historical context.
An appendix will consider the justification and conditions for making moral
judgments about historical characters and events. &lt;br/&gt;Many of the debates
about religion and science, as well as those alleging an endemic racism in
respect to Darwinian theory, have manipulated a demonic Haeckel in those
controversies. It is the P.I.'s hope that this study will alter the picture of
Haeckel, and more generally the strategy of doing this kind of history. Under
the best of outcomes, this research may have some judicious impact on the
aforementioned debates and the historiography of science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;