* 0350396
* Collaborative Research: Miocene-Pliocene Paleoelevation of the Bolivian Altiplano
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Julie Libarkin, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2006
* USD 19,725.00

High elevation plateaus are enigmatic features that form in contractional
mountain belts.&lt;br/&gt;Regional crustal shortening and thickening cause
significant amounts of surface uplift within plateaus. However, other crustal
and subcrustal lithospheric processes, such as lithospheric thinning, magmatic
additions to the crust, tectonic underplating, or lower crustal flow may also
play an important role in producing these broad, high elevation regions.
Understanding the mechanisms responsible for plateau uplift requires knowledge
of the history of surface elevation. Both the magnitude and time scale of
surface uplift are controlled by the underlying mechanisms responsible for
uplift. The PI's propose to study the uplift history of the Altiplano in Bolivia
using oxygen isotope paleoaltimetry techniques in addition to testing a new
cosmogenic isotope paleoaltimeter. These paleoelevation data will help resolve
current debates over the early versus recent uplift of the Altiplano. In
addition, these data will place constraints on the magnitudes and rates of
uplift over time, enabling them to determine the importance of certain uplift
mechanisms. The Altiplano has an average elevation of 3700 m, second only to the
Tibetan plateau in size and lateral extent. This is an ideal setting in which to
carry out a systematic study of long term surface uplift for the following
reasons: 1) A previous paleoelevation study, based on leaf physiognomy, provides
a record by which to compare our paleoelevation data. These data suggest that no
more than half of the uplift of the Altiplano took by ~10 Ma (Gregory-Wodzicki,
1998) and also provide paleotemperature estimates required for oxygen isotope
paleoaltimetry. 2) Oxygen isotope paleoaltimetry can only be applied in regions
that experience minimal evaporation (humid environments), whereas cosmogenic
isotope paleoaltimetry requires minimal erosion (arid environment). There is a
large range of climatic variability within the Bolivian Altiplano, enabling us
carry out oxygen isotope paleoaltimetry in the more humid northern Altiplano and
cosmogenic isotope paleoaltimetry in the arid southern Altiplano. 3) There is a
long-term history of sedimentation within the Altiplano, producing an extensive
carbonate record from which oxygen isotope paleoelevation estimates can be
obtained. The ages of sedimentary rocks in the Corque basin, our target section,
have been determined to be between ~14 Ma and ~5 Ma by 40 Ar/ 39 Ar dates of
interbedded tuffs (Marshall et al., 1992) and magnetostratigraphy (Roperch et
al., 1999). 4) Data on the oxygen isotope composition of monthly and yearly
rainfall has been collected providing an excellent d 18 O vs. altitude gradient
(Gonfiantini et al., 2001). This gradient will be used to estimate the elevation
of paleometeoric water from which carbonates were precipitated. 5) Widespread
Miocene to recent volcanism within the Altiplano provides abundant datable
paleosurfaces containing the mineralogies needed to apply cosmogenic isotope
techniques to determining paleoelevation. In the southern Bolivian Altiplano
evidence suggests that these paleosurfaces have experienced very little erosion
over the past 15 Ma (Horton, 1998). The preliminary oxygen isotope data show a
pronounced shift in oxygen isotopic ratios of about -7.5 between late Oligocene
and late Miocene time, which suggests more than 3 km of surface uplift. Initial
measurements on apatite and sanidine indicate that both cosmogenic 3 He and 38
Ar are preserved in modern low latitude surfaces on the Altiplano. This research
is a collaborative effort between the University of Rochester, the Harvard-
Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, and researchers at Berkeley and Caltech.
The broader impacts of this project are that it will provide partial support for
two Ph.D. students and two or more undergraduate students. Undergraduate
research will lead to the completion of senior thesis projects. In addition,
this research will directly inform an ongoing study of student conceptual
understanding&lt;br/&gt;of earth processes. Scientific views of plate tectonic
processes continue to evolve in response to research like that proposed here,
and these views are the datum to which student ideas must be compared.