* 0350748
* Collaborative Research:  Social versus individual learning in life cycle consumption and saving
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Nathaniel Wilcox, Stephen F. Austin State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2007
* USD 57,296.00

This project experimentally examines whether people can learn how to perform
these tasks better through observation of, and/or advice from, other people. The
hypotheses under scrutiny are motivated by a large literature in sociological
and psychological disciplines concerning observational, social and cooperative
learning on the one hand, and group processes and performance on the other. The
tasks studied are drawn from the contemporary economic literature on consumption
and saving. The purpose of the experiments is to determine: (a) Whether social
learning can occur in these important economic settings; (b) what factors govern
the occurrence and/or strength of this learning; and (c) how such learning
compares to individual learning from individual
repetition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The life-cycle consumption
and saving task (hereafter LCCS task) plays a central role in macroeconomic
theory, and is also an intense object of study in several microeconomic areas.
Experimental examinations suggest that people do not perform LCCS tasks
optimally. And while it is possible that some individual learning and adaptation
could take place with individual repetition of LCCS tasks in an experimental
setting, this is of questionable relevance to LCCS tasks in the external world
(the world outside the lab) since, by definition, they are only encountered once
in their entirety over any agent's lifetime in the external world. However,
people may learn from observation of (or advice from) other people who have
performed (or are performing) similar tasks. That is, there is a possibility of
social learning about LCCS tasks, even though individual learning through
repetition is impossible. Similar remarks apply to many other important
individual decision making tasks that are, by their nature, only encountered
once in a lifetime. But few are as important, ubiquitous or complex as the LCCS
task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Experimentalists commonly build
repetition of tasks into experimental designs. This is a questionable procedure
whenever: (a) The decision problem under analysis is a unique, once-over-a-
lifetime task in the external world, such as the LCCS task; and (b) the
experimenter wishes her results to be externally valid. However, if social
learning occurs for such tasks, and social learning compares well with
individual learning, then the procedure gains in respectability since it may be
regarded as a "laboratory substitute" for the social learning that would take
place in naturally occurring settings. So this research will add useful
knowledge to the methodological base of experimental economics.&lt;br/&gt;