* 0350041
* Neural Bases of Speech Perception in Human Auditory Cortex
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Josef Rauschecker, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 09/30/2006
* USD 136,983.00

Speech perception is one of our most important skills - something we spend a
great deal of time acquiring as children and that is of the utmost importance in
social interactions. It is also one of the skills commonly affected by strokes,
as well as by hearing loss. Speech perception is characterized by considerable
flexibility and robustness - we can understand speakers in noisy environments,
and we can cope with wide variations in the speaker's mood and accent, all of
which affect the nature of the speech signal we need to decode. With support
from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Josef Rauschecker seeks answers to
these and related questions. His studies will help to transfer knowledge gained
from animal models toward the understanding of higher cognitive processes of
speech and language perception in humans. The notions of hierarchical networks,
processing streams, and higher-order computational maps have been used
successfully in animal research on complex visual and auditory perception. Dr.
Rauschecker will perform analogous investigations directly in humans using
noninvasive, high-resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to
determine activation of auditory cortices by speech and speech-like sounds.
Using high-field fMRI the studies will not only determine the location of
cortical areas activated by natural and synthetic speech sounds, as opposed to
other sounds with similar complexity, but also reveal detailed organizational
principles of higher-order acoustic-phonetic feature maps within human auditory
and language cortex. The studies will provide a wealth of new information in the
under-researched field of higher auditory pathways in humans as well as insight
into general organizational principles of functional architecture in cortical
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of the neural basis of
speech perception has potential broader impacts on clinical issues such as
recovery from aphasic stroke, as well as on educational neuroscience. This
research could have impacts for understanding second language learning and the
development of multilingual children. The broader impacts of this project
include opportunities for hands-on research experience of undergraduate and
graduate students in Cognitive Science as well as Neuroscience. This direct
immersion into ongoing research will lead to tighter integration of teaching and
research. The funded project will enhance the infrastructure for research at
Georgetown University and help support two formal training programs offered at
GU. The project will strive to further increase the number of minority students
at all levels. It will broadly disseminate the results of its research through
publications and public databases to scientific as well as lay audiences thus
enhancing scientific understanding by the public&lt;br/&gt;