* 0350762
* Titanium catalyzed multi-component coupling strategies based on hydroamination of alkynes
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Aaron Odom, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 02/28/2007
* USD 378,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports Professor Aaron Odom of Michigan State University for his research
exploring the development and elaboration of pyrrolyl-based ligands in early
transition metal-based catalysis. Prof. Odom will investigate the formation of
C-N bond forming reactions, especially in the synthesis of heterocycles, through
the investigation of new titanium-based catalysts. The development of
hydroamination catalysts will be furthered by the elucidation of the structural
features and electronic structures of key intermediates to understand the
factors governing metal-ligand multiple band reactivity. This research will
advance the chemistry needed for the organic transformations of heterocyclic
frameworks such as pyrroles, indoles and quinolines that are important in the
development of the majority of fine chemicals including
pharmaceuticals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of new reaction chemistry
and catalysts for C-N bond formation is a critical step to improve the
methodology for the synthesis of a variety of compounds such as pyrroles,
indoles and quinolines, many of which are important specialty and pharmaceutical
compounds This research will allow the generation of organic compounds with
relatively high molecular complexity from simple starting materials. Graduate
students, undergraduate students and postdoctoral associates will receive
excellent training in synthetic methodology, and the electronic structure
studies of metal complexes in a forefront inorganic chemistry program.