* 0350351
* Seminar on Finite Element Analysis of Reinforced Concrete Structures Subjected to Extreme Loads:    Recent Research Activities and Future Research Needs; Nov. 2-4-2003; Makena, HI
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Laura Lowes, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 08/31/2005
* USD 30,000.00

PI: Laura Lowes, University of Washington &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is
to solicit support for an international seminar on "Finite Element Analysis of
Reinforced Concrete Structures Under Extreme Loads." The seminar will be
organized by Professor Hiroshi Noguchi of Chiba University in Japan and
Professors Laura N. Lowes of the University of Washington, Filip C. Filippou of
the University of California and Kaspar Willam of the University of Colorado in
the United States. A counterpart proposal for the joint seminar will be funded
by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science. The workshop will be held 2-4
November 2003, in Makena, Hawaii on the island of Maui. It will bring together
researchers from the U.S. and Japan as well as Canada and Europe. The objectives
of this seminar are to 1) review recent developments in state-of-the-art
material constitutive models, finite element analysis techniques and numerical
methods and 2) to identify research needs to enable accurate,&lt;br/&gt;robust,
efficient simulation of the response of reinforced concrete structures under
extreme loads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The seminar
will provide an opportunity to discuss research activities in the broad range of
topic areas that support the finite element modeling of reinforced concrete
structures. The afternoon of the first day will be dedicated to discussion of
experimental investigation of the behavior of reinforced concrete structures,
experimental data sets for use in model development and benchmark studies. The
second day will focus on modeling the mechanical behavior of reinforced concrete
structures including constitutive models, element formations, component models
and computational techniques. The morning of the last day of the seminar will be
devoted to analysis of structural systems, software tools and numerical methods
that can be used&lt;br/&gt;facilitate and enable analysis in the post-peak
regime. The seminar will conclude with a group discussion to identify future
research objectives. The seminar will have both oral presentations of written
papers and group discussions. The technical papers, summary of discussions and
resolutions will be published in a technical report, which will be distributed
to the research and engineering communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that the seminar will help identify future research
needs in the areas of 1) benchmark studies and experimental data to support
improved simulation, in particular data that may be generated by testing
performed at NEES facilities, 2) constitutive modeling and element formulations,
3) finite element methods, 4) numerical and computational methods to enable
analysis in the post-peak regime and 5) software to support model building and
analysis of reinforced concrete structural systems. Additionally, it is expected
that participants from the U.S., Japan, Canada and Europe will identify
potential collaborations that leverage the strengths and accomplishments of the
individual research groups around the world.&lt;br/&gt;