* 0350770
* Research in Financial Economics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Jose Scheinkman, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2008
* USD 145,329.00

The proposal involves two research projects. In the first project, the PI
investigates the consequences of speculative trading in financial markets. The
PI is especially interested in cases where speculative trading is produced by
overconfident investors who think that their knowledge about assets is more
precise than it really is. Overconfidence creates disagreement among investors.
An asset owner has an option to sell the asset to other agents who have more
optimistic beliefs. This resale option is valuable if short sales are costly.
The resale option has a recursive structure, that is, a buyer of the asset gets
the option to resell it. This causes a significant bubble component in asset
prices even when small differences of beliefs are sufficient to generate a
trade. The model explains why, when transaction costs are low, price bubbles are
accompanied by significant increases in trading volume and high price volatility
as it has been observed in many actual episodes of asset bubbles. Some
predictions of the model will be tested using data on stocks prices in China and
on US closed-end funds. The PI will also consider markets with a finite number
of risk-averse investors to investigate the impact of changes in asset supply on
the speculative component of asset prices. Speculative trading also has
consequences for the design of executive compensation and the behavior of
managers. The PI proposes to investigate the role of speculative trading in
generating the compensation packages that seem to have led many corporate
managers to pursue strategies that maximize short-term stock performance at the
expense of the long run fundamentals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second research
project aims at exploiting the Markov structure that is present in several of
the asset pricing models that are used in practice, to increase our
understanding of how the behavior of asset returns in the short-run are
transmitted into the prices of securities with payoffs in the long run. This
will allow us to perform new tests on theoretical models of asset
pricing.&lt;br/&gt;