* 0350891
* Dynamics of a Buoyant Coastal Current Encountering Abrupt Changes in Coastline and Bathymetry
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* David Chapman, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 01/31/2008
* USD 491,027.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Buoyant coastal currents transport fresh water,
heat, dissolved and particulate materials along many continental shelves and
thereby impact coastal circulation and ecosystems. The dynamics by which they
adjust to changes in topography and coastline are poorly understood. The PI's
will use laboratory and numerical models to study a buoyant coastal current
crossing a simple channel. Both surface-trapped currents, which do not feel the
bottom, and slope-controlled currents which are steered by a sloping bottom will
be considered. Buoyant fluxes into the channel and past the channel will be
quantified among other variables. The synergy between laboratory and numerical
models will be used to overcome the difficulties and uncertainties of each
approach. Finally, the numerical model will be applied to several ocean
locations with realistic coastlines and bathymetry and the results will be
compared both to existing observations at these locations and to the results of
idealized models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Better understanding of
buoyant coastal currents as a result of this study will help other research
efforts many of which are interdisciplinary. The results will become a part of a
graduate course in coastal physical oceanography. The laboratory experiments
will be displayed to school groups and will act as motivational and teaching
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;