* 0350973
* Mechanisms of Golgi Apparatus Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 08/20/2003,02/28/2005
* Brian Storrie, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/28/2005
* USD 111,824.00

The Golgi apparatus is central to the biosynthetic processing of secretory and
membrane proteins in eukaryotic cells. Proteins destined for secretion or for
insertion into the plasma membrane, as well as proteins destined for various
intracellular compartments such as the lysosomes, are rapidly sequestered,
usually co-translationally, into an intracellular system of compartments that
facilitate the post-translational biochemical processing of these proteins and
their translocation to their functional locations in the cell. The first
compartment into which such proteins are sequestered is the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER); from there, the proteins are transported through the Golgi
apparatus and from there distributed to their ultimate locations. The Golgi
apparatus itself is complex, and its various components (stacked cisternae) are
specialized for various functions, e.g., in terms of postranslational
modifications of proteins. The mechanism of transport of proteins through the
various cisternae of the Golgi apparatus, and the biogenesis and maintenance of
the Golgi apparatus in the cell, is a topic of considerable significance to the
understanding (and, ultimately, deliberate biotechnological manipulation) of
these processes. It is also a controversial topic, since recent discoveries have
forced cell biologists to reconsider the working model of Golgi biogenesis that
has dominated cell biological thinking in this area for the past twenty years.
This proposal addresses a key aspect of this issue, the functional and dynamic
relationship of the Golgi apparatus to the endoplasmic
reticulum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Golgi apparatus receives newly synthesized
proteins and lipids from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and distributes them to
other downstream organelles within the secretory pathway. Key to Golgi function
is an unequal distribution of 'resident' proteins, that are concentrated in one
cisterna and are absent from other parts of the organelle, to give a 'polarized'
stack of Golgi membranes. The proposed research centers on the question of how
polarized Golgi stacks form; in other words, on the biogenesis of the organelle.
Prior work by Dr. Storrie (Storrie et al., 1998; Storrie and Yang, 1998) raises
the possibility that the Golgi apparatus may 'melt' into the ER during mitosis
followed by subsequent de novo formation of the organelle from the ER. In this
project, exploratory research will be performed to test the role of two families
of molecules in the postulated de novo formation of polarized Golgi stacks.
These molecules are the COPI class of coat proteins and two members of the rab
family of small GTPases, rab6 and rab33b. Each is known from the work of others
to be involved in membrane trafficking. Dr. Storrie will assess conditions that
specifically block vesicular transport within the Golgi stack and will score for
effects on de novo Golgi formation using as a model system Golgi reassembly from
the ER following brefeldin A (BFA) washout. BFA-treatment results in a
reversible dispersal of Golgi proteins and lipids to the ER. The experiments
probe the hypothesis that vesicular transport processes may be necessary to mold
stabilized molecular associations within the Golgi apparatus into polarized
Golgi stacks. A reverse genetic approach will be taken, in which dominant
negative mutant proteins will be introduced into cells by microinjection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;