* 0350104
* Lively Capital: Biotechnologies, Ethics and Governance in Global Markets, October 2004
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Kaushik Sunderrajan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2006
* USD 10,000.00

This is a proposal for a workshop entitled "Lively Capital: Biotechnologies,
Ethics and Governance in Global Markets," to be held at the Anthropology
Department, University of California, Irvine in October 2004. $10,000 is being
requested from NSF for the conduct of his workshop. This is in addition to funds
(amounting to $27,000) that are being requested from two other funding sources:
The University of California Humanities Research Institute and the Newkirk
Center for Science and Society at UC Irvine.&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring
together scholars in Science and Technology Studies (STS) who adopt a range of
disciplinary perspectives (including anthropology, history, sociology, law and
political science, and the life sciences, to name some) whose work addresses
various aspects of ethics and governance of emergent biotechnologies in global
marketplaces. Invited participants will include some of the most established
scholars in STS, along with younger scholars who are at an advanced stage of
their research projects.&lt;br/&gt;There will be an explicit focus on
comparative perspectives, so that the global magnitude &lt;br/&gt;and scale of
the modes of production and impacts of biotechology can be adequately
reflected.&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will last for 3 days, and will be open to
attendees from departments at UC Irvine and nearby campuses. The papers
presented at the workshop will be collected into a series of edited volumes on
"Lively Capital." The proposed workshop will represent the cutting-edge of
enquiries in STS around issues of biotechnology and society. As it will involve
leading scholars in the field, and be hosted by a department that is well known
for its commitment to fostering inter-disciplinary conversations on questions of
modernity, it will be an activity of high intellectual merit and considerable
significance in academic STS and anthropology circles. In addition to its
academic impacts, the workshop will foster conversations between social science
and life science departments at UC Irvine, and will contribute to wider public
and policy debates n the nature and impacts of emergent
biotechnologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;