* 0350200
* SGER:  Towards Computational Epidemiology:Designing an Infectious Disease Outbreak Simulator
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Armin Mikler, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2005
* USD 50,319.00

This project is focusing on a new branch of computational science, i.e.
computational epidemiology, an interdisciplinary, small scale, exploratory, high
risk research with relevance to national health. Specifically, this project will
accomplish a complex task of designing and implementing a simulator of an
Infectious Disease Outbreak. This tool will not only allow epidemiologist to
hypothesize on the spatial progression of an epidemiological event, but will
allow computer scientists to study the effects of deploying a communication
infrastructure on control and containment of a disease outbreak. This marks a
rather ambitious endeavor, as it requires solutions to problems that are rooted
in graph theory, stochastic modeling, medical geography, and high performance
networking and computing. The developed simulator will serve not only as an
investigative and analytical computational tool for epidemiologists, but will
also be an essential tool to help develop the required communication
infrastructure among healthcare providers. It can be used to investigate the
effectiveness of providing epidemiologists with access to distributed
information via peer-to-peer networks (e.g. peer-to-peer grid computing) and/or
access to sensor networks. In other words, experimental studies conducted with
this simulator will provide guidance in the decisions how to design the
communication infrastructure and how to appropriately distribute sensor network
components. The design of this simulator can be viewed as an early contribution
to the field of computational epidemiology.