* 0350988
* The Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Marianne Page, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2006
* USD 70,245.00

ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NO: 0350988 INSTITUTION: University of California, Davis NSF PROGRAM:
ECONOMICS PI: Page, Marianne TITLE: The Intergenerational Transmission of Human
Capital

There is a high degree of persistence in economic status across generations,
but very little is known about the causal processes behind this phenomenon. This
research project will investigate the causal effects of parental education on
children's education and labor market outcomes. The project is that it will lead
to a better understanding of the causal processes that contribute to
intergenerational immobility. Quantifying the extent to which a child's well
being can be improved by increasing his parent's education level will shed light
on the debate over whether similarities across generations result from "nature
vs. nurture". Discussions about the government's role in providing educational
aid focus on the individual's return to education and ignore the possibility of
social benefits. Knowing that there are intergenerational returns to increased
schooling would provide a further rationale for such programs.

Very few studies have attempted to isolate the causal effect of education on the
next generation's well being. This is probably due, partly, to difficulty in
finding plausible sources of identifying variation as well as finding large,
nationally representative datasets that simultaneously provide information on
parental characteristics and children's outcomes. The Census Bureau's IPUMS and
data on compulsory schooling will be sources of data for this study. The first
source of identification is variation in state compulsory schooling and child
labor laws across cohorts and over time. Between 1915 and 1969 48 states changed
these laws, and many changed them multiple times. If these laws lead people to
get more schooling, and if parental education has a positive effect on the next
generation's schooling then the children of individuals who grew up in states
with later drop-out ages should have higher measures of human capital.

The second source of identification comes from variation induced by the World
War II G.I. Bill, together with variation across cohorts in the probability of
taking up G.I. benefits. These benefits have a substantive effect on collegiate
attainment and there were differences in the probability of GI take-up across
cohorts. Compared to younger veterans older veterans would have been more likely
to have completed their schooling before being drafted, had fewer years over
which to recoup the gains, and would more likely to have had a pre-existing job
that was held for them. They were thus less likely to take advantage of the G.I.
program. Since these differences are generated only by differences in age,
however, it is unlikely that they would have an independent effect on children's
outcomes. This research will also be the first to focus on causality using a
large, nationally representative dataset. The results of this research are
likely to increase our understanding of the intergenerational transmission of
human capital.