* 0350687
* Embodiment in Emotion Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Piotr Winkielman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 11/30/2008
* USD 231,260.00

The present program of research examines the means by which individuals process
emotional information. The guiding framework holds that emotion processing
involves "embodiment", or the activation of emotion-relevant sensory-motor and
somatic states in the individual. In that framework, embodiment occurs not only
when an emotion-eliciting object is physically present to the perceiver, but
also when the emotion object is referred to by internal symbols (thoughts) or
external symbols (e.g., words). To understand the role of sensory-motor and
somatic states in emotion processing, planned experiments will investigate
classic phenomena in social psychology. These phenomena include the perception
of and memory for facial expressions of emotion, the use of emotion concepts,
and the influence of emotional states on judgment. The experiments will measure
both behavioral and physiological indicators of embodiment to assess the mutual
influence between the sensory-motor states and emotion processing. The expected
findings should provide the basis of a coherent account of embodiment in the
perception and manipulation of emotional information. By extension, this
research can put our understanding of the processing of all social concepts on a
novel theoretical footing. The research is also likely to have broader
scientific impact. For instance, the embodiment framework suggests a new way to
define emotional dysfunctions, and points to more effective treatments that
target the sensory-motor and somatic components of the emotion process. It also
suggests a scientifically productive way to conceptualize the acquisition and
change of emotionally-charged beliefs and memories, including dysfunctional
social attitudes, such as prejudice. Finally, the project has the potential to
revise our understanding of learning in general by highlighting the critical
role of imagery, gesture, and action. Once re-conceptualized in this way, new
methods of teaching can be developed that explicitly involve sensory-motor
experience in the building of both emotional and non-emotional knowledge and
skills.&lt;br/&gt;