* 0350768
* Marine Geological Samples Laboratory:  Graduate School of Oceanography, University of Rhode Island
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Steven Carey, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 01/31/2008
* USD 186,734.00

Under this award the PIs will be responsible for the duration of the Marine
Geological Samples Laboratory (MGSL) of the Graduate School of Oceanography
(GSO), University of Rhode Island. This facility serves as the central
repository for marine geological samples collected by faculty, staff and
students of the Graduate School. The present collection consists of 1729 deep-
sea cores, 583 dredge samples and 693 coastal grab samples. During the past
three years there has been a continued strong demand for sediment core and
dredge rock samples distributed from the MGSL to qualified investigators.
Information about the sample collection at URI is now available&lt;br/&gt;Online
through the MGSL website with interactive maps for determining sample
distribution. Sample request demand will continue to grow as new cores and
dredge samples are added to the collection. Over the next three years proposed
activities will include duration of new core and dredge rock samples, further
description of existing samples, enhancement of the MGSL website, submittal of
sample information to the NGDC core curators' database, and initiation of
routine logging for new core acquisitions. The Marine Geological Samples Lab
will be used as a laboratory facility for graduate instruction in Marine Geology
and for public outreach in the form of tours for school groups and the general
public interested in looking at samples from the seafloor and the techniques
that are used to collect them. Electronic dissemination of the information about
the facility and seafloor samples will take place through continued upgrading of
the MGSL website.&lt;br/&gt;