* 0351824
* Y-90/Sr-90 and Th-234/U-238 Disequilibria: The Utility of Dual fast Process Chronometers as Tracers of Particle Dynamics in Shallow Coastal, Estuarine and Freshwater Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* J Klump, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2008
* USD 500,005.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0351824&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In marine environments,
particle-reactive scavenging rates, sediment trap efficiencies (e.g., Buesseler
et al., 1994), surface sediment mixing, and vertical and horizontal particle
transport rates have all been calculated in part by measuring the disequilibrium
between naturally occurring, particle-reactive 234Th and its generally soluble
parent, 238U. While measurements of 234Th/238U disequilibria have proven very
useful in understanding particle dynamics in the open ocean, the utility and
facility of using this radio chronometer diminishes in nearshore, estuarine and
freshwater systems. Interestingly, 90Y is similar to 234Th in that it is
particle reactive while its parent is generally non-reactive and a conservative
constituent in aquatic systems. However, 90Y has a half-life of only 64 hours
while 234Th has a half-life of 24.1 days.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study,
researchers at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee intend to explore the
utility of simultaneously measuring 90Y /90Sr and 234Th/238U disequilibria in
both nearshore and offshore Lake Michigan as a novel means of quantifying short
term temporal dynamics of particles in aquatic systems. Under steady state and
non-steady state conditions both dissolved (&lt; 0.45 um) and particle bound
nuclide activities of 90Y, 90Sr, 234Th and 238U will be measured. Over the four-
year project, these nuclides will be measured simultaneously in both shallow
(&lt;20 m) and deep (&gt; 100 m) water stations with special emphasis on
collecting samples during periods of calm, intense bottom sediment resuspension,
intense primary production, and a whiting event. During the third and fourth
years of this project, daily variations in 90Y /90Sr and 234Th/238U
disequilibria in the water column will be measured in conjunction with daily
measurements of excess particle-bound inventories of 90Y and 234Th on the
lakebed during a series of 5-day cruises over different physical/seasonal
regimes. Mathematical expressions used to relate 234Th/238U disequilibria to the
physical dynamics of particles and particle-reactive species also apply to the
90Y /90Sr pair so that separate estimates of both particle scavenging and
removal rates will be made.&lt;br/&gt;