* 0351289
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Juvenile Drug Courts: An Ethnographic View of the Interagency Collaboration and Client Perceptions of the Court Intervention
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Robert Emerson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Christopher J. Zorn
* 12/31/2004
* USD 6,998.00

The juvenile drug court is one of many recent attempts to change how the
juvenile justice system considers the youth within the greater context of his
family and community. Based on adult drug courts that started in the United
States in the late 1980s, a juvenile drug court diverts juvenile offenders with
substance abuse problems into drug treatment instead of traditional probation.
Very little empirical research has been done on juvenile drug courts due their
recent entry on the juvenile justice scene. This gap in research leaves
unanswered many questions about the basic operation and decision-making
processes characteristic of these courts such as: what kinds of tensions and
conflict arise in the routine functioning of such inter-agency treatment
programs? What are the key points of discretionary decision-making in these
programs? What community and organizational factors influence the decision
junctures and outcomes? What is the impact of the program on youth clients over
time? To answer those questions, this project will look at the youth clients'
institutional careers -- the stages a client moves through within a program and
the array of outcomes available at various points in time. The project will use
qualitative methods of ethnography (participant observation and interviews) and
conversation analysis, following 30 youth in a juvenile drug court program for
12 months to obtain a naturalistic account of the process. In short, the project
will create institutional "road maps" of each client to see if there are
parallels, inconsistencies or contingencies marking critical decisions and
junctures for different clients. The project objective is twofold: the first is
to dissect the court's decision-making process, identifying the factors involved
in that process and detecting variations among clients' institutional careers.
The second is to pay particular attention to how youth clients and their parents
become consumers of this process and the ways in which they try to shape the
staff's decision-making process.