* 0351899
* An Exploration of Frequency-Based Multi-Scale Multi-Decomposition Techniques for Effective Urban Mapping
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Soe Win Myint, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2006
* USD 99,315.00

Despite significant advances in geographic information science, accurately
classifying high-resolution digital images into urban land categories remains a
challenge. The high frequency appearance of spatial features is the major
limitation in urban mapping. The conventional classifiers employ spectral
information based on single pixel values without considering the images' spatial
properties. Current geospatial approaches are also ineffective, since they are
incapable of extracting different spatial features in different directions at
multiple scales. Wavelet theory could open up a lot of opportunities for
characterizing complex features, since it provides four different pieces of
spatial information at each scale. The investigator will develop a wavelet based
framework and operational algorithms to identify urban classes accurately by
combining different spatial information in different direction at multiple
scales. For comparison purposes, this project will also develop and evaluate
other geospatial techniques - fractal isarithm, fractal variogram, lacunarity,
spatial autocorrelation, and G index.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
have implications for scale dependency of geographic phenomena, data mining,
pattern recognition, and self-similarity of features. Results and findings from
the project will provide new opportunities for modeling and understanding urban
systems. This study will also reveal the advantages and weaknesses of different
geospatial techniques, and help improve automated analysis
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;