* 0351575
* Understanding the Increased Time to the Baccalaureate Degree
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* John Bound, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 196,322.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO: 0351575&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION:
NBER/University of Virginia&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: EHANCING HUMAN
PERFORMANCE&lt;br/&gt;PI: Turner, Sara E&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Understanding the
Increased Time to the Baccalaureate Degree&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time taken to
complete the Baccalaureate degree in the US has significantly increased over the
last two decades. This empirical observation does not fit neatly&lt;br/&gt;into
standard human capital theory and yet has received little attention in empirical
research. Understanding the nature and cause(s) of the increase in the time to
completion of the baccalaureate degree over the last two decades is a
significant contribution to the more general social science research objective
of helping people to transition from the classroom to the workplace. Extended
time-to-degree may reflect personal costs of lost earnings and frustration in
the higher education market, while also encompassing the social cost of
potentially reduced economic growth as the supply of college-educated workers is
limited by tradeoffs between school and work.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While there
is considerable evidence that the time college graduates take to finish
their&lt;br/&gt;degrees has increased over the last quarter century, there is
little understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;nature and causes of this shift. This
research will study the causes of the increase in time to finish the
Baccalaureate degree in the US. It will first provide an empirical description
of the nature of increase of time-to-degree beyond the four-year norm,
distinguishing between extension of time in school and interruptions in
collegiate study. It will then identify the causes of variation in time-to-
degree. To do so, this research will employ data from multiple sources including
the annual October files of the Current Population Survey and the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth. One hypothesis is that individuals in more recent
cohorts moving through the collegiate pipeline are less academically or
financially prepared than those in prior decades, implying that selection may
explain much of the extension in time-to-degree. An alternative hypothesis is
that changes in the resources available to students at colleges and
universities, particularly large public institutions, may limit the ability of
students to complete their studies in a timely fashion. Both hypotheses will be
analyzed using the data assembled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;