* 0351050
* Investigating the Importance of the Coastal Zone as a Source of Methylmercury to the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Robert Mason, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 04/30/2006
* USD 524,055.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0351050&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mercury (Hg) is released to
the environment from natural and anthropogenic sources and inputs have increased
substantially this century, and have increased Hg deposition to the ocean, the
dominant Hg input, by a factor of three. However, the evidence that the
concentration of Hg, mostly as methylmercury (CH3Hg), in ocean fish has
increased in concert is contradictory. Indeed, in most ecosystems studied to
date, the relationship between Hg input and CH3Hg production is weak, suggesting
that many factors influence the rate of Hg methylation. Researchers at the
Chesapeake Biological Laboratory and the Benedict Estuarine Research Laboratory
have been studying these interactions and relationships in freshwater and
estuarine systems, and in this project they will extend investigations to the
coastal ocean under this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While prior ocean
studies have focused on the air-water exchange, and on ocean distributions and
biogeochemistry, the coastal zone has been relatively little studied even though
it plays an integral role in the global Hg cycle. The researchers hypothesize
that it is a potential source of methylated Hg to the ocean. A preliminary
budget for CH3Hg in the ocean indicates that net in situ production is the most
important source. It is generally accepted that sulfate- reducing bacteria are
the primary Hg methylators in the environment and thus sediments under highly
productive coastal waters, where sulfate-reduction is the main mineralization
mechanism, should be important locations for Hg methylation. The researchers
surmise that because of the interaction between Fe and S in these sediments, Hg
bioavailability to methylating bacteria will not be effected by high sulfide
concentration, which has been shown to inhibit Hg methylation. The primary
working hypothesis is, therefore, that the coastal zone and the land-ocean
margin are important sites of Hg methylation, are net sources of CH3Hg to the
open ocean, and contribute an important fraction of the global ocean CH3Hg
budget. Furthermore, the researchers propose that most of this CH3Hg is derived
from in situ bacterial methylation within coastal and shelf sediments. The
primary objectives are therefore to measure the concentration and speciation of
total Hg and CH3Hg, and ancillary parameters (organic carbon, Fe, Mn, S) in the
dissolved and solid phase, and with depth, in sediments collected from sites
ranging from the upper Chesapeake Bay to the outer reaches of the shelf of the
Mid-Atlantic Bight. In addition, researcher team will determine the relative
rate of methylation and demethylation in these sediments, spatially and
temporally, and investigate relationships between these measures and Hg
speciation, sediment biogeochemistry and microbial activity. The distribution
(speciation) of Hg in the solid phase will be examined using sequential
extraction approaches. The effect of Hg speciation in the dissolved and solid
phase on Hg methylation will also be examined.&lt;br/&gt;