* 0351500
* Private Information in Dynamic Games
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Susan Athey, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2010
* USD 225,948.00

This project aims to provide and empirically test new economic theories about
auctions that take place over time. The project will also develop a new theory
about pricing in collusive markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Auctions are a type of
market that is used to sell many different goods and services. Developments in
information technology have made use of this type of market increasingly
attractive to both buyers and sellers. However, much of what economists know
about auctions is based on static models where an auction happens once. This is
unrealistic; in many settings buyers and/or sellers interact repeatedly in a
series of auctions. In particular, the project will analyze the case where cost
shocks may be serially correlated. This type of correlation arises when firms
periodically improve their production process or gain expertise, or
when&lt;br/&gt;supply or labor contracts are periodically renegotiated. Little
is known about this case.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators will
also apply the same basic model to analyze how firms collude over time in
markets with the same kind of cost shock. One goal is to better understand why
firms start price wars when their actions are fully observable by opponents. One
possibility is that firms may be signaling the fact that they have especially
low costs and thus require a larger share of the market in order to reduce their
incentive to cheat on the collusive agreement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A third
project will consider what happens in a market where the buyer and seller both
have private information. The goal is to show that when the buyer and seller
interact repeatedly, strong institutions and commitment power can guarantee that
the market can overcome the information problem to reach efficient outcomes. A
fourth project analyzes the effect of market design, in particular the auction
format, on competition in auctions when entry is endogenous, such as timber
auctions. These auctions include both small logging operations and large mills.
Economic theory suggests that small bidders participate more in first-price
auctions. The project will analyze data from timber auctions to see if this is
in fact the case.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will yield a variety of
broader impacts to society, including include an improved ability of antitrust
authorities to distinguish competition from collusion. Further, the results will
give guidance on how governments and firms should design auction markets, in
particular how the auction format and the information revealed about firm bids
may affect the types of bidders who enter the auction. &lt;br/&gt;