* 0351055
* Modeling the Freshening and Cooling Event in the Subpolar North Atlantic Ocean and its Impact on Thermohaline Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Jiayan Yang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2008
* USD 358,692.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0351055&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale and
full-depth cooling and freshening have occurred in the subpolar North Atlantic
Ocean in the last four decades. This was accompanied by a reduction of the
Nordic Seas overflow through the Faroe Bank Channel, a key process for the NADW
formation. Observations indicated that interaction between the Nordic Seas and
the Atlantic Ocean may have played a key role in the development of this event.
The PI proposes to use numerical models to study mechanisms and interactions
that give rise to the observed changes, and to assess their impacts on the
thermohaline circulation (THC) and on ocean circulations in the tropical and
subtropical Atlantic Ocean. Since the dynamics and scales inherent to such
exchanges are very different from that of the general circulation over the open
ocean, most ocean general circulation models (OGCMs) are not yet adequate for
modeling interactions between the Nordic Seas and the Atlantic Ocean. Supported
by a previous NSF grant, the PI and Dr. Jim Price have developed a coupled
OGCM/marginal-sea model with the specific purpose of applying it in the subpolar
North Atlantic Ocean. This coupled model represents a state of the art numerical
tool for studying interactions among the Nordic Seas overflow, the density
current entrainment at shelf breaks, and open ocean processes. The model will be
used to address (1) how the sustained positive state of North Atlantic
Oscillation in the last 4 decades a?ected the fresh water budget in the Nordic
Seas; (2) how the overflow through the Denmark Strait and Faroe Bank Channel
responded to the fresh water forcing in the Nordic Seas; (3) how the freshening
of the overflowed source water a?ected the entrainment rate at shelf breaks and
thus the property and production of NADW; (4) how the THC responded to changes
in NADW production; (5) what role the wind-driven circulation played in this
cooling and freshening event; (6) how the circulation in the low-latitude ocean
responded to the NADW and THC
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;