* 0351848
* CSULA-Caltech PREM Collaborative
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2004,01/31/2011
* Frank Gomez, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Jones
* 01/31/2011
* USD 2,895,568.00

The broad goal of this award is to enhance the materials science research and
education program at California State University, Los Angeles (CSULA) by
expanding the existing collaboration between the Center for the Science and
Engineering of Materials (CSEM) at the California Institute of Technology
(Caltech). It focuses on developing highly trained undergraduate and master's
students for careers in research via a comprehensive program involving
scientific research, workshops and seminars, and faculty mentoring and advising.
The program will be called the CSULA-Caltech Partnerships for Research and
Education in Materials (PREM) Collaborative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The materials
research emphasis will focus on the development and application of new
materials. Specifically, they will focus on three research subprojects:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Solvent-Resistant Microfluidics.&lt;br/&gt;2. The Study of Drug
Release Using the Self-Assembly of Fluoroalkyl-Ended Poly(ethylene glycol) by
NMR Methods of Relaxation, Self-Diffusion and Microimaging.&lt;br/&gt;3. Ir and
Pt Complexes Tethered to Nanoparticles as Singlet Oxygen Sensitizers and
Quenchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of intellectual merit, this
collaboration brings together well-qualified researchers with diverse interests
in an interdisciplinary setting to examine materials science problems in a
creative and novel approach. The facilities at CSULA and Caltech are sufficient
to conduct the proposed work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to integrate more
faculty from CSULA into the PREM program, a yearly SEED grant program is
proposed. This program will be a competitive internal grants program and will
provide funding for creative small research projects, student stipends and
travel, and supplies. Faculty awarded funding will be eligible for continued
funding throughout the duration of the PREM program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational program will consist of a student research program, research
training workshops and scientific seminars, and academic advising and mentoring.
Students will be designated as PREM fellows and will participate in the three
research subprojects. Fellows will participate in yearlong workshops on topics
such as careers in materials science and chemistry, conducting scientific
research, and ethics in research. Students will be continually evaluated as to
their academic progress and course advisement will occur prior to each quarter
of instruction. A summer research experience for academically talented high
schools students is also proposed in collaboration with three local minority
high schools (Roosevelt, Garfield, and Wilson) with over 95% Latino enrollment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;