* 0351166
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Field Experiments on Public Goods Provision
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Rachel Croson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2006
* USD 14,820.00

Why individuals make charitable contributions, voluntarily provide public goods
and cooperate in social dilemmas is an important question in modern society.
Extensive research on public goods provision has been conducted by economists,
psychologists, sociologists, and political scientists . Previous research has
primarily looked at these questions with empirical (historical) data and with
laboratory experiments. This project will use field experiments to demonstrate
the impact of social comparisons on charitable giving. Anecdotal evidence
suggests that individuals donating to charity care deeply about what others are
contributing. This concern for what others contribute may be due to social
comparisons. This research also combines experimental results with empirical
(historical) data and survey data to achieve a complete picture of what makes
individuals contribute.

The field experiments will use data from the public radio industry and from a
religious group. They involve manipulating the social comparison information
that individuals receive and examining the impact of that information on
different individuals (e.g. new versus existing donors) and in different
settings (e.g. via phone versus via mail). The project is interdisciplinary.it
examines the impact of a social psychological factor (social comparisons) on
economic behavior (provision of public goods). Thus it makes an important and
unique contribution to behavioral and experimental economics by identifying an
important and unrecognized factor which impacts behavior in these settings. The
project will have multiple broader impacts. A better understanding of the
motivations for cooperative behavior can help nonprofits (and society) create
social welfare.