* 0351421
* CFC Measurements along 26N and CFC and Carbon Measurements at the Western Boundary
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Rana Fine, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2006
* USD 247,116.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0351421&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
is a proposal to measure chlorofluorocarbons (CFC-11, CFC-12, CFC-113) on the
U.K. run 26 degrees N transect in winter 2004. The objective is to provide a
high quality data set, and make them available nearly immediately to the
community as required by the Global Repeat program. The program is in support of
CLIVAR (CLImate VARiability and predictability) and the International Carbon
Cycle Programs, and is a component of a global observing system for the physical
climate/CO2 system. The data will contribute to documenting and understanding
how ventilation and ocean carbon change over time. The intellectual merit of the
proposed measurements is that they will contribute to the goals of the Global
Repeat program: data for model calibration and validation, carbon system
studies, calibration of autonomous sensors, and deep and shallow water mass and
ventilation studies. In addition, the addition of CFC measurements to the 2004
occupation of the 26N transect will fill a zonal gap in a region where CFC
inventories are relatively large, and in the west increasing rapidly throughout
the water column. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader societal impacts of the
proposed measurements include: broad and near immediate dissemination of data to
enhance scientific and technological understanding; societal benefits of
collection of a high quality data set, use of the data to assess climate change,
and a resource for model calibration of the climate system. Carbon dioxide is
one of the most important gases in the atmosphere affecting the radiative
balance of the earth. A number of alternative, although still indirect, means of
estimating anthropogenic CO2 use CFC data. The funded measurements will
contribute to quantifying the inventory and flux of anthropogenic CO2 in the
oceans, and to understanding its variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;