* 0351586
* Modes of Governance in International Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Giovanni Maggi, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 144,144.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO: 0351586&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION:
NBER/Princeton University&lt;br/&gt;PI: Maggi, Giovanni&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Modes
of Governance in International
Organizations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International agreements are
incomplete contracts. Since agreements cannot specify the actions to be taken in
all future contingencies, the design of procedures is of key importance to
achieve a high degree of cooperation. This research focuses on two kinds of such
procedures: decision-making procedures and dispute-settlement
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;The second theme of this research is that all procedures
in international organizations&lt;br/&gt;Must be self-enforcing, because there
is no other enforcement mechanism. This research project therefore studies the
optimal design of self-enforcing international
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the research focuses on
self-enforcing voting procedures. The issue is that a country cannot be forced
to comply with the decision of the majority; it will comply only if it has
incentives to do so, an issue that has received little attention in the
literature. The literature on optimal voting rules typically assumes that the
outcome of the vote can be perfectly enforced while the literature on self-
enforcing international agreements considers infinite-horizon games where there
is no scope for voting. Taking self-enforcement issues into account can
radically change conclusions on the optimal design of voting systems. For
example, the optimal self-enforcing system is the unanimity rule, whereas in a
world of perfect enforcement unanimity is suboptimal. The modeling approach in
this research can be applied to examine the evolution of the governance mode
over time, the design of weighted voting systems, and the optimal size and
breadth of international organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second focuses
on international dispute settlement procedures. A dispute settlement procedure
(DSP) can "fill the gaps" of an incomplete agreement, and idea that has largely
been ignored in the formal literature. The modeling approach can help understand
the conditions under which a DSP can enhance efficiency, and how the potential
gains from a DSP depend on the fundamental parameters of the
problem.&lt;br/&gt;Another potential remedy to contract incompleteness, possibly
complementary to a DSP, is to agree on noncontingent ("rigid") rules ex-ante.
Thus another important question is under what conditions the optimal mode of
governance involves ex-ante contracting, ex-post dispute settlement, or both.
Finally, the DSP itself must be self-enforcing - for example, governments must
have incentives to comply with DSP rulings even when they are not favorable to
them. This perspective is quite novel, and gives rise to a host of new
questions, that can be summarized as follows: how should a self-enforcing
dispute settlement system be designed? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an era of
increasing globalization and the rise of many international institutions, this
research fills an important gap in providing tolls to analyze the governance of
such organizations. The broader impact of this project will derive from a better
understanding of the issues involved in the design of international decision-
making procedures and dispute-settlement systems. This is a highly topical
issue, at a time when organizations such as the European Union, the United
Nations and the World Trade Organization are struggling to improve their systems
of governance.&lt;br/&gt;