* 0351728
* US-France Cooperative Research:   Cell Adhesion and Innate Immunity in C. Elegans
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Andrew Chisholm, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2007
* USD 15,000.00

0351728&lt;br/&gt;Chisholm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structural changes occurring
in an organism during its development, known as morphogenesis, involves the
modulation of cell adhesion. Cells can adhere to other cells expressing similar
proteins or different proteins. Some cell surface molecules are anti-adhesive.
The mechanisms of cell adhesion show similarities with innate immunity, an
ancient and conserved system of self-nonself recognition. This three-year
U.S.-France cooperative research project, between Andrew Chisholm of the
University of California at Santa Cruz and Jonathan Ewbank and Nathalie Pujol of
the Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille, explores connections between these two
basic processes in the nematode C. elegans. The Chisholm lab has expertise in
molecular genetics of morphogenesis in C. elegans. The Ewbank lab in Marseille
studies innate immunity using C. elegans as a model. While investigating the
function of the nematode homologue of the receptor Toll, known to be important
in other organisms for resistance to infection, they have determined that the
receptor has a role in embryonic morphogenesis linked to cell adhesion. In this
project they will identify genes that interact with known cell adhesion pathways
in C. elegans morphogenesis using an automated sorter to dispense worms and sort
animals and a whole genome RNA interference library available at the Ewbank lab
in France. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies of cell adhesion and innate
immunity pathways in the simple organism C. elegans will advance understanding
of more complex versions of the same pathways in other animals and further our
knowledge about cell adhesion's role in innate immunity. Undergraduate and
graduate students will be trained in interdisciplinary and post-genomic
approaches for studying complex biological processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS) jointly support this project. NSF will cover the costs of
visits to France by the U.S. investigators and students. The CNRS provides
funding to the French investigators for their visits to the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;