* 0351037
* Land-Use Politics, Disturbance, and Biodiveristy in the Indian Aravalli
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Kendra McSweeney, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2007
* USD 198,049.00

Environmental conservation has entered an era of upheaval. Ecosystems far from
human impact, once thought to be pristine and stable, are increasingly
understood to undergo unpredictable changes. Meanwhile, regimes of human
disturbance, long characterized as out of balance, have been shown to enhance
ecosystem stability and productivity. As a result, traditional conservation
models, which hold that "pristinity" and the enclosure of nature from human
activity are required to maintain biodiversity, have been called into question.
This poses a problem for environmental science at a time when global
biodiversity is in rapid decline. Similarly, where groups of stakeholders engage
in conflict over resources, dissolution of control ensues, with multiple land
uses emerging from monolithic laws. Such variation in land use commonly leads to
variation in land cover and floral biodiversity. Far from being a force that
invariably reduces species diversity, populist contests for control of resources
may lead to dynamic landscapes, with patches of distinct and diverse ecological
communities. This research project explores the relationships among
environmental politics, ecological disturbance, and floral biodiversity. The
investigators hypothesize that when populist demands for access to environmental
resources (forests or pasture) lead to heterogeneous management, the result will
be patchy forms of ecological disturbance. Conflict-laden sociopolitical
conditions therefore may enhance, rather than undermine, biodiversity, though
potentially by favoring the encroachment of invasive species at the expense of
native ones. Using a case study from Rajasthan India, the researchers will use
satellite image analysis, biodiversity surveys, and stakeholder surveys to map
the conflicting demands of resource users and the distribution of ecologically
significant plant species. The interdisciplinary team includes researchers from
geography, ecology, and zoology, and the work involves close collaboration
between Indian and U.S. institutions.

Empirically, the project will provide a first systematic- view of regional
biodiversity change in the Aravalli, an area that forms a storehouse of endemic
species and a crucial source of water and nutrient inputs for the vast areas to
the north and west. Conceptually, the research will offer insights into the
relationship between political struggle, state power, and land-cover change. The
project will provide educational and training opportunities for graduate
students, and it will increase international collaboration.

