* 0351280
* Stratospheric Aerosol Data Assimilation for Climate Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Alan Robock, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 02/29/2008
* USD 299,000.00

The PIs will develop a data assimilation system for stratospheric aerosols based
on the new generation NASA finite volume Data Assimilation System (fvDAS) to
produce a global stratospheric aerosol data set for the extended time period of
the stratospheric aerosol and gas experiment (SAGE) observations suitable for
climate studies. They will account for the physical mechanisms of aerosol
transport and microphysical transformations, and tune the fvDAS for assimilating
satellite, lidar, balloon, and mission observations. Dynamically-consistent 3-D
spatial distributions of aerosol extinction, single scattering albedo, asymmetry
parameter, backscattering coefficient, and phase function will be calculated.
The study will focus on the 25-year period from 1979 to the present covering the
effects of two of the largest volcanic eruptions of the 20th century, El Chichon
and Pinatubo. To exercise and validate the new data set, they will calculate
radiative forcing caused by volcanic aerosols and study the effect of volcanic
eruptions on decadal climate change. They will quantify their contribution to
the observed positive trend of the Arctic Oscillation. The calculated aerosol
data set and aerosol radiative forcing will be made available for climate and
chemistry studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project will
support the education of one graduate student. The project will develop new
research collaborations between Rutgers University, the NASA Langley Research
Center, the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, the University of Colorado, and
San Jose State University. The results will be disseminated electronically on
the Worldwide Web and will produce a better understanding of the mechanisms of
observed climate change and will improve the quantification of the volcanic
effect on climate, clearly of benefit to society.