* 0352215
* Collaborative Research into Indo-Asian Monsoon Variability: Data and Model Assessment of Northern- and Southern-Hemisphere Mechanisms
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Warren Prell, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 07/31/2009
* USD 459,331.00

Under this award the PIs will generate and analyze proxy records of the Asian
monsoon system over the interval from 5 to 2 million years before present and to
run a core set of eight GCM experiments which will test three hypotheses
regarding key climate processes that lead to intensification and evolution of
the Indian and Asian monsoons:

1) The timing of strong Northern Hemisphere summer-monsoons is more sensitive to
the export of latent heat from the Southern Hemisphere than to direct sensible
heating over Asia.

2) The initiation and development of large-scale ice volume in the Northern
Hemisphere strengthens the winter monsoon, weakens the summer monsoon and is the
root cause of the observed non-stationary phase response relative to orbital
forcing (i.e. the timing of the strongest summer-monsoon drifts relative to
insolation forcing).

3) The intensity of winter- and summer-monsoon circulation is dynamically
coupled and linked to glacial evolution in the Northern Hemisphere.



Testing these hypotheses using the geological record will be accomplished by
analyzing and comparing the monsoon response during the rapidly evolving, high
ice-volume interval from 3.2 Ma to present and the warm, relatively stable,
minimal ice interval 5 to 3.2 Ma. The combined data/model strategy of analyzing
monsoon variability during two intervals of Earth history with very different
large-scale boundary conditions will enable differentiation of internal (climate
feedback) and external (insolation) mechanisms responsible for seasonal monsoon
variability at orbital time scales.

