* 0352326
* Generalized Interchange Instabilities in the Magnetosphere
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Philip Pritchett, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* kile baker
* 04/30/2009
* USD 420,000.00

The magnetospheric substorm constitutes the largest energy dissipation process
in the magnetosphere, and the explication of the nature of substorm onset is the
key to understanding the complex dynamics of the magnetotail. Preliminary 3-D
particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations have suggested that an interchange mode
driven by a positive tailward gradient in the equatorial magnetic field may be
the underlying mechanism for triggering substorms. This mode is driven by the
need to return magnetic flux to the dayside region; since this flux transfer
must occur over large scales in the magnetotail, the Bz interchange is
potentially a stronger and more dynamic instability than the standard
interchange. This project will carry out a detailed, fully kinetic investigation
of ballooning/interchange modes in configurations characteristic of the coupled
magnetosphere-ionosphere system. The primary tool will be state-of-the-art,
large-scale, 3-D PIC simulations carried out on massively parallel computers.
These new simulations will overcome the previous limitations associated with a
small ion to electron mass ratio, limited spatial extent in the east-west
direction, and a too strong convection electric field. The conditions that lead
to growth, the saturation mechanism and level, and the effect of ionospheric
boundary conditions will be determined. The simulations will also determine
whether or not an external trigger such as a northward turning of the IMF can
directly excite the nonlinear interchange. It is possible that both types of
interchange may occur simultaneously. This could lead to the creation of a
magnetic neutral region magnetic reconnection can take place under the continued
driving by the convection electric field. The project will provide a decisive
determination of whether the interchange mode scenario is a viable solution to
the substorm onset conundrum. The project will provide training for a graduate
student in the rapidly evolving field of computational plasma physics. In
addition, the research personnel will collaborate with the Los Angeles Physics
Teachers Alliance Group (LAPTAG) to develop an outreach presentation on the use
of computers in scientific research. This presentation, to be offered on several
Saturdays during the year, will aim at demonstrating to local high school
students the exciting opportunities in science made possible by advances in
computing power and encouraging them to further their education in science.