* 0352252
* Development of Analytical Protocols and Optimization of a Capillary Waveguide Biosensor for Marine Microbial Process Studies
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2007
* Harbans Dhadwal, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 05/31/2007
* USD 364,759.00

P.I. Paul Kemp (SUNY-SB) Proposal #: 0352252 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The PIs have
developed a Capillary Waveguide Biosensor system to study microbial populations
and processes in aquatic systems, particularly coastal and estuarine waters and
sediments. The biosensor system employs fluorescence detection to measure the
hybridization of nucleic acids to probe molecules bound to the interior surface
of a capillary tube. The tube walls serve as an optical waveguide, while the
capillary interior serves as a flow cell and hybridization chamber. By targeting
DNA, rRNA and mRNA sequences appropriately, the fiber-optic biosensor system can
be used to assay for the abundance of specific genes (DNA target), the
expression of those genes (mRNA target), or the physiological status of cells
(rRNA target) within mixed microbial communities. The goals of this proposal are
to 1) develop and test the analytical protocols required to apply the
instrument, using model biological systems representative of different research
problems; 2) test alternative analytical protocols that show promise for
increased sensitivity; and 3) conduct theoretical analyses leading to practical
refinements in instrument design. During the course of this research, two
graduate students will be supported and other high school, undergraduate and
graduate students will be involved. The biosensor will be tested with pathogens
of direct interest to human health and the seafood industry. It can be used not
only for detection of pathogens in seawater, but human pathogens in processed
seafood, fish pathogens in aquaculture facilities, and other harmful and
nuisance species in a diverse range of environments. The capacity to examine
microbial abundance and population dynamics, biomass production and gene
expression in marine environments has enormous potential benefit for water
quality management and the seafood industry, both economically and with respect
to food safety. Other potential applications beyond ecological research include
detection and quantification of microbial contaminants for estuary management,
shellfish aquaculture, and water quality for public health purposes. The
biosensor also has implications for homeland security issues, particularly
monitoring for the presence of potentially harmful organisms in recreational
waters and reservoirs, and in coastal waters.&lt;br/&gt;