* 0352851
* Studies of Antifreeze Proteins and Related Overwintering Adaptations in Arctic and Subarctic Insectes
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* John Duman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 05/31/2006
* USD 185,000.00

This is a collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators at the University of
Alaska-Fairbanks and Purdue University. Antifreeze proteins (AFPs) are found in
a number of diverse organisms including fish, insects, spiders, mites, plant,
and bacteria. While there is tremendous structural variation among these AFPs
they all appear to lower the freezing point of water by a similar non-
colligative mechanism. However, the insect AFPs are, by far, the most active,
generally functioning to prevent freezing in freeze susceptible insects by
inhibiting ice nucleating agents and innoculative freezing across the cuticle.
However, a few AFP-producing insects are freeze tolerant and the function of
AFPs in these is unknown. Two insect AFPs have been characterized. One type has
been described from two species of beetles, but there is variation in sequence,
etc., both within and between the species. Until recent research identified 18
species with AFPs, these proteins had not been reported in Alaskan or arctic
insects. Certain of these have been chosen for further study, presenting the
opportunity to extend understanding of insect AFPs to extremely cold tolerant
species, and in the case of the beetle Cucujus clavipes ,to compare populations
from arctic Alaska to those from Indiana. The mean winter supercooling point of
Alaskan Cucujus larvae are -42oC, with some individuals supercooling to -57oC,
while that of Indiana larvae is -24oC. AFP activity in Alaskan Cucujus is, by
far, the highest ever described, even though the AFPs are similar to those of
other beetles. Understanding the structure/function relationships of the Cucujus
AFPs, and the enhancers (other proteins and polyols) which increase their
activity, is of prime concern. In addition to AFPs, a suite of other
overwintering adaptations (extreme dehydration to 1/3 normal body water,
multimolar glycerol concentrations, diapause) contribute to the low supercooling
points of Alaskan Cucujus. These are being studied, and using microarray
technology and other means to monitor molecular markers, the Principal
Investigators will attempt to understand the integration of these adaptations.
Additional investigations involve the structure/function relationships of three
other Alaskan beetle AFPs, and that of the insect type of AFP. Two of the beetle
species are freeze tolerant and this is the first study of AFPs from freeze
tolerant insects. The Principal Investigators will continue to screen additional
species for the presence of AFPs (to identify interesting candidates for future
study), and to monitor microhabitat temperatures and overwintering mortality of
select species. The broader impact of this study concerns its effects on 1)
biological education and 2) applications of AFPs in science and technology.
Post-docs, PhD and undergraduate students, and high school teachers will work on
this project. The Principal Investigators believe that the integrated training
(in modern molecular techniques such as microarray, field biology, physiology of
cold tolerance, protein biochemistry, etc.) at they will receive provides
critical preparation for success in today's highly integrative and changing
research environment. This will provide a direct benefit to teaching in biology.
In addition to research papers, the Principal Investigators will incorporate
these studies in review articles, symposium presentations. Also, as they are the
most active AFPs known, insect AFPs (especially from Alaskan beetles) have
tremendous potential for applied studies. For example, they have generated
transgenic plants producing insect AFPs which lower the plant freezing
temperature. Similar work using Alaskan beetle AFPs should be even more
productive.