* 0352062
* Preferences as Memory
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Elke Weber, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2008
* USD 479,578.00

The proposal examines preference, a key construct in decision science and
economics, as the natural output of the human memory system, following the
properties and characteristics of other types of knowledge. This preferences-as-
memory approach suggests that preferences are neither "constructed" from first
principles anew on each occasion, nor completely stable and immutable. The
research attempts to explain and predict important phenomena in which preference
deviates from rational-economic model prescription (including loss aversion,
intertemporal discounting, and tradeoff difficulty) by examining the memory
mechanisms involve in preference construction. These include priming, i.e., a
transient increase in the accessibility of a concept after presentation of a
related concept; inhibition or interference, i.e., a class of phenomena where
instructions to recall parts of previously learned materials hinders subsequent
recall of the rest; reactivity, i.e. where access of memory produces changes in
its content and structure; structure of memory representations, i.e., the number
of concept attributes and the system of their interconnections. The proposed
theoretical and empirical work has the following three purposes: (1) to convince
behavioral decision researchers that they are ignoring the (memory) processes
involved in the formation and expression of preference at their peril, (2) to
demonstrate that current considerations of mostly explicit memory processes are
incomplete, and (3) to show that the incorporation of a small number of well
established memory properties provides conceptual integration across a large
number of preference and choice phenomena that range from loss aversion to
tradeoff difficulty, subadditivity, anchoring, and overconfidence. Societally
important practical applications also arise from the use of a memory framework
for understanding the formation and modification of preferences. A better
understanding of developmental changes in memory processes and preference
construction could help, for example, to design interventions that would
minimize socially harmful consequences of changes in memory performance on
judgment and choice in geriatric populations.