* 0352683
* Collaborative Research: Resolving the Enigma of Late Quaternary Loess on the Great Plains
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Joseph Mason, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2008
* USD 133,561.00

Loess is essentially an accumulation of atmospheric dust, and thick loess
deposits provide a long-term record of dust transport and deposition. This
record is of growing importance in research on past, present, and future
environmental change. Dust production is strongly influenced by climatic change,
but also has feedback effects on climate. Loess in the central Great Plains
records episodes of extraordinarily rapid dust deposition over the past 25,000
years, greatly exceeding deposition rates downwind of major desert dust sources
elsewhere in the world. These high rates of Great Plains loess accumulation
challenge our current understanding of major natural dust sources and their past
activity. This project will test two hypotheses that may help explain rapid
loess deposition on the Great Plains. One hypothesis states that episodes of
rapid loess deposition occurred when large dune fields formed from stream and
lake sediments that had previously accumulated in the central Plains. If those
deposits were reworked by the wind during the past 25,000 years, they would have
been sorted into dune sand and fine-grained dust. This hypothesis will be tested
by using optical dating to compare the timing of dune field formation and rapid
dust deposition, and by comparing the composition of the loess to the proposed
source materials. The second hypothesis proposes that dust deposition in the
Great Plains was concentrated near source areas, leading to very high deposition
rates, to a much greater degree than in other dry regions. Such high near-source
deposition rates would result from unusually coarse dust and a very stable
boundary between dust sources and sinks. This hypothesis will be tested by
comparing downwind trends of loess deposition rate and particle size in the
Great Plains and the Loess Plateau of northern China. This part of the project
will enhance interchange of ideas and techniques between researchers working in
the Great Plains and China, both regions with thick, extensive loess deposits
that provide valuable records of long-term environmental change.