* 0352478
* My World:  A Geographic Information System for Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Daniel Edelson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Haney
* 05/31/2008
* USD 970,507.00

This thirty-three month project will develop and evaluate "My World," a learner-
appropriate geographic information system (GIS), data library and learning
activities. The software and accompanying data and materials will support
inquiry-based learning in middle and high school Earth science, environmental
science and geography classes. The project will complete development of the
software, develop a community of users, create and disseminate a data library
with appropriate activities and conduct an extensive evaluation. The software
development focuses on usability and scaffolding, functionality to support
standards-based instruction and compatibility with school needs. The community
development effort builds a community of GIS experts in schools who will provide
input to the design, develop associated materials and provide professional
development. The project will include a core data library for the geosciences
with learning activities ready for distribution. The evaluation effort will
conduct formative and summative evaluations. Part of this plan includes a
comparison to traditional and to established methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Close cooperation with developers and publishers is
included in the work plan and the PI anticipates these materials will be
included in future secondary earth science courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;