* 0352776
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Developing Non-Lithographic Methods for Nanopatterning
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* C Carter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/2008
* USD 30,000.00

0352776&lt;br/&gt;Carter&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports the
U.S.-India Cooperative Research: Developing &lt;br/&gt;Non-Lithographic Methods
for Nanopatterning. Professors C. Barry Carter, University of Minnesota-Twin
Cities and N. Ravishankar, Indian Institute of Science will conduct an
exploratory study on controlled self-assembly of nanoparticles. The aim is to
understand the fundamentals of heterogeneous nucleation on ionic surfaces that
exhibit singularity in electric field along the sharp edges of the surface, in
an attempt to understand the broader impact of the basics of nanopatterning on
such surfaces. They will study the nucleation and growth of facets on high-
energy ceramic surfaces and examine different surfaces in detail in order to
more fully comprehend nucleation and growth processes of facets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The Indian investigator is a former postdoctoral
research associate of Professor Carter. The U.S. group is one of the world
leaders in ceramics and microstructural characterization; Ravishankar is an
assistant professor at the premier Indian Institute of Science, Material
Research Center and is producing novel and interesting research results on
ceramic surfaces/interfaces. The investigators have a proven track record as
collaborators and are likely to continue producing original scientific results.
The project has important broader impacts regarding opportunities for women and
minorities in materials research. This research is also being supported by the
Indian Department of Science and Technology (DST) under the NSF/DST joint
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;b
r/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;