* 0352140
* SGER:    Exploiting Motion in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2004
* James Lehnert, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph B. Evans
* 09/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This project focuses on the cross-layer design of wireless systems, at
&lt;br/&gt;the network protocol, data link, and physical link layers. Mobility,
&lt;br/&gt;which has traditionally been viewed as an impediment, can be utilized
to &lt;br/&gt;improve the use of wireless spectrum. Significant gains in
performance &lt;br/&gt;can be achieved by adding structure to transmitted
signals and exploiting &lt;br/&gt;the different Doppler shifts of nodes in
multi-carrier code-division &lt;br/&gt;multiple-access systems. Feedback among
the lower three protocol layers &lt;br/&gt;offers the opportunity to utilize the
frequency shifts that result from &lt;br/&gt;the motion of mobile wireless
users, thereby alleviating effects of &lt;br/&gt;interference and increasing
effective utilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. &lt;br/&gt;This
project introduces a novel way to exploit motion as an additional
&lt;br/&gt;parameter in wireless systems. By utilizing frequency subbands as
&lt;br/&gt;in OFDM and adding sufficient structure to transmitted signals for
&lt;br/&gt;processing, Doppler frequency shifts can be used to reduce the
effects of &lt;br/&gt;interference. Initial work by the investigators suggests
the processing &lt;br/&gt;is feasible. The use of motion requires that the
physical, data link, &lt;br/&gt;and network layer protocols be designed in an
integrated fashion, and &lt;br/&gt;assumes that computing and location-awareness
capabilities will continue &lt;br/&gt;to improve. The use of timing
relationships between received signals &lt;br/&gt;for interference excision,
which also requires cross-layer information, &lt;br/&gt;is also an increasingly
feasible approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. &lt;br/&gt;This
project initiates research into utilization of motion as a &lt;br/&gt;possibly
beneficial factor in the optimization of wireless spectrum. &lt;br/&gt;The
potential benefits of exploiting motion, instead of compensating for
&lt;br/&gt;it, are very significant. This is analogous to the MIMO techniques
that &lt;br/&gt;have gained such prominence in recent years, in that factors
that were &lt;br/&gt;previously believed to be detrimental to performance are
transformed &lt;br/&gt;into positives. Exploiting motion requires a cross-layer
approach, as &lt;br/&gt;information on movement needs to be passed to lower
layers to enhance &lt;br/&gt;processing at those layers. This research will help
to understand the &lt;br/&gt;benefits of integrated design across layers.
Further, this work will &lt;br/&gt;support graduate education into cross-layer
techniques through the &lt;br/&gt;student positions included in the project
plan.