* 0352812
* SGER: Template-Controlled Living Polymerization for Synthesis of Self-Assembling Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2003,03/31/2006
* Youqing Shen, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2006
* USD 99,786.00

Youqing Shen University of Wyoming "SGER: Template-Controlled Living
Polymerization for Synthesis of Self-Assembling Polymers."

Association of polymer chains with uncontrolled distribution of hydrogen bonding
sites leads to random clusters and three-dimensional networks through a process
of random intra- and intermolecular bonding which leads to self- and cross-
association or both. By contrast, uniform polymer chains (same structure and
length from molecule to molecule) with a well-defined distribution of hydrogen-
bonding sites can self assemble with their complementary chains, that is, they
can form highly aligned chain duplexes with well-defined bond sequences. Such
polymer self-assembly, reminiscent of DNA self-assembly, can lead to valuable
biotic and abiotic materials. The challenge is how to synthesize such self-
assembling polymers.

The principal investigator proposes a template-controlled living polymerization
for the synthesis of self-assembling polymers. The goal of the exploratory
research is to demonstrate that the proposed template-controlled living
polymerization is viable, i.e. the monomers can be kept on the template during
the polymerization and the polymerization can be kept along the template.
Specific objectives of the proposed research are as follows:

1) To synthesize template and monomers. 2) To develop a living polymerization
process for these monomers. 3) To develop a template-controlled living
polymerization process.

This research will clarify the two main concerns to the template-controlled
living polymerization. The interdisciplinary research, combining the elements of
polymer science, supramolecular chemistry, biochemistry, thermodynamics and
materials engineering, will enhance our fundamental understanding to which
extent macromolecules must be uniform in order to self assemble, as opposed to
randomly self associate. Such understanding will be the basis for future
research on polymer self-assembly. In addition to building a knowledge base and
seeding future research, the proposed project could result in novel functional
materials, such as new silk-like materials having exceptional mechanical and
thermal properties.