* 0352504
* Engineering Inquiry-based Learning Modules for Technology Education
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Taryn Bayles, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 03/31/2010
* USD 1,581,869.00

The University of Maryland, Baltimore County, and the University of Maryland,
Baltimore, in cooperation with technology education teachers and industrial
collaborators, are developing modular instructional materials for students. The
materials are designed to increase the awareness of and interest in career
opportunities in engineering and technology. The modules use authentic, real-
world engineering applications and hands-on experiences to build problem-solving
skills and contribute to the technological literacy of secondary students. The
modules specifically target the ITEA Content Standards for Technological
Literacy and related benchmarks. Specifically, the project is developing five
case studies in CD format, using real-world examples to introduce students to
engineering design and decision-making processes. Inquiry-based learning with
hands-on experiences will be used to maximize student interest and
understanding. The project is conducting research to demonstrate the
effectiveness of the modules in increasing technological literacy and in
building awareness of and interest in engineering and technology careers. The
project is also conducting research to determine how interactive, authentic,
problem-solving simulations impact and facilitate student learning. It is also
providing professional development opportunities for technology education
teachers, including an overview of the program and acquaintance with the
curriculum case studies prior to their use in the classroom, as well as
increasing the involvement of women and other underrepresented groups in
engineering and technology by providing female and minority role models in the
classroom and developing case studies that encourage interest and participation
by all groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;