* 0352735
* Investigation of the Low Temperature Normal State of Electron-Doped Copper Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* richard greene, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2007
* USD 375,000.00

Understanding the mechanism of high-Tc superconductivity in the cuprates is one
of the major unsolved problems of condensed matter physics. The main goal of
this Individual Investigator Award is to gain a more detailed understanding of
the normal state properties of the electron-doped high-Tc cuprates and to
compare/relate these properties to the more studied hole-doped cuprates. A
comprehensive set of experiments is proposed that will study the low temperature
normal state when the superconductivity is suppressed by a magnetic field. An
understanding of the properties of the low temperature normal state is expected
to give crucial information for understanding the origin of high-Tc
superconductivity. The broad ranges of experimental techniques to be used in
this study are: anisotropic transport (i.e., resistivity, Hall effect,
magnetoresistance, Nernst effect, thermopower, and thermal conductivity),
specific heat, and tunneling. Collaborative experiments with other groups will
use Raman scattering, IR optics, NMR, and muon spin resonance. The crystals and
thin films needed for all of these experiments will be prepared and
characterized by the PI. The broader impact of this program includes the
training of undergraduate science majors, graduate students, and postdoctoral
scientists in materials physics research, especially the methodology of thin
film growth and characterization and transport
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the origin of high-temperature
superconductivity (i.e., superconductivity at a temperature, Tc, above the
boiling point of liquid nitrogen) is one of the major unsolved problems of
physics. This Individual Investigator Award supports a project that addresses
this problem by a comprehensive study of the electrical transport properties of
a specially selected group of copper oxide high-Tc superconductors. The
measurements will be made in high magnetic fields and at very low temperatures.
The proposed studies will probe properties that are highly anomalous in
comparison with conventional metals and superconductors. Therefore, the results
of this study may provide important new insights into the mechanism of high-Tc
superconductivity. These studies also hold the promise of opening new paths for
the science and technology of these novel materials, and for other materials
where strongly interacting electrons dominate the physics. This project also
involves the training of undergraduate students, graduate students and
postdoctoral scientists in materials physics, a field of great technological
importance. &lt;br/&gt;