* 0352221
* Collaborative Research: RUI--Effect of Diurnal and Weekly Water Column Hypoxia Events on Nitrification and Nitrogen Transformations in Estuarine Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Jane Caffrey, University of West Florida
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/29/2008
* USD 450,405.00

ABSTRACT OCE- 0352221 / OCE- 0352216 Nitrification contributes to removing fixed
nitrogen from ecosystems; it is a centrally important process modulating
ecosystem productivity and the global nitrogen budget. In anoxic estuaries,
nitrification is compromised, reducing the removal of fixed nitrogen. Bottom
water anoxia leads to increased HS- concentrations in pore waters that can lead
to extended inhibition of aerobic nitrifying bacteria. A researcher at the
University of West Florida believes that the loss of nitrification activity
during weeklong hypoxic events will reduce denitrification rates, although N2
production by anaerobic NH4+ oxidation (anammox) may be enhanced.

In this study, the scientist from the University of West Florida will
investigate how the community composition of aerobic nitrifiers differs under
varying oxygen tensions. How the nitrifiers respond to short-term hypoxic events
will also be considered, as well as how the degree of hypoxia and bottom water
NO3- concentrations (either through denitrification or anammox) will affect N2
levels. And, finally, because adaptation by the nitrifying community to periodic
hypoxia and HS- exposure has important ecological implications, the researcher
will investigate the degree to which nitrifiers can adapt to intermittent
hypoxia lasting hours to days, specifically when intermitted with exposure to
HS-. If communities adapt to and become HS- tolerant, then they can nitrify when
conditions are favorable without extended lag periods. Thus, nitrogen removal
through denitrification would be more efficient in these systems. In addition,
the role of anammox in estuarine environments is not well studied, particularly
its contribution to estuarine nitrogen budgets. If anammox rates are
significant, it will suggest a major revision of the fixed nitrogen removal
processes in estuaries.