* 0352084
* A Workshop on Horizontal Gene Flow in Microbial Communities, to be held on June 13-15, 2004 in Warrenton, VA.
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Tamar Barkay, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2006
* USD 60,701.00

Vertical gene inheritance involves the transfer of genes from parents to
offspring, whereas horizontal gene transfer (HGT) describes the exchange of
genes between different species of organisms. This is a grant award to Drs.
Barth Smets (University of Connecticut) and Tamar Barkay (Rutgers) to convene a
scientific workshop on HGT-mediated gene flow in complex microbial communities
to be held at Warrenton, VA on or about June 13-15, 2004. The purpose of the
workshop is to initiate the integration of concepts and experimental approaches
from diverse fields within the life sciences and engineering to understand the
potential role of HGT in shaping the metabolic diversity and potential of
microbial communities. 30 advanced-career scientists and 10 postdoctoral fellows
active in the fields of evolutionary biology, molecular biology, and microbial
ecology/environmental microbiology, with explicit expertise and interest in HGT
will participate in presentations and discussions relevant to this very timely
issue. &lt;br/&gt;Data emerging from recent studies on microbial genome
sequences and from molecular analysis of microbial communities from diverse
environments suggest that HGT occurs far more frequently than imagined even five
years ago. HGT has a significant effect on microbial evolution, influences the
genetic and metabolic diversity of extant microbial communities, and affects
such processes as ecosystem function, the spread of antibiotic resistance, the
emergence of new plant and animal pathogens, and the persistence of toxic and
recalcitrant environmental contaminants. As a result, HGT may have wide-reaching
societal implications. The proposed workshop, by fostering communication between
scientists from seemingly unrelated scientific disciplines, is likely to spur
new intellectual and conceptual frameworks for the integration of HGT into a
greater understanding of microbial communities and their activities. By
including a significant number of early career scientists, as well as members of
underrepresented groups in science, the gathering will also have a broader
impact on education, training and diversity in the workplace. A report
summarizing presentations and discussions, and including recommendations for
future research directions will result from this event.&lt;br/&gt;