* 0352750
* Spring 2004 ACS Inauguration Symposium for the Nanoscience Subdivision of American Chemical Society; Anaheim. CA; March 29, 2004
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2004,12/31/2005
* Peidong Yang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/2005
* USD 4,650.00

The spring 2004 ACS Inaugural Symposium for the Nanoscience Subdivision of the
American Chemical Society will emphasize interest in fundamental chemistry
issues that are central to advancing nanoscience and engineering. These
chemistry related areas of nanoscience and engineering have undergone explosive
growth in recent years due to the broadly based recognition of the technological
importance and scientific challenges involved in the discovery and study of new
materials, and due to the influx of scientists from other disciplines who see
the opportunities for performing exciting research in this area. This inaugural
symposium for the Nanoscience Subdivision of the American Chemical Society will
address topics that include the synthesis, characterization, physical and
chemical properties of inorganic nanocrystals and inorganic-organic hybrid
materials. The goal of this ACS meeting is to facilitate collaborations and
information exchange across a broad spectrum of researchers with interests in
advancing chemistry areas related to nanoscience and engineering. The NSF funds
will be used to defray the expenses of students, post-docs, and junior faculty
attending the symposium.

The Solid State and Materials Chemistry community continues to have a direct
impact on technological advances of high significance to society by training
students to design, synthesize, characterize, and fabricate nanoscale materials
as novel device materials relevant to advancing thermoelectric, magnetic, and
electronic technologies.