* 0352694
* Collaborative Research:     Glacial History of Snowball Earth
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Paul Hoffman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 03/31/2008
* USD 353,019.00

This is a collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators at the Harvard
University and Hamilton College. They will study the glacial history of the two
most recent "Snowball Earth" epochs, which preceded the first appearance of
complex animal life on the planet. (Snowball Earth refers to a state in which
the entire ocean is covered by Equatorward-flowing glaciers. It is the
manifestation of a fundamental instability in the climate system due to ice-
albedo feedback.)&lt;br/&gt;Snowball episodes expanded millions of years because
atmospheric pCO2 must reach hundreds of times present levels for deglaciation to
occur. This is achieved because silicate weathering (which consumes CO2) is
attenuated, but volcanic outgassing is not. Glacial
deposits&lt;br/&gt;(diamictite) previously used to test the snowball concept may
actually have formed during&lt;br/&gt;deglaciation, under very different
conditions, creating a false dichotomy between theory
and&lt;br/&gt;observations. Fine-grained suspension deposits between or beneath
diamictites were previously&lt;br/&gt;regarded as interglacial or interstadial,
but they may better represent marine sedimentation&lt;br/&gt;during snowball
Earth itself. When a snowball Earth deglaciates, ferrous iron dissolved
in&lt;br/&gt;seawater should precipitate as iron oxide. Iron-oxide-rich deposits
are observed to follow&lt;br/&gt;suspension deposits and precede diamictite,
consistent with the snowball hypothesis if the former represent the snowball
Earth and the latter its demise. The suspension deposits are
locally&lt;br/&gt;associated with carbonate sediments and other indications of
open water. Models imply that&lt;br/&gt;invasion by marine glaciers from higher
latitudes will keep the tropical ocean covered by thick&lt;br/&gt;ice even after
the surface temperature reaches the melting point (due to greenhouse
forcing).&lt;br/&gt;Consequently, 'oases' will open up on tropical shelves and
inland seas that are protected from&lt;br/&gt;marine glacial invasion.
Carbonates precipitated in snowball oases have characteristic
isotopic&lt;br/&gt;patterns, dictated by the large atmospheric carbon reservoir.
These new concepts could eliminate&lt;br/&gt;the most potent criticisms of the
snowball Earth concept based on the glacial record. Stratigraphic mapping and
logging will be done in the fjord region of East Greenland, northwestern
Nordaustlandet (Svalbard), and the Mackenzie Mountains of the northern Canadian
Cordillera. In these areas, the full glacial history of snowball Earth is well
developed and exposed. Sample sets will be collected and curated for
collaborative geochemical studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. The
proposal brings together two of the most experienced researchers
in&lt;br/&gt;their respective fields in an intensely collaborative field-based
study to test a far-reaching theory&lt;br/&gt;(snowball Earth) using creative
and original concepts. Some of the concepts (e.g., snowball&lt;br/&gt;oases)
derive from recent theoretical modeling in yet another field (geophysical fluid
dynamics).&lt;br/&gt;A strength of the Harvard team's prior work on the snowball
Earth problem was the strong&lt;br/&gt;interest and involvement of a colleague,
the geochemical oceanographer Daniel P. Schrag.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact. Both Principal Investigators hold appointments at liberal arts
institutions, where the primary responsibility is to undergraduate instruction.
Both incorporate elements of their research in courses they teach, and both
include students as field and laboratory assistants. They regularly give
lectures intended for the general public, and are frequently consulted by media
science writers and television producers covering aspects of Antarctic
geoscience and snowball Earth. They have also contributed to courses in science
journalism. An article in Scientific American on Snowball Earth co-written by
one of the Principal Investigators is used by many elementary school teachers in
their classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;