* 0352642
* A Detailed Bathymetric Study of Tectonic and Magmatic Processes at the Extremely Slow-Spreading Gakkel Ridge
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* James Cochran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 03/31/2008
* USD 174,614.00

ABSTRACT Cochran OPP-0352642

Intellectual Merit: Gakkel Ridge, the mid-ocean ridge spreading center in the
Arctic, is the slowest spreading portion of the global mid-ocean ridge (MOR)
system. Mantle melting models predict that melt production and crustal thickness
should decrease significantly at spreading rates of less than 15-20 mm/a. The
extremely slow spreading rate and the gradient in spreading rate along the
Gakkel Ridge make it an important end member constraining models of mantle
melting and crustal generation. Extension at MORs involves both. The balance and
interplay of magmatic and mechanical extension of accommodating plate separation
varies as a function of spreading rate (and melt availability) to produce the
differing ridge axis and ridge flank morphology. Thus, the low spreading rate
and low melt production may affect the crustal thickness and along-axis
distribution of volcanism and faulting. Recently the Gakkel Ridge was studied by
two programs using very different platforms and instrumentation. The SCICEX
program used a U.S. Navy submarine to obtain gravity, high-resolution sidescan
and low- to moderate-resolution bathymetry data out to 50 km from the axis for
600 km along the Gakkel Ridge. The AMORE project used two icebreakers to obtain
high-resolution bathymetry, rock samples and seismic refraction data at the
Gakkel Ridge axis. The bathymetry data maps the ridge axis for ~1000 km, but is
confined to the rift valley floor and walls. The Principal Investigator was
invited by AMORE Principal Investigators to analyze and interpret the AMORE
bathymetry data and to establish the detailed tectonic context of their rock
samples. The project will be primarily based on the high-resolution AMORE swath-
bathymetry data and the SCICEX sidescan data. The goals of the research are to
determine and characterize volcanic and tectonic landforms within the Gakkel
Ridge rift valley, relate the nature and distribution of the bathymetry to
extensional processes, and to establish how these processes vary along the ridge
and how they interact to accommodate plate separation at the extremely slow
spreading rates of the Gakkel Ridge. Hypotheses to be addressed include: -What
form does volcanic activity take at the extremely slow spreading Gakkel Ridge?
Are there significant differences in the form, distribution and size of
individual small scale volcanic features in the western volcanic zone where
volcanism is widespread and the rest of the ridge where it occurs at widely
spaced volcanic centers? -What form does tectonic activity take at the Gakkel
Ridge? Are there differences in the dip, throw, length and spacing of faults
along the axis? How does faulting differ between the western volcanic zone and
the rest of the ridge where magmatism is rarer? In the eastern portion of the
ridge, does the nature of faulting change approaching the volcanic centers and
if so, how? Does the nature of faulting in areas where the ridge is orthogonal
to the opening direction differ from where it is oblique? -How do volcanic and
tectonic processes interact to produce the observed morphology along the Gakkel
Ridge? How does extension and lithospheric creation occur in the absence of
volcanism?

Broader Impacts: Undergraduate students will be involved in this research
through Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory (LDEO)'s Summer Internship program.
This is an NSF-sponsored program in which undergraduates spend the summer
working on a project under the mentorship of an LDEO scientist. At the end they
write an abstract and present an American Geophysical Union (AGU) -type" talk on
their research. Not infrequently, interns present their work at national
meetings or coauthor papers with their mentors. This program has been very
successful in introducing undergraduates to an academic research environment and
the majority decide to go on graduate school in the Earth sciences.

