* 0352456
* High-Resolution Cellular Imaging in Freely Moving Animals Using Fiber-Optic Multiphoton Fluorescence Endoscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Mark Schnitzer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nily R. Dan
* 08/31/2008
* USD 866,580.00

This award supports development of a fiber-optic multiphoton endoscope (FOME)
capable of visualizing cellular details at the micron-scale within the tissues
of freely moving animals. The instrument will exploit recent advances in telecom
fiber- and micro-optics to allow the user to mount or implant a micro-optical
probe on an animal as small as a mouse. The probe will enable visualization of
cellular properties and dynamics in animals that are free to move within a
behavioral testing chamber. The instrument will use multiphoton fluorescence
excitation to provide true three-dimensional imaging with thin optical
sectioning possible over distances of several hundred microns within the
position of the probe tip. By enabling studies in which macroscopic observations
of live animal behavior and physiology are concurrent with microscopic
observations of underlying cellular dynamics, the FOME will help uncover new
relationships between the organism and the cells within it. The excitation and
emission light will be routed to and from the animal using state-of-the-art
optical fibers. Fluorescent markers that are either injected or genetically
engineered into the animal's cells will selectively tag particular molecular
species within specific classes of cells. The user will control imaging sessions
remotely from a computer interface, without having to interrupt animal behavior.
By combining cellular- and organismic-level analysis, the instrument will
facilitate collaborative studies by cellular biologists, physiologists and
behavioral scientists. As part of the project, two auxiliary instrument will be
constructed for use by trainees and other researchers to pilot new experiments
destined for the central FOME imaging station. These auxiliary stations will
provide core infrastructure for new undergraduate and graduate curricula on
modern optical imaging techniques in the biological sciences and on biophysical
aspects of neurons and neural circuits. &lt;br/&gt;