* 0352865
* Climatic Aspects of the Initiation of the Laurentide Ice Sheet.
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2009
* David Bromwich, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 10/31/2009
* USD 420,001.00

626- Considerable advancements have been made toward understanding the climate
forcing mechanisms and subsequent atmospheric circulation patterns that are
required for the initiation of the Laurentide Ice Sheet (LIS) at the end of the
last interglacial 116 thousand years (kyr B.P.) Yet, the relative importance of
these forcing mechanisms, and their relationship to atmospheric variability on
interannual and longer time scales, have not been determined. The Principal
Investigators will undertake a comprehensive and systematic modeling
investigation of the initiation and inception of the LIS over northeastern
Canada, using state-of-the-art high-resolution climate and ice sheet models to
determine the role of climate forcings, their influence on natural climate
variability, and the impact of model resolution on the results obtained.
&lt;br/&gt;Objectives and Justification: The Principal Investigators will model
the atmospheric state in the contemporary and last interglacial environments
using the Polar MM5 regional climate model and the NCAR Community Climate System
Model 2 (CCSM2). CCSM2 will produce global-scale descriptions of the atmosphere,
ocean, sea-ice cover, and land surface while Polar MM5, developed specifically
for high-latitudes, will yield high-resolution descriptions of the regional
atmospheric circulation and surface characteristics over the likely initiation
region of the LIS. From the contemporary environment, which is characterized by
large interannual variability, they will identify modern analogs for glacial
initiation, that is, distinct modes of atmospheric circulation that yield
exceptional winter precipitation and cool summer temperatures in northeastern
Canada. Data from these periods will be used in Polar MM5 simulations of several
idealized modern scenarios to determine the relative importance of cool summers
versus wet winters in achieving perennial snow cover. Coupled CCSM2/Polar MM5
simulations of the climate at 116 kyr B.P. will be conducted, using appropriate
orbital, trace gas, and vegetation boundary conditions, to determine whether the
interannual variability from the coupled climate models is sufficient to achieve
glacial initiation on appropriate time scales and in the correct locations.
Snapshot output from the Polar MM5 will be input to a high-resolution, three-
dimensional ice sheet downscaling routine and ice sheet model for multi-
millennial ice sheet simulations to determine whether the climate model
snowfields are sufficient for glacial inception to occur. The location and
timing of the model ice sheet will bevalidated against observed glacial geology
and geomorphology in the study region. Guided by the results from the
contemporary and last interglacial model simulations, specific sensitivity tests
will be conducted to isolate the critical climate forcing mechanisms for glacial
initiation and inception to occur at 116 kyr B.P.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
and Broader Impacts: This project brings together a team of highly qualified
scientists with expertise in meteorology, climate, glaciology, and glacial
geology, along with sophisticated numerical models to address for the first time
the explicit atmospheric processes occurring on various temporal and spatial
scales that lead to glacial initiation. Coupling an explicit representation of
climate to a high-resolution ice sheet model will greatly advance our
understanding of the importance of climate forcing variability on ice sheet
inception at both the last interglacial and the current interglacial. Because
the relative roles of natural variability and anthropogenic forcing are of very
important to possible future climate changes, a better understanding of climate
variability at the last interglacial-glacial transition will have important
implications for potential societal impacts in a future climate scenario. There
will be abundant material available for educational outreach at elementary/
secondary schools, university classes, and through an interactive Internet web
site. Two Ph.D. students will receive training through this research project and
summer internships will be offered to inner city high school youth to develop
their science skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;