* 0352104
* Collaborative Research:  Stochastic Transport Models for the Coastal Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Arthur Mariano, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2007
* USD 118,974.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0352104&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI's seek to determine optimal stochastic particle transport (i.e. Lagrangian)
models for use in the coastal ocean which will provide a necessary link between
the copious Eulerian coastal circulation data from high frequency (HF) radar
systems, and transport information required by coastal resource managers tasked
with identifying the fate of pollutants, larvae, and objects lost-at-sea.
Specific research objectives are to (i) observe surface flow fields in two
coastal regions using HF radar and high-resolution drifters, (ii) to develop
accurate Lagrangian transport models to predict trajectories from the HF radar
fields, (iii) to model trajectories and quantify their skill through comparisons
with in-situ drifter tracks, and (iv) to compute redistribution kernel functions
(RKFs), or connectivity matrices, and demonstrate their utility as simple
probabilistic near-shore transport models. Existing trajectory models will be
modified for consideration of flow patterns characteristic to the coastal ocean.
A model with a large-scale mean component (U), a periodic component representing
tidal and (near-) inertial motions (Up), and a Lagrangian stochastic component
(model; LSM) for subgrid-scale motions (u) will be developed. The LSM will
initially be based on high resolution drifter data. An LSM parameterization
based on large-scale velocity information (e.g. integral time scales, eddy
variance.) and coastal geomorphology will then be developed. This enables the
trajectory models to be applied in all coastal regions with sufficient large-
scale flow information. Model skill over a wide range of dynamic parameters
(e.g. velocity, vorticity, eddy energy) will be quantified in the Santa Barbara
(CA) and Miami (FL) coastal regions through comparisons with in-situ drifter
tracks. RKFs, giving the probability that a particle released at some location
x0 at time t0 will reach location x1 at t1, will be computed with modeled
trajectories and evaluated as tools for predicting transport, or connectivity in
the coastal ocean. An improved understanding of coastal circulation will result
from subsequent identification of how and why RKFs vary spatially and
temporally. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;