* 0352924
* The Halos of Post-Merger Galaxies:    A Detailed Study of NGC 5128 (Centaurus A)
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Theodore Williams, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 06/30/2006
* USD 43,418.00

AST 0098566&lt;br/&gt;Ford&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elliptical galaxies contain a
large fraction of the stars and dark matter in the local universe, yet their
formation mechanisms are still largely unknown. Understanding the formation and
evolution of elliptical galaxies is essential for understanding galaxy
formation, and, ultimately, the star formation history of the universe. In
addition, ellipticals are often found to be the hosts of powerful active
galactic nuclei (AGN) and understanding their evolution may also shed some light
on the AGN phenomenon. Various competing scenarios of elliptical formation have
been studied over the past decade. These include: 1) multiple bursts of early
star formation, 2) merging of gas-rich spiral galaxies, and 3) prolonged
accretion and tidal stripping of gas-poor galaxies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project involves a detailed study of NGC 5128 (Centaurus A), the nearest giant
elliptical galaxy. Cen A has undergone a recent merger with a gas-rich system,
and is one of the prototypical classes of radio galaxies. This makes it an
excellent laboratory in which to study both the fossil record of old stars in
the halos of ellipticals, and the transitional states that result from mergers
and nuclear activity. The present work will cover Cen A's halo as far out as a
radius of 100 kpc. It will use broadband UBVRI and [O III] imaging and
multifiber spectroscopy to constrain the origins of the stellar populations in
Cen A. In particular it seeks to:&lt;br/&gt;1. determine the origin of the faint
halo light, i.e. the extended stellar disk, shells, and other possible merger
remnants like accreted dwarf galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;2. determine the spatial
distribution, metallicity distribution, and kinematics of the globular cluster
system. &lt;br/&gt;3. determine the quantity, spatial extent, and timescale of
AGN-induced star formation in the halo. &lt;br/&gt;4. measure the extent of the
elliptical galaxy halo, and quantify the total mass of its luminous and dark
matter out to 100 kpc.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;