* 0352259
* Development of a Rapid Method for Simultaneous Measurement of SF6 and CFCs in Water
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2009
* William Smethie, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2009
* USD 420,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE- 0350229&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Iron
Hypothesis was built around the argument that phytoplankton production in large
regions of the world's oceans is limited by iron. A large number of laboratory
studies, field projects, and modeling efforts continue to make this area of
research a hot topic within biological and chemical oceanography. Iron
fertilization from ships does result in the enhanced biological productivity of
surface waters. In contrast, enhanced ocean productivity, following the
atmospheric deposition of naturally occurring iron, is not well documented.
&lt;br/&gt;Looking to apply new technologies that link atmospheric processes
with chemical and biological oceanography, a researcher from the Woods Hole
Oceangraphic Institution will deploy a buoy-mounted aerosol sampler on the
Bermuda Testbed Mooring (BTM) buoy with the primary objective of producing a
time-series for the concentrations of mineral dust, Fe and other geochemically
important elements. Aerosol sampling will start before and end after the period
of the large-scale transport of African dust to the Sargasso Sea and Bermuda,
which occurs in July and August. If the instrument works as designed, the
proposed study will produce the first time-series to have captured and
quantified dust events at the air-sea boundary from a moored buoy. The aerosol
sampler deployment will coincide with Boyle's deployment of the MITESS water
sampler under the BTM buoy. This joint deployment will allow for a comparison
between the temporal variations in the atmospheric deposition of mineral dust
(Fe) and the surface water concentrations of Fe. While the proposed project
involves testing new technologies, it has implications for drawing longer-term
connections between iron deposition, primary productivity and ecosystem
dynamics. Atmospheric concentrations and deposition rates of iron, derived from
buoy-mounted instruments, can also provide observational data that can be
compared to model simulations of iron deposition to the ocean. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;