* 0352347
* Charitable Giving and Fundraising
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2009
* Lise Vesterlund, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2009
* USD 233,844.00

Ninety percent of all U.S.households contribute to charities, with average
contributions in excess of $1,500 per year. It is easy to see that charitable
contributions constitute an important component of the American economy.
Furthermore current public policy makes it clear that we increasingly will be
relying on such donations. It is therefore important that we understand what
triggers giving. However, charitable giving has long posed a challenge for
standard models of economic behavior. Consultants and nonprofit managers
recommend many methods to encourage donations, but few if any of these methods
are actually tested against alternatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a new model of charitable donations to better explain how and why people
give to charity. In particular, the model includes not just donors and a
charity, but includes multiple charities and fundraisers that serve as
intermediaries between people and charities. The goal is to improve our
understanding of an important kind of cooperative behavior and the institutions
that support such cooperation. Broader implications of this research will
benefit charities by giving them better information about the best fundraising
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three parts of this project will examine
fundraising behavior, multiple charities, and cooperative behavior. The common
assumption of models of charitable giving is that donors make their
contributions simultaneously, with the charity playing a purely passive role.
Typically, however, campaigns are guided and directed by fundraisers - often
very active ones. The work in the first part of the proposal extends the models
of giving to account for this fact. In particular, the work will consider
whether herding or a concern for status may be reasons why contributions are
announced. Another frequently used strategy is for the fundraiser to set
thresholds or goals for the combined contributions to the charity, we will also
investigate the implications of such a strategy. The second part of
&lt;br/&gt;the proposal relaxes the standard assumption that there only is one
charity. Allowing for multiple charities I first determine if as predicted
aggregate contributions increase when a heterogeneous set of charities are
available, and then whether free-riding behavior may be more or less prominent
when donors contribute to different and overlapping public goods. Finally, the
work in the third part of the proposal studies cooperative behavior. In
particular we examine the extent to which learning, reciprocity, and end-game
effects can explain the observation that cooperation decreases with time. We
also examine what kinds of institutions do the most to encourage
cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;