* 0352449
* Development of an Electroactive Fiber-Optic Chip for Optical/Electrochemical Characterization of Planar-Supported Biological Materials
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Neal Armstrong, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 02/28/2007
* USD 493,792.00

This award supports development of a new, fiber-optic-based instrument which
will permit broadband, highly sensitive spectro/electrochemical characterization
of substrate-supported biomolecular films, including membrane-bound proteins and
their electroactive constituents. The proposed instrumentation is based on a new
electroactive fiber-optic chip (EA-FOC) that can provide: 1) ultra-sensitive
absorbance and fluorescence characterization of surface-confined and membrane-
bound biologically relevant molecules, 2) spectro/electrochemical (voltammetric,
amperometric or potentiometric) characterization of proteins at microliter cell
volumes and using 10-100 femtomoles of surface-confined redox reagent; 3)
fluorescence detection of changes in the environment of signaling molecules that
occur during ion transport through membrane assemblies. The instrument will make
accessible, for the first time, the sensitivity enhancements of integrated optic
waveguide and electroactive integrated optic waveguide (EA-IOW) technologies
combined with the ease-of-use of fiber-optic based spectrophotometers. The
planned effort extends previous work of the PIs to permit detection of changes
in the structure and activity of membrane-bound biomolecules and increase the
range of applications. The instrument will be able to study surface-confined
optical/electrochemical events in biomolecular films of increasing architectural
complexity, culminating with studies of membrane proteins reconstituted into
planar supported lipid bilayers. The final design of the EA-FOC is expected to
provide a platform that can be integrated with a wide range of commercially
available instrumentation, and will provide opportunities for the development of
versatile, sensitive, and selective bio- and chemical sensor platform. Students
directly involved in the project will be trained in the design, fabrication,
characterization, and testing of new instrumentation, and will acquire an in-
depth experience in several aspects of spectro/electrochemistry techniques,
optical fiber technologies, and optical spectroscopies, and in the application
of those tools into studies of biomolecular films.