* 0352805
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Investigating Metal Induced Crystallization on Thin Films of Amorphous Silicon
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Hameed Naseem, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/2009
* USD 28,400.00

0352805&lt;br/&gt;Naseem&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports the US-India
cooperative research entitled Investigating Metal Induced Crystallization on
Thin Films of Amorphous Silicon. Professors Hameed Naseem, University of
Arkansas and Ram Kishore, National Physical Laboratory (NPL), New Delhi will use
characterization techniques including electron microscopy to investigate low
temperature, aluminum induced solid phase crystallization of amorphous silicon.
They expect to improve fundamental understanding of the basic science, including
kinetics, of crystallization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The collaborators
will employ complimentary strengths of the University of Arkansas in thin film
processing and that of NPL in electron microscopy to study in real-time
nucleation and growth mechanisms associated with crystallization behavior of
amorphous silicon. They expect to develop new technologies that will reduce the
amount of energy and material needed for a given end product and expand choices
of low cost materials. They may be applications for lower cost photovoltaic and
thermo-photovoltaic power generation options in large area liquid crystal flat
panel displays and high-density TV application. Findings will be disseminated at
international conferences and in scientific journals. This research is supported
by the Department of Science &amp; Technology (DST) under the NSF/DST joint
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;