* 0353848
* REU Site at Northwest Indian College
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Roberto Gonzalez-Plaza, Northwest Indian College
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2006
* USD 194,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northwest Indian College (NWIC) is a
small two-year Tribal College forging research based science education programs,
especially through the Tribal Environmental and Natural Resources Management and
the Tribal Colleges and Universities Programs. These and other Science Division
programs lead to AAS and AS degrees with significant numbers of students
transferring to partner institutions. The Research Experience for Undergraduates
grant will allow the College to engage Native students in research projects in
the areas of environmental science and natural resources relevant to the Pacific
Northwest Tribes. Northwest Indian College partners with institutions and
agencies such as Western Washington University's Huxley College of Environmental
Studies; the University of Washington Friday Harbor Laboratories; the Lummi
Natural Resources Department; the WA State Department of Ecology; the University
of California, Irvine; the National Park Service and the North Cascades
Institute. All of the above, plus NASA and the Ecological Society of America
have supported the College's efforts to transition to a Research-based science
education model that was part of the original Science Division plan. The REU
Program will select students for scientific research projects based on their
interest, a suitable mentor from the College or any of the partnering
Institutions, and if necessary, the sponsorship of their Tribe. If the student
chooses a research project with a partnering Institution, a faculty member from
NWIC will coordinate the research project with the mentor and the student. The
research projects will address, among other topics, questions related to non-
point source pollution, restoration ecology of salmon, remote field habitat
assessment tools, shellfish and fisheries aquaculture technologies, traditional
use of native plants, DNA-based shellfish and fish population analyses, the
ecology of the Salish Sea (Puget Sound), and tree physiology. We expect, as the
nascent National Indian Center for Marine Environmental Research and Education
(NICMERE) starts functioning on the Lummi Reservation, to incorporate Research
dealing with other aspects of Marine Sciences. Students may choose to work on
their research projects throughout the academic year and summer. For more info,
please contact Roberto Gonzalez-Plaza, Science Division, Northwest Indian
College, 2522 Kwina Road, Lummi Nation, Bellingham WA, 98226. rgonzalez@nwic.edu
, Telephone: 360-392.4307&lt;br/&gt;