* 0353953
* REU Site: Bioinformatic and Phylogenetic Approaches to the Study of Plant and Fungal Biodiversity
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Paul Manos, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2007
* USD 144,951.00

The Department of Biology at Duke University will host seven undergraduate
students each summer in a research program in Bioinformatic and Phylogenetic
Approaches to the Study of Plant and Fungal Biodiversity. The site is supported
by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.
Applications to participate in Bioinformatics and Phylogenetics will be accepted
from sophomore and junior undergraduates. Students with limited opportunities
for research, including under-represented minorities, are especially encouraged
to apply. The seven faculty who will serve as mentors in our program have active
research programs ranging from the Tree of Life initiative to reconstructing
species-level genealogies, and within species and population-level genomic-based
biology of plants and fungi. The focus of the ten-week summer program will be a
research mentorship with a participating faculty member. The series will strive
to reinforce the intellectual integration of the undergraduate participants with
graduate students and senior personnel by developing the programmatic theme
including three types of activities into a ten-week undergraduate research
experience: (1) a two-day orientation; (2) a twice-weekly seminar/discussion
series; and (3) a research forum for presenting the summer's results and
conclusions. The intention is to provide a supportive environment to the
students as they progress through the summer, as well as to reinforce the image
of science as an interactive enterprise. Duke University has a history of
successful undergraduate summer research programs, especially those that provide
training experiences for women and minorities. We have drawn from this
experience and will be able to make use of existing administrative structures
both for recruiting candidates to the program and for providing the logistical
support necessary for an engaging and stimulating research experience. The
research environment at Duke offers state-of-the-art facilities, including
world-class research collections of plants and fungi, a diverse living reference
collection of plants and cultures of fungi and algae, the Duke Biology Genetic
Analysis Facility, and the experimental setting provided by the Duke Forest,
including the Forest-Atmosphere Carbon Transfer and Storage (FACTS-I) site. For
further information and application materials, please contact Dr. Paul Manos at
pmanos@duke.edu or (919) 660-7358, or visit
http://www.biology.duke.edu/reu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;