* 0353973
* REU Site for Ecosystems in Transition:  The Role of Research in Assessing Ecosystem Responses to a Changing Environment
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Kurt Pregitzer, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2006
* USD 155,463.00

Ten Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) students will spend the summer
at Michigan Technological University examining Ecosystems in Transition. The
students will work with faculty mentors on existing large-scale, long-term,
interdisciplinary experiments examining the responses of forest ecosystems to
climatic variations, anthropogenic pollutants, changing wildlife populations,
exotic species invasions and ecosystem restoration efforts. During the ten-week
program, each student will also develop and carry out an independent research
project examining a specific aspect of an important environmental issue. During
the second half of the program, many of the students will spend periods of time
off-campus at field research locations. In addition to their research, the REU
students will participate in educational training sessions on the experimental
design, communicating science to professional and lay audiences, and ethics in
science. Through a series of Case Study discussion, they also will examine the
role that basic research plays in improving our understanding of ecosystem
function and the development of environmental policy. At the end of the ten-week
session, the students will present their research findings at a symposium
sponsored by MTU. The work of all REU students will be published by MTU, and
students will be encouraged to submit their results to peer-reviewed journals.
The REU students they will be able to explore career possibilities through
meetings with invited speakers from universities, government agencies and
private industry, attendance at a national scientific meeting, and a career
workshop. The program is open to all undergraduate students, and stipends, room,
board and travel are provided. Women and students from underrepresented groups
are strongly encouraged to apply. For more information, students should contact
Dr. Andrew Burton (ajburton@mtu.edu or (906) 487-2566), or visit
http://www.forest.mtu.edu/reu/.