* 0353041
* Conference on Emerging Mechanisms of Epigenetic Regulation, to be held January 2004 in Lake Tahoe, California
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Vicki Chandler, Keystone Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Rita Teutonico
* 12/31/2004
* USD 5,000.00

This Keystone Symposium on Emerging Mechanisms of Epigenetic Regulation will
focus on the study of epigenetics and its impact on many different areas of
biological sciences. Some of the aspects of epigenetic phenomena are beginning
to be understood, but the underlying mechanisms are still unknown. This
Symposium will attempt to find common themes and differences across all phyla
(fungi, plants, animals) in phenomena such as genomic imprinting, X-chromosome
inactivation, RNA-interference, and paramutation. The Symposium will bring
together a diverse range of researchers in a meeting setting that promotes
interaction and discussion. The Symposium is devoted to providing an atmosphere
that promotes the research and careers of young investigators, so the
participation of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior faculty is
being strongly encouraged. In addition, one of the Symposium's goals is to
strengthen the voice of underrepresented minorities, women, and persons with
disabilities in the field. To achieve this, organizers have set aside speaking
slots for young investigators and will choose additional speakers from submitted
abstracts. The Program already includes a significant number of prominent women
scientist speakers who can act as role models for young women attendees. The
Symposium will defray the cost of attendance for a number of young scientists
and participants from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;