* 0353698
* REU Site: Summer Program for Research in Applied Psychology
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Jan Murdoch, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 02/29/2008
* USD 237,692.00

The Clemson Summer Program in Applied Psychology provides student participants
with research training in human factors and health psychology. The program
objectives are to increase talented students' interest, understanding, and
commitment to research, science, and scientific careers. These objectives should
increase and sustain student participation in research, professional activities,
and entry into graduate programs. The students selected will have strong
backgrounds in mathematics, biological science, social science, and/or
industrial engineering, will exhibit potential interest and commitment to
science and research, and will be selected mainly from non-research colleges and
universities. Program activities will include a supervised program of
collaborative research with eleven participating faculty from the Psychology and
Industrial Engineering Departments. Support activities will include course work
(3 credit hours) in research methods in applied psychology, seminars, site-
visits, and the Conference in Applied Psychology. Research partners in industry,
government, and education will collaborate via participation in support
activities and research projects. Students will present the results of their
research at the Conference on Applied Psychology. Follow-through annual
activities will include travel support for additional professional
presentations, collaborative publications, and advising to support applications
to graduate programs.

The intellectual merit of the program is to identify and evaluate techniques
that increase student understanding of science and science careers, increase
student participation in professional activities, and encourage student
application to graduate programs in science. The broader impact of the program
is to promote undergraduate research at the institutional level through the
visible success of the program, to provide a model of effective undergraduate
science education through professional national dissemination of the program
characteristics and outcomes, to promote participation by underrepresented
groups, and to extend the benefits of the program to the public and private
sector through partnerships with defense, industry, and government entities.

This award contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts to attract
talented students into careers in science through active undergraduate research
experiences. This Site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership
with the NSF REU program.

