* 0353703
* Gender Differences in Employment Outcomes for Academics in Science and Social Science
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2004,09/30/2011
* Donna Ginther, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 09/30/2011
* USD 292,752.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO: 0353703&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION:
University of Kansas&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: ECONOMICS&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ginther,
Donna K&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Gender Differences in Employment Outcomes for Academics
in Science and Social Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several studies find that
women are underrepresented in the sciences, earn less, and are less likely to be
tenured than men. The studies, however, do not explain what factors contribute
to the observed gender differences. This research will investigate the economic
explanations for gender differences in salary, promotion, and attrition for
academics in science, social science, and engineering using data from the 1973
-2001 waves of the Survey of Doctorate Recipients (SDR). This study has 4
specific goals: 1) matching the SDR data with publication data; 2), examine the
effect of productivity on outcomes; 3), document the facts concerning gender
differences in science and social science; and 4), use economic theory to
explore the causes of the observed gender differences. Matching the SDR data
with publication data has several advantages: it is a nationally representative
sample of doctorates in the U. S. that follows individuals over time and
contains detailed information on demographic characteristics, educational
background, employer characteristics, academic rank, primary work activity,
government support, productivity, salary, and promotion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to the literature by
performing separate analyses in the fields of life, physical, and social science
and engineering of the economic explanations for gender differences in
employment outcomes. It will explore whether the gender salary gap in science
has converged since the mid-1990s; factors accounting for the gender promotion
gap in the social sciences; and the timing and reasons for women leaving the
scientific pipeline. It will examine explanations of the gender gap such as
differences in preferences and productivity, market forces including monopsony
and the excess supply of doctoral scientists, and
discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focusing on academic labor markets allows
researchers to evaluate economic explanations of the gender wage gap such as
productivity differences or market forces more easily than in the general
population. Second, this expands the analysis of gender differences to include
additional employment outcomes such as promotion and attrition from careers that
may, in turn, explain a substantial portion of the gender wage differential.
Academic institutions and National Science Foundation can use the results of
this research to address barriers faced by underrepresented groups in physical
and social sciences.&lt;br/&gt;