* 0353402
* Video Interactions for Teaching and Learning (VITAL):  A Learning Environment for Courses in Early Childhood Mathematics Education
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2009
* Herbert Ginsburg, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Julia Clark
* 11/30/2009
* USD 2,328,636.00

This proposal is a request for support to develop a research program that uses
digital techniques, referred to as "Video Interactions for Teaching and
Learning" (VITAL) to improve teaching performance. The proposed project will
develop a pre-service resource called "VITAL." A consortium including Teachers
College, the Columbia Center for New Media Teaching and Learning, and William
Patterson University is requesting support for a five-year project to enable the
consortium to create a structured learning environment for preparing teachers of
early childhood (K-3) mathematics. The proposed environment is to include
college and graduate level curricula, a digital library of primary source
materials and an online community workspace. More specifically, the intent is to
enhance and expand video-based instruction already being employed in the
classrooms of two of the project staff to help prospective and practicing
teachers to analyze the development of young children's mathematical thinking
and learning to reach a broader audience that includes mathematics education and
early childhood education professors involved in teacher preparation and
professional development. The project goals are to train prospective teachers
to: (a) understand from a cognitive developmental psychology perspective how
children learn and think about mathematics; (b) assess children's mathematical
knowledge and plan instructional activities accordingly; (c) develop an
evidence-based understanding of effective and developmentally appropriate
teaching methods and curricula; and (d) develop a basic understanding of key
mathematical concepts.