* 0353651
* REU: Summer Research Experience in the Mammoth Cave/Upper Green River Watershed
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2004,09/30/2007
* Cathleen Webb, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 09/30/2007
* USD 253,556.00

This is a 10-week summer research program, designed the program for eight
undergraduates in a multidisciplinary faculty research project submitted jointly
from &lt;br/&gt;the Departments of Biology, Chemistry, and Geography and Geology
and the Center for Water Resource Studies of the Ogden College of Science and
Engineering of Western Kentucky University. Each student will develop a research
project in collaboration with one of ten faculty or professional staff mentors
who have an active research program with an environmental focus in their
respective disciplines. All projects &lt;br/&gt;will be linked to environmental
issues related to the karst terrain in the Mammoth Cave/ Upper Green River Basin
in western Kentucky. This REU site has several objectives: 1) to provide the
student participants with unique and exciting research opportunities in an area
of environmental research; 2) to provide the students an opportunity to apply
their knowledge to a real and current environmental problem in a meaningful way;
3) to enhance the critical thinking and communication skills (including written,
oral, listening, and computer-enhanced presentations) of the student
participants; 4) to introduce the students to a research setting that is .beyond
the classroom.; 5) to develop the scientific maturity of the students while
working on a research experience that is ultimately based on service to the
greater community; 6) to increase interest in graduate study by hands-on
experience utilizing state-of-the-art instrumentation and experimental
facilities; and 7) to prepare and present a research poster at a regional and
national conference during the academic year. A goal is to have more than 50% of
the participants pursue post- graduate studies and/or pursue careers in an
environmentally related profession.&lt;br/&gt; The undergraduate researchers
will develop a mentoring relationship with a faculty mentor while participating
in meaningful research activities. They will be exposed to a variety of research
and instrumental techniques in each participating department through a series of
hands-on training sessions. During the academic year, regular contact between
the mentor and student will be maintained in order to facilitate the students
poster presentation at a national conference. Mentors will also attend the
conference with the student to provide on-site support, if needed. &lt;br/&gt;