* 0353209
* Artificial Atoms
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Marc Kastner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2007
* USD 347,880.00

When the tunnel barriers confining electrons in an artificial atom are
transmitting enough, the motion of electrons in the leads becomes correlated
with the motion of electrons in the isolated region. The most dramatic
manifestation of these correlations is the Kondo effect. Recent experiments have
shown that the physics of the Kondo effect is fundamentally different when there
are two unpaired electrons in the isolated region rather than one. The way the
correlations develop with decreasing temperature or decreasing magnetic field is
expected to be sensitive to the geometry of the leads. Specific theoretical
predictions have been made for this situation, and a major part of the work
proposed for this project is designed to test these predictions. More generally,
the single-electron transistors used for these studies are an outstanding
laboratory for studying the physics of nanostructures, some of which may
eventually have important technological applications. Research on semiconductor
nanostructures has also proven to be an outstanding training ground for young
physicists. Former students and postdoctoral associates educated in this group
have positions in small companies, large companies and universities. A
significant number of these have been women and minorities. Continued
recruitment of undergraduates, graduate students and postdocs, especially women
and minorities is planned.

Advances in nano-science and engineering let one make transistors so small that
the electrons in them behave quantum mechanically. Understanding this quantum
behavior is intrinsically interesting, but it is also important for
understanding how to make useful electronic devices at the nanometer length
scale. When electrons are confined to nanometer length scales they can be
thought of as artificial atoms. Bringing an artificial atom into close contact
with a metal creates a chemical bond between the atom and the metal. This
project studies how that chemical bond depends on the number of electrons in the
artificial atom. Because transistors made with artificial atoms turn on and off
again for every electron added to them they are called single-electron
transistors. In addition to its interest for technology, research on single
electron transistors has proven to be an outstanding training ground for young
physicists. Former students and postdoctoral associates educated in this group
have positions in small companies, large companies and universities. A
significant fraction of these have been women and minorities. Continued
recruitment of undergraduates, graduate students and postdocs, especially women
and minorities is planned.