* 0353569
* REU Site in Biomolecular Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Andrew Zydney, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 05/31/2008
* USD 325,544.00

This award provides support for a three-year REU Site at the Pennsylvania State
University, University Park campus. Twelve students will be recruited from
throughout the U.S. for a ten-week summer experience in research related to
biomolecular engineering. Students will have an opportunity to do research aimed
at understanding the engineering challenges involved in the production,
purification, and application of biological molecules. REU participants will
work closely with faculty, graduate students, and post-docs on cutting-edge
projects ranging from developing membrane systems for protein purification, to
understanding intermolecular forces involved in bacterial adhesion, to
developing nanoparticles for drug delivery, to optimizing directed evolution
protocols for novel engineered proteins, to the synthesis of monoclonal
antibodies in transgenic plants. The program will provide opportunities for
student participants to learn how to effectively communicate their research
results through a poster session held at the end of the summer. This program
will provide a unique opportunity for undergraduate students to gain a broad
exposure to the field of biomolecular engineering and will provide a unique
opportunity for students majoring in fields such as biochemistry and molecular
biology to gain an engineering perspective on this research field. It is
anticipated that this program will have a Broader Impact on the nations need to
increase the number of U.S. citizens and permanent residents engaged in
research-related careers at U.S. universities, government agencies, and in
private-sector organizations. It is also anticipated that this REU Site will
have a Broader Impact on the nations need to have broader participation in the
research enterprise of citizens and permanent residents from demographic groups
traditionally underrepresented in science and engineering.