* 0353186
* U.S.-Tunisia Cooperative Research: Combined Cellular Automata and Multigrid Methods for Structural Topology Design
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Zafer Gurdal, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/29/2008
* USD 30,000.00

0353186 &lt;br/&gt;Gurdal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports collaborative research between Dr. Zafar Gurdal, Department of
Engineering Science and Mechanics, Virginia Institute of Technology and State
University, Blacksburg, Virginia and Dr. Hichem Smaoui, Department of Civil
Engineering, Ecole National d'Ingenieurs de Tunis (ENIT), Tunis, Tunisia. The
research will develop a numerical design optimization methodology based on a
combination of the cellular automata (CA) paradigm and multigrid methods (MG)
for the design of large complex structures, and to investigate the new
methodology in the context of design of large complex structures. Unlike the
traditional approach, the CA does not require repetitive system level analyses,
as it is based completely on local problem solving for both analysis and design.
Multigrid methods are used to improve its efficiency. This innovative approach
offers a new paradigm to design and analysis with great potential. This approach
will be massively parallel and much more efficient than present design
optimization algorithms. The PIs plan to apply this methodology to the topology
optimization of 2-D elastic continua with highly refined grids, and to the
topology and fiber orientation optimization of composite plates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Developing automated methods for engineering design
is of immense significance, and will remain an important problem. The
application of multi-grid approach in the design environment can benefit from
the experience to be gained in this project. The results may change design
paradigm for industry and thus have a major impact. The approach may be extended
beyond structural design to other areas of multidisciplinary design optimization
and to system identification, and would make many areas of optimization more
efficient and allow them to be more widely applied, especially to nonlinear
problems. The project would enhance teaching through the development of an
associated course in Tunisia, and learning through the involvement of graduate
students, with participation of a female Ph.D. student. A strong partnership is
expected to develop between the research groups at the U.S. and Tunisian
institutes. It is expected that the collaboration will be successful in
completing the proposed work since the two researchers have already done
preliminary work in the area. There will be participation of graduate students
from Tunisia and VPI who will be working together. Widespread dissemination of
results is expected. &lt;br/&gt;