* 0353283
* SGER:     Design and Manufacturing of Precision Products Directly from CAD by Combined Laser Aided Metal Addition and Subtraction
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Steven Skerlos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 10/31/2004
* USD 66,622.00

SGER ABSTRACT: Design and Manufacturing of Precision Products directly from CAD
by combined Laser Aided Metal Addition and Subtraction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
recent years, advanced laser research has created the opportunity to
conceptualize a machine tool that can perform sequential laser aided material
addition and subtraction on a single platform. The potential economic impact of
this technology on the U.S. economy is enormous, as combined laser deposition
and removal of metals would greatly reduce the time required to manufacture
complex shaped tools and dies. The high potential for Design and Manufacturing
of precision products directly from CAD by combined laser aided metal addition
and subtraction under the framework of a single system is also associated with
high risk. First, there is an urgent need for an integrated CAD/CAE/CAM for
laser based fabrication where part/tool performance can be predicted by design
engineers using CAE physics based modeling tools in tandem with CAD/CAM to
design and fabricate complex precision parts to geometries and surface finish
tolerances. CAD-integrated computer aided manufacturing (CAM) systems are not
completely developed for either additive or subtractive laser based
manufacturing, let alone for the combination of the two. This complexity of
design challenge increases substantially when the process is conceptualized for
5 DOF deposition and removal. Second, the deposition process involves two
significant challenges: metallurgical and precision size control. The
development of precision in-situ measurement technique that can survive in a hot
melt metal environment represents another challenge. Third, damage-free laser
micromachining for materials removal at the submicron level from a freshly
deposited substrate that exhibits considerable residual stress has yet to be
explored. Fourth, there is a need to investigate innovative surface modification
processes to attain desired surface characteristics. The proposed program will
evaluate the critical technologies necessary to rapidly and directly build
functional metal parts, tooling, and dies with high precision using a single
setup.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this SGER will focus on
demonstrating the feasibility of a new innovative technology that has the
potential to arrest the off shore migration of manufacturing industries. The
novel process proposed during the program is expected to replace many steps and
complex processes in traditional tooling and die manufacturing, offering the
advantage of greatly reducing the time to produce complex tooling and dies with
high precision, while simultaneously achieving superior tool life and
productivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;