* 0353841
* The Mathematical Association of America National Research Experience for Undergraduates Program (NREUP)
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2007
* William Anthony Hawkins, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 05/31/2007
* USD 245,623.00

The Mathematical Association of America (MAA), through its Strengthening
Underrepresented Minority Mathematics Achievement (SUMMA) program, will support
the participation of mathematics undergraduates from underrepresented groups in
focused and challenging research experiences to increase their interest in
advanced degrees and careers in mathematics. Our goal is to support a minimum of
four students at each of four local sites annually, each site to run for six
weeks in the summer. The project will be conducted for two years starting in
2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MAA SUMMA program seeks to build on a seven-year
history of assisting faculty to provide mathematics enrichment projects for pre-
college students from underrepresented groups. By offering small-scale programs
at geographically diverse locations, we believe that we can broaden the
participation in summer research programs by students from underrepresented
groups. The MAA and its SUMMA Program, with a focus on undergraduate
mathematics, are uniquely positioned to identify and support faculty to direct
such programs. Initially, research will be done in these subareas of
mathematics: fair division, combinatorial and cooperative game theory, graph
theory, mathematical biology, and knot theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for
increased participation of U.S. citizens in the mathematical sciences requires
that we identify and nurture students from underrepresented groups, both to
serve as professional mathematicians and to serve as role models and mentors for
future generations. With support of faculty mentors and the focused peer-group
experience shared by students participating in this program, the MAA National
Research Experience for Undergraduates Program will encourage and support
broadened participation of these students in graduate studies and careers in
mathematics. Moreover, by supporting faculty at a diverse group of institutions
to direct summer research programs, we are simultaneously supporting the
development of a community of skilled faculty mentors which we expect will lead
to ever-increasing opportunities for undergraduate research. The 48 participants
will significantly increase the pool of minority graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program Contacts:&lt;br/&gt;William Hawkins, MAA
SUMMA Michael Pearson, MAA Programs and Services &lt;br/&gt;bhawkins@maa.org
pearson@maa.org &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Association of America Ph:
202-387-5200&lt;br/&gt;1529 Eighteenth St NW, Washington DC
20036&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robert Megginson,
MSRI&lt;br/&gt;meggin@msri.org&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences
Research Institute Ph: 510-642-0143&lt;br/&gt;1000 Centennial Drive, Berkeley,
CA 94720-5070&lt;br/&gt;