* 0353505
* REU Site in the Biology of the Greater Salt Lake Ecosystems
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* John Cavitt, Weber State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally E. O'Connor
* 04/30/2006
* USD 146,187.00

This NSF-REU Site Program will provide support for ten students to conduct full-
time (ten weeks) independent research collaboratively with a faculty member from
within the College of Science at Weber State University in Ogden, UT. Students
participating in this program will conduct research on the biology of the
Greater Salt Lake Ecosystems (GSLE). Research will be conducted on a diversity
of taxa and at different levels of organization, from the molecular level to the
ecosystem level. The Great Salt Lake (GSL) is located in western North America
at the eastern edge of the Great Basin. The western boundary of the GSL is
bounded by the Great Basin Desert. This area is a vast complex of playas and
includes several unique plant species. The eastern boundary of the GSL valley is
formed by the Wasatch Range of the Rocky Mountains. The lake is tied to the
Wasatch Range by a series of streams and rivers that drain into it. In the
desert west, these rivers create ribbons of riparian habitat, which are critical
migratory and breeding habitats for a variety of wildlife. Furthermore, these
upland areas provide linking habitat types that create the highly productive
marsh ecosystems surrounding the lake. The GSLE supports a diverse biota in a
unique mosaic of upland, wetland, mudflat, river delta, brackish and freshwater
marshes, ephemeral ponds and other habitat types. Our focus on the biology of
the GSLE will foster a sense of community among student researchers who will be
engaged in answering questions and testing hypotheses centered on a common
theme. In addition, students will gain a working knowledge of, and an
appreciation for, a unique and important area. The REU student will participate
in a(n): orientation, seminars on the Biology of the Greater Salt Lake
Ecosystems, Research Tools Workshop, course on Research Ethics, field trips,
social events, and an end-of-program symposium. Each student will pursue
independent research under the supervision of a faculty mentor. Students will
learn the process of science by active involvement in research and come to
understand the sense of community that cooperation in research promotes. After
the summer program, students will have the opportunity to attend a professional
meeting to present their research to national or international audiences. Women
and underrepresented minorities, nontraditional students, and students from
institutions where research opportunities are limited are strongly encouraged to
apply. Visit our NSF-REU website (http://departments.weber.edu/zoology/REU.htm)
for more information on mentors and for an application. Point-of-contact for the
WSU Summer REU Program is Dr. John F. Cavitt, at 801-626-6172 or
jcavitt@weber.edu.