* 0353737
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates REU Site at Kent State University: Liquid Crystals - Synthetic and Natural Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Arne Gericke, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 03/31/2007
* USD 190,631.00

The Chemistry Division award supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site at Kent State University for the summers of 2004-2006. The Division
of Materials Research cofunds this site. Arne Gericke is the site director and
Robert J. Tweig is the co-PI. This site will provide research experiences for 9
students for 10 weeks each summer. The theme of this site is "Liquid Crystals -
Synthetic and Natural Systems. The objective of this interdisciplinary program
is to provide a comprehensive learning experience that has chemistry at its core
and yet seamlessly crosses the disciplinary boundaries of materials science,
biology and chemical physics. Fifteen faculty from the Department of Chemistry
and the Liquid Crystal Institute will serve as research mentors. Weekly
seminars, clean room training, report writing and participation in the end-of-
summer undergraduate research symposium will supplement the research activities.
Recruitment will target smaller colleges in Ohio and neighboring states with
limited research programs, students from underrepresented groups, and students
with special circumstances. The program will be evaluated from entrance, exit
and post-departure surveys, informal interviews and mentor assessments.