* 0353556
* GOALI:      Carnegie Mellon - Morgan Stanley Mathematical Finance Postdoctoral Fellow
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Joseph Langsam, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2007
* USD 98,088.00

GOALI: Carnegie Mellon - Morgan Stanley Mathematical Finance Post-Doctoral
&lt;br/&gt;Fellow&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators will
participate with a post-doctoral fellow &lt;br/&gt;on the development of models
for corporate bond default. There are two &lt;br/&gt;general classes of such
models. In one of these, the models of &lt;br/&gt;"structural form," default
occurs when the value of a firm hits a lower &lt;br/&gt;barrier. These are
intuitively appealing, but in their pure form they &lt;br/&gt;suffer from the
fact that default is never a surprise. The second class &lt;br/&gt;of models,
those of "reduced form," postulate an exogenous event which &lt;br/&gt;triggers
default. These have an intensity of arrival of the default &lt;br/&gt;event, and
the difficulty with these models is constructing this intensity
&lt;br/&gt;process so that the model conforms to market data. This work
&lt;br/&gt;will investigate the behavior of models in which the intensity
process is &lt;br/&gt;driven by two factors, one evolving on a fast time scale
and the other on &lt;br/&gt;a slow time scale. Such models are amenable to
asymptotic analysis as the &lt;br/&gt;fast time scale approaches
infinity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent years have shown that default on financial
obligations is a genuine &lt;br/&gt;possibility, and as a result, many financial
instruments which offer some &lt;br/&gt;form of protection against default have
arisen. These instruments &lt;br/&gt;are a type of derivative security. Pricing
these instruments &lt;br/&gt;and managing the risk associated with them has
become a critical &lt;br/&gt;issue for the banks that issue and trade them. A
number of mathematical &lt;br/&gt;models have been developed for this purpose,
and each of them has certain &lt;br/&gt;drawbacks. Under this grant, the
principal investigators and a post-doctoral &lt;br/&gt;fellow will develop a new
class of models based on a novel approach &lt;br/&gt;that has proved useful in
modeling other types of derivative securities.&lt;br/&gt;