* 0353717
* EMSW21-RTG Research Training in Geometry and Topology at Michigan State University
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2009
* Jon Wolfson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 640,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0353717&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigators: Ronald A. Fintushel, Efstratia Kalfagianni,&lt;br/&gt;Thomas H.
Parker, Jon G. wolfson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is the
enhancement of the research&lt;br/&gt;training environment in geometry and
topology at Michigan State&lt;br/&gt;University. Our goal is to use increased
resources to improve:&lt;br/&gt;1. Recruitment at all levels --- undergraduate,
graduate, and&lt;br/&gt;postdoctoral.&lt;br/&gt;2. Graduate training, especially
in terms of the diversity of&lt;br/&gt;seminars, course offerings, and reducing
the time to obtain a&lt;br/&gt;Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;3. The experience of postdoctoral
fellows and their preparation&lt;br/&gt;for a tenure-track
position.&lt;br/&gt;4. Undergraduate participation with the
Geometry/Topology&lt;br/&gt;research group.&lt;br/&gt;5. Interaction among
students and faculty at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;6. The research environment at all
levels with a regular program&lt;br/&gt;of seminars and visiting
mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;The graduate students and postdoctoral assistants who
will be&lt;br/&gt;mentored under this proposal will contribute to research on
our&lt;br/&gt;main focus, low-dimensional manifolds, using a wide variety
of&lt;br/&gt;techniques including gauge theory, geometric
analysis,&lt;br/&gt;pseudoholomorphic maps, knot invariants, surgery techniques,
and&lt;br/&gt;mapping class groups. Faculty at Michigan State University
as&lt;br/&gt;well as former students and postdoctoral assistants have
taken&lt;br/&gt;part in important advances in this rapidly progressing area,
and&lt;br/&gt;it is expected that future students and postdoctoral fellows
will&lt;br/&gt;continue in this direction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To further
stimulate research, the MSU Geometry/Topology Group&lt;br/&gt;will initiate new
programs for undergraduate and graduate&lt;br/&gt;students and postdoctoral
fellows. The key to these seminars is&lt;br/&gt;the atmosphere of collaborative
learning that has been fostered&lt;br/&gt;by the Geometry/Topology Group over
the last fifteen years. The&lt;br/&gt;broader impact of this proposal will
address the production of&lt;br/&gt;research mathematicians and teachers of
mathematics who are&lt;br/&gt;interested in geometry and topology. The aim is to
create an&lt;br/&gt;environment which encourages all involved to become
better&lt;br/&gt;teachers, better expositors, and better researchers,
and&lt;br/&gt;encourages those entering mathematics to stay in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;