* 0353732
* REU Site:  Undergraduate Research in Behavior, Ecology, and Evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Michael Breed, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2007
* USD 240,084.00

The Mountain Research Station of the University of Colorado at Boulder will host
10 students each summer in a 10-week REU program in Behavior, Ecology and
Evolution. Our goal is to give students the tools needed to understand and
conduct biological research, and to encourage students, particularly those from
groups that are under-represented in the professoriate, to pursue graduate
degrees in biology and, ultimately, careers in teaching and research in colleges
and universities. Recruitment of a culturally diverse group of student
participants will be based on interest in the appropriate disciplines of their
faculty mentors, career goals, and academic achievement. Students in the program
will participate in a one-week intensive orientation to field research and then
will work on faculty-mentored individual projects for the remainder of the
summer. Faculty mentors are drawn from the Department of Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology at the University of Colorado, Boulder, have active
research programs, and are committed to mentoring undergraduate students.
Student projects may focus on issues such as water quality and community ecology
in alpine lakes and streams, biogeochemistry and community ecology of alpine and
subalpine terrestrial ecosystems, the evolution of plant adaptations for
reproduction and survival in montane environments, the behavioral ecology of
social insects and birds, and the evolution of mate choice in fish. We treat our
REU students as colleagues, with the expectation that they will join the
research community and be able to contribute on an equal footing with graduate
students, post-docs, and faculty. We provide background and experience to
students who wish to advance their careers in science. The success of our
program hinges on having students finish the ten weeks with a full knowledge of
the scientific process and with complete confidence in their ability to
implement the process. The summer culminates in student presentations of their
results in a scientific meeting format. The Mountain Research Station, located
at 3000 meters elevation in the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains, is 45
minutes from the University's Boulder campus. The adjacent Niwot Ridge Biosphere
Reserve is home to an NSF-Long Term Ecological Research site. Our participants
live in rustic cabins in a camp that is frequented by deer, elk, and other
wildlife, but have access to world-class research facilities at the Station and
the Boulder campus. For further information and application materials, please
contact Prof. Michael breed at michael.breed@colorado.edu, (303) 492-7687, or
visit http://www.colorado.edu/eeb/EEBprojects/reu/.