* 0353696
* REU SITES-Molecular and Cellular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* George O'Toole, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2007
* USD 128,800.00

The Molecular and Cellular Biology Program at Dartmouth will host 6-8 students
for a valuable and enriching summer research experience. Our program provides an
opportunity for undergraduates from across the country to come to Dartmouth for
ten weeks during the summer to participate in research in the biological
sciences. Dartmouth values teaching and student-faculty interaction in addition
to excellent research. Students participate in research in the labs within the
Molecular and Cellular Biology (MCB) program, with research topics that include
microbiology, developmental biology, plant biology, genetics, biochemistry,
immunology and evolutionary biology. Students can choose from over 20 possible
faculty mentors and will work side-by-side with faculty and graduate students to
gain hands-on experience in experimental design, bench research and science
writing. Key goals of our program are to give students a real feeling for what
it is like to be a graduate student and to encourage students to pursue a career
in research. Summer program students are selected primarily from groups
typically underrepresented in the sciences and from institutions that do not
have available research opportunities. Our program integrates a robust
laboratory research experience with career development activities. Students will
have opportunities to interact with members of the MCB program (faculty,
graduate students and other REU students), attend seminars on such topics as
preparing for and applying to graduate school and science ethics, and present
their summer research at a student symposium. The Kaplan GRE preparation course
is included in our summer program and students can take the GRE exam at the end
of the summer. Dartmouth College, situated in the beautiful Upper Valley of New
Hampshire, is an hour from the White Mountains National Forest, two hours from
Boston, three hours from Montreal and four hours from New York City. Students
attending the program will be provided with a stipend, room, food allowance and
travel reimbursement. For further information and application materials, please
contact Dr. George O'Toole at georgeo@Dartmouth.edu or (603) 650-1248, or visit
http://www.dartmouth.edu/~surf. This site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.