* 0353911
* REU Site:  Ecology and Evolutionary Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Val Smith, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2007
* USD 217,432.00

Ten students will be recruited from across the United States to participate in a
ten week summer program at the Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology at
the University of Kansas (KU). The program is open to all undergraduate
students, and summer stipends, room and board, travel, and financial support to
help defray research costs are provided. During the ten-week program, each
student will develop and carry out an independent research project that explores
an important issue in ecology or evolutionary biology. Although most of these
summer research experiences will be based at locations within the U.S., our REU
program also offers the potential for an integrated international research
experience through a cooperative arrangement with KU's Natural History Museum
and Biodiversity Center. All students will also participate in common field
trips, social activities, career discussions, weekly seminars, and other
opportunities to present their research as it progresses. At the end of the ten-
week session, the students will present their findings at a formal KU research
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;Our students will live as a group in University housing, in
close association with students from KU's other REU programs, in order to
encourage interactions among students from different disciplines. This REU site
is intended to enhance the undergraduate education and professional development
of a diverse set of students who might not otherwise have the opportunity to
participate in a research experience. It is also intended to support
individualized training for potential members of the next generation of U.S.
researchers in the areas of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, and to contribute
to the enhancement of ethnic and cultural diversity in the sciences. Financial
support is provided for our REU students to present their research at scientific
meetings, and we will strongly encourage each student to submit their results
for publication in peer-reviewed scientific journals. Women and students from
underrepresented groups are strongly encouraged to apply. For more information,
students should contact the site's Program Director, Dr. Val Smith
(vsmith@ku.edu or (785) 864-4565), our Program Assistant, Sharon Green
(greensl@ku.edu or (785) 864-5888), or visit
http://www.ku.edu/~reu/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;