* 0353360
* Mathematics Specialist in K-5 Schools:  Research and Policy Pilot Study
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2011
* Patricia Campbell, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Edith Gummer
* 05/31/2011
* USD 4,444,898.00

"Mathematics Specialist in K-5 Schools: Research and Policy Pilot Study," a
five-year Teacher Professional Continuum Research and Development on Models and
Systems project, seeks to develop and test a statewide K-5 school-based
Mathematics Specialist program. The project is a statewide collaboration between
Virginia Commonwealth University, the lead institution; Norfolk State
University, a historically black college; the University of Virginia in
Charlottesville; the University of Maryland and three school districts --
Portsmouth Public Schools, Richmond Public Schools and Stafford County Public
Schools. The centerpiece of the project is the preparation, support and
deployment of two cohorts of twelve mathematics specialists through a graduate
degree program and follow-up support. The research component will investigate
the efficacy of the mathematics specialist program on teacher change and student
achievement. A policy study will examine legislative, regulatory, and
infrastructure needs and funding issues including a cost and benefits analysis
related to the establishment of a statewide mathematics specialist program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design utilizes a stratified randomized
control study. The research examines the effectiveness of the mathematics
specialists' program on teacher change, both specialists and classroom teachers,
and student achievement. Thirty-six elementary schools in three diverse school
districts in the state of Virginia will participate in the study. Participating
schools are organized into triples with each triple residing in the same school
district and having similar mathematics achievement and student demographics.
Within each triple, schools will be randomly assigned to one of three treatment
categories -- Cohort I mathematics specialists, Cohort II mathematics
specialists and a Control group. Data analysis involves a mixed methods
approach. Student demographics, school demographics and teacher data will be
used as control variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the potential to
serve as a national model for elementary school mathematics specialists. The
state endorsement of a mathematics specialist license enhances the timing of
this proposal and underscores the relevance of the policy implications. Project
sustainability is addressed through the development of a statewide masters
degree program offered by the collaborating institutions of higher education.
The involvement of an HBCU, Norfolk State University, addresses the need to
diversify the teacher workforce. An advisory board will give direction to the
project that reflects expertise in mathematics teacher preparation and
development, equity and diversity, mathematics educational research, design and
implementation of courses and statewide collaborations. An external evaluator
will conduct both formative and summative evaluation. Dissemination will reach a
broad audience including policy makers, researchers and
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;