* 0354003
* REU Site:  The Athienou Archaeological Project, Cyprus
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Michael Toumazou, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 01/31/2008
* USD 225,000.00

The Athienou Archaeological REU Site in Cyprus has been investigating long-term
culture change in central Cyprus since 1990. This multidisciplinary undertaking
combines field training in archaeological methods (excavation and survey) with
analyses of the natural and cultural contexts of ritual and secular use of the
ancient and modern landscape. The specific problem that guides the project's
research agenda is the degree to which rural areas were assimilated into
regional and interregional economic, political, social, and religious networks
of exchange. A focus on regions is essential to such considerations since it is
only by comparison to events in other parts of Cyprus and elsewhere in the
eastern Mediterranean that past and present human activity in the area of
Athienou makes sense. While the Athienou region and in fact Cyprus as a whole
may be viewed as marginal in the evolution of western civilization, the project
area&lt;br/&gt;can, nonetheless, be seen as a laboratory for the study of
culture change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ten outstanding undergraduate students are
provided with the opportunity to join this Site and (1) receive instruction in
survey and excavation techniques (e.g., remote sensing, computer-assisted
mapping), record keeping and data management, and artifact analysis, (2)
participate in seminars taught by specialists on archaeological method and
theory and the cultural history of Cyprus and the Eastern Mediterranean,
(3)&lt;br/&gt;visit archaeological sites and museums on the island, (4) plan and
complete an independent research project bearing on the work of AAP, and (5)
live in Athienou and learn about life in modern Cyprus. A part of their
experience with AAP, the students find themselves at the intellectual vortex
created by the presence of many international scholars representing the fields
of Social Sciences (archaeology and history), Humanities (literature, and art)
and Natural Sciences (chemistry, geophysics and biology) working towards a
common goal. Thus the students benefit enormously not only through their
interaction with different disciplines, but learn the value of cooperation
across disciplines and cross-fertilization of ideas. By the end of the 7-week
experience students will have gained a deep understanding of the methods of
archaeological theory and of field research, including most recent approaches to
data collection and analysis. Their undertaking of independent research -
sometimes on artifacts brought to light by themselves or their peers - and carry
it through with the aim of publication will give them confidence in their
abilities to work as scientists, and accomplish set goals. This mentally and
physically demanding program prepares the students for productive careers in
archaeology or related fields, or in whatever other career they
pursue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Site's broader impact to society is manifest in
many other ways. Through site tours led by the staff to K-12 school children,
public lectures and articles in the media, the Project contributes immensely in
educating people on the importance of archaeological remains and helps stem
illicit looting for profit. The cross-cultural interaction between the staff and
students on the one hand, and the local population on the other, helps forge
lasting friendships and bridges of understanding between the US and Cyprus. This
award contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented
students into careers in science through active undergraduate research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;