* 0354573
* SGER:    Temporal Variability in Natural and Anthropogenic Disturbances at McMurdo Station, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2005
* Mahlon Kennicutt, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 11/30/2005
* USD 50,000.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will focus on the collection of the
crucial next set of observations that will aid in establishing natural and human
induced environmental variability in terrestrial and marine systems at McMurdo
Station, Antarctica. Under the Antarctic Treaty, nations are required to
document the impacts of human activity in Antarctica. The exploratory nature of
the current project results from the recent synthesis of results from a pilot
project that required extensive time and effort to develop a statistically
robust program design. The project has extreme urgency in order to access the
austral summer season at McMurdo Station to evaluate an environmental monitoring
program to be implemented for the U.S. Antarctic Program. One year of sampling
has already been missed and further gaps will compromise the ability to detect
trends over time. Thus, the unavoidable delay put the continuity of the time
series data in jeopardy; therefore, a one season sampling effort is critical for
a final assessment of the study design. Monitoring provides the objective
information needed to make timely and informed management decisions regarding
support and science operations. A basic precept in understanding human induced
changes in natural systems is that they occur against a back drop of natural
variability that would occur whether or not there was an anthropogenic
perturbation. The causes of change cannot be unambiguously determined unless
natural variability is defined. Variability occurs across a continuum of space
and time that requires long-term observations to identify changes in system
attributes. Previous studies of the spatial variability of the McMurdo Station
environment provide an opportunity to establish the extent of temporal
variability in terrestrial and marine systems. A series of 163 terrestrial
samples will be collected for hydrocarbons, trace metals and carbon analyses at
fixed point and random sample locations. Three transects of three stations
offshore of the station will be sampled for chemical contaminants, sediment
properties, benthic infaunal assemblages, and assayed for toxicity. The data
will be analyzed by multi-variate statistics to establish temporal variability
and test the design elements of a longer term program of observations. These
studies will increase our understanding of the physical, chemical, and
biological processes that are critical in defining system variability over space
and time. The broader impacts of the project are multi-faceted. The study will
fulfill both national and international requirements for environmental
protection under domestic law and the Protocol on the Environment of the
Antarctic Treaty. The conduct of the field activities and the analysis of
samples will be used to train undergraduate and graduate students in the
laboratory. The project will be a part of the College of Geosciences' "Adopt a
School Program" that allows K-12 students to interact with and follow the
program from initiation to completion, especially during the field activities.
The field activities are chronicled in near real-time on the World Wide Web.