* 0354017
* REU Site: An Integrative Faculty/Student Research Program in Biology at Berry College
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2007
* Patricia Tomlinson, Berry College
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2007
* USD 166,244.00

Berry College will host 6, 8 and 10 students, in the summers of 2004, 2005, and
2006 respectively in 10-week REU internship programs in biology. Our program is
designed to provide hands-on research opportunities for undergraduates,
particularly those from groups traditionally underrepresented in the sciences.
Student selection will be based on research interests, career goals, and
academic achievement. We will recruit students in a manner that will ensure a
culturally diverse group of participants, with at least one student each summer
who is training to become a high school biology teacher. The core of the
internship will be a broad program in basic and applied biological research,
designed to take advantage of Berry's key resources (a new state-of-the-art
science facility, a faculty highly active in faculty-student research, and a
28,000 acre campus). Research projects will include studies of striped bass
migration and spawning, the biological vectors of Trypanosoma, movement and
vocalization patterns of coyote, the effects of fire management on mountain
longleaf pine restoration, and studies of the physiology of oak seedling
development - among others. Most studies take advantage of Berry's enormous
campus and its diversity of natural habitats. While at Berry, students will
participate in a weekly seminar series designed to improve communication skills,
explore biological ethics, and orient them to graduate schools and careers in
biology. Students will complete the program by presenting a research seminar at
an on-campus symposium, a formal presentation at a regional, national, or
international meeting, and by collaborating in the preparation of a scientific
manuscript. For further information and application materials, please contact
Dr. Martin Cipollini at mcipollini@berry.edu, phone (706) 290-2149, or visit
http://www2.berry.edu/academics/science/biology/index.asp.