* 0354538
* Workshop on n-Categories: Foundations and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* John Baez, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0354538&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: J. Peter May and John C. Baez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2004 Summer
Program of the Institute for Mathematics and its&lt;br/&gt;Applications is on
"n-Categories: Foundations and Applications," to be&lt;br/&gt;held in
Minneapolis, Minnesota at the Institute's facilities at the&lt;br/&gt;University
of Minnesota - Twin Cities. This award provides&lt;br/&gt;participant support to
augment the summer program's membership and to&lt;br/&gt;make it possible for a
group of workshop participants to join the lead&lt;br/&gt;organizer and his
students in a post-workshop working session at the&lt;br/&gt;University of
Chicago. The proposal describes the emerging theory of&lt;br/&gt;n-categories as
an area of international attention but of relatively&lt;br/&gt;little presence
in the U.S. The Institute's summer program and the&lt;br/&gt;subsequent working
session particularly aim to expose U.S. students&lt;br/&gt;and junior
researchers to the variety of ideas on n-categories being&lt;br/&gt;pursued
internationally. The post-workshop working group is an&lt;br/&gt;attempt to
focus heightened energies resulting from the workshop onto&lt;br/&gt;problems of
greatest promise, as identified during the workshop, and&lt;br/&gt;is an
innovation whose progress will be watched with
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical idea of a "category" is a
versatile notion defined in&lt;br/&gt;the mid-20th century to encapsulate the
common features of a large&lt;br/&gt;variety of mathematical objects. Although
abstract, the ideas of&lt;br/&gt;category theory are widely useful because they
facilitate knowledge&lt;br/&gt;transfer from one domain to another, for example,
from algebra to&lt;br/&gt;theoretical computer science. At the end of the 20th
century several&lt;br/&gt;complicated notions of "n-category" had come into play
to meet the&lt;br/&gt;needs of several areas of algebra, geometry, and physical
theory, but&lt;br/&gt;we do not have a definition yet of "n-category" that is as
broadly&lt;br/&gt;applicable as the original idea. The expository and research
work of&lt;br/&gt;the leaders of this summer program aims to achieve that
missing&lt;br/&gt;synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;