* 0354213
* NEW PRECURSORS FOR ATOMIC LAYER DEPOSITION OF METALS
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Roy Gordon, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 03/31/2007
* USD 180,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a method for
constructing thin layers of materials atom by atom, providing exquisitely
detailed control over the nano-structure and composition of the layers. In ALD,
two reactant vapors are supplied alternately to a surface on which they react to
form thin layers. Films with highly uniform thickness and composition and sharp
interfaces can be deposited over large areas and even within very narrow holes.
However, ALD processes are known for only a few metals. We propose to discover
and develop ALD precursors and processes for depositing many metals, including
chromium, manganese, tantalum, iron, ruthenium, cobalt, nickel, copper and
silver, for which no ALD processes are known. These new precursors will also be
tested for ALD of metal compounds of interest in semiconductor microelectronics,
such as lanthanum oxide, praseodymium oxide, titanium nitride and tantalum
nitride.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;ALD of metals may form
the basis for future devices for both the processing and the storage of
information. ALD of copper, cobalt and tantalum films may become a key to
further miniaturization of copper wires on semiconductor chips. Metal nitrides
are needed as conformal diffusion barriers and as conformal contacts in
capacitors containing metal oxides with high dielectric constants. Future
magnetic data storage may be integrated with the silicon semiconductor chips
that process this data. The proposed research should help to supply the
scientific base for the realization of these hopes, as well as providing
relevant training for undergraduates, graduate students and post-doctoral
fellows.&lt;br/&gt;