* 0354822
* Quantum chromodynamics in nuclear and polarized scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2009
* George Sterman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 09/30/2009
* USD 336,463.00

This proposal requests the support of one research associate and one student to
work with senior participants on topics in quantum chromodynamics (QCD) relevant
to ongoing experiments that are carried out at the Brookhaven, Jefferson and
Fermi National Laboratories and the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, as well
as at international laboratories present and planned. These experiments, involve
colliding nuclei and/or nucleons (protons and neutrons). They test basic
properties of matter, through the investigation of how the elementary particles,
quarks and gluons, which moved freely at the earliest stages of the expanding
universe, became bound ('confined') to make up neutrons and protons (nucleons).
Nucleons in turn constitute the nuclei of all atoms. Also, by polarizing
(aligning the spin of) nucleons that are collided, experiments shed light on
their internal structure in novel ways. QCD is generally accepted as the
controlling theory for the formation of nucleons and nuclei, but the mechanisms
by which it acts to confine quarks and produce new particles in collisions are
not fully understood, and is one of the most important challenges in theoretical
physics. The proposed research will help to synthesize and extend existing
theoretical methods from elementary particle and nuclear physics in this area
during a period in which experiments are being performed and analyzed. Progress
resulting from this project may also have impact on several related theoretical
areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide an ideal opportunity for
broadening contact between the nuclear and high energy communities, and between
theory and experiment. It is characterized by integrated research and training,
and will provide career-enhancing opportunities for the junior participants. The
professional environment of this work will emphasize intra- and inter-field
communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;