* 0354430
* Career Trajectories of Master's Degree Recipients in the Sciences
* SBE,NCSE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Shirley Malcom, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Pollak
* 08/31/2008
* USD 109,861.00

"Graduate education in the US is in a period of change and likely to look quite
different in the next 15-20 years, as students, programs, and science continue
to evolve. However, we lack research findings on many key issues to guide
change." That was the conclusion of an NSF workshop on the future of graduate
education held in March 2003. As the structure of the U.S. economy changes, as
the participants in higher education change, and as market pressures induce
educational institutions to create new programs and practices, there is an
increasing need to generate a body of comprehensive knowledge about graduate
education. Currently, most of the research done on graduate education in the
United States involves doctoral-level studies. However, an area of graduate
education that has long been neglected is the master's degree, often called the
"forgotten degree." In many fields of science, individuals holding master's
degrees have been relegated to "second-class" or "consolation prize" status by
administrators and faculty in higher education, and subsequently by researchers
as well. In 2001, only one out of five master's degrees awarded was in a science
and engineering field and only 34,960 (7.5%) of the 466,645 master's degrees
awarded were in the natural sciences. In contrast 12,496 doctorates (30.7%) out
of 40,744 total Ph.D.s were awarded in the natural sciences in 2001. There are
good reasons to focus on master's degrees. Our nation's graduate schools have
been particularly effective in producing research, but are not well connected to
the needs of the U.S. economy and U.S. employers. The difficult job market faced
by many new Ph.D.s and postdocs, the growth of part-time and adjunct faculty,
the 8-9 year average time now needed to acquire a doctoral degree in the
sciences followed by long postdoctoral periods, the suitability of present
graduate training for non-academic jobs, and the 50% non-completion rate of
doctoral degrees suggests a mismatch between career options and educational
choices in the sciences. The sizable attrition rate of science and engineering
bachelor's degree holders from our science and engineering workforce is also
problematic.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed study would comprehensively examine the
master's degree as it is currently configured using NSF's SESTAT and WebCASPAR
databases, augmented by statistical data sources from other government agencies
(e.g., U.S. Census Bureau, Bureau of Labor Statistics, National Center for
Education Statistics) to gain a complete picture of who earns a master's degree,
why, from where, and the impact the degree has had on their overall career path,
as well as a national perspective on the value of master's degrees to the
overall U.S. economy. This statistical study would serve as the background for a
more qualitative look at AAAS members who have a master's degree as their
highest degree. Currently AAAS has 5,226 regular members at the master's level
(excluding student memberships). A subgroup of these members would be chosen for
structured telephone interviews to ascertain their reasons for getting a
master's degree, what it has meant for their careers, and what support
mechanisms have helped them along the way.

Broader Impact: Our ultimate goal is to inform the creation of a wider variety
of postbaccalaureate options by a well-researched examination of where the
master's degree has succeeded to date. By building on these results, this study
could generate recommendations for constructing viable and respectable master's
degree programs in the sciences, and hopefully increase interest on the part of
U.S. undergraduates in careers in science and math. Perhaps the sizeable
attrition among students bright enough to do science and math comes from too
narrow a set of career options presented to them.