* 0354140
* REU Site:  Biology Educator and Student Training-Team Experience in Research Program (BEST-TERP)
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Mike Woller, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2007
* USD 161,785.00

The University of Wisconsin-Whitewater will host 12 participants each summer in
a 10-week REU program in one of two areas of Biological Research: Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology or Molecular, Cell and Neurobiology. Our program is
designed to provide hands-on research opportunities for teams of participants
consisting of high school teachers, undergraduates, and select high school
students. Applicants will be recruited from pools of traditionally
underrepresented groups in the sciences. Recruitment will be based on interest
in the work in one or more of the research labs, career goals, and academic
achievement. Application selection will be structured to ensure diversity while
emphasizing opportunities for in-service and pre-service educators. The 10
faculty who will serve as mentors in the program have active research programs
including evolutionary aspects of mate choice, molecular analysis of plant
pathogens, and mechanisms of brain reward systems. Participants in the REU
program will be able to: 1) distinguish between investigative science and dated
accepted facts called "science knowledge", 2) demonstrate skilled
laboratory/field work, 3) independently progress from a research problem to
developing a research question, form a hypothesis, and test the hypothesis, 4)
develop an appreciation of investigative science and methods, 5) provide an
articulate discussion of ethics, 6) organize the laboratory bench/site for
research, 7) deliver an effective oral presentation, and 8) conduct data
analysis and present results as a scientific poster. The University of
Wisconsin-Whitewater is a campus of 11,000 students in a small community in
rural southeastern Wisconsin with a reputation for an active environment for
undergraduate research. For further information and application materials,
please contact Dr. Mike Woller at wollerm@uww.edu or 262-472-5137, or visit
http://academics.uww.edu/biology/TERP.html.