* 0354600
* FRG:  Collaborative Research in Algorithms for Sparse Data Representation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Anna Gilbert, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2008
* USD 317,808.00

The investigators address the mathematical underpinnings of compressing large
data sets using sparse representations over rich dictionaries and develop a
foundation for classifying these problems in terms of their algorithmic
complexity. The investigators also find efficient algorithms for computing high-
quality sparse representations of data over sophisticated, commonly used
dictionaries that provably perform as claimed with respect to both efficiency
and correctness of output and are particularly well-suited for massive data set
applications. The research proceeds at multiple levels of abstraction. It
considers general factors of a representation class that guarantee or preclude
such algorithms, it considers algorithms for specific common representation
classes, and it finds algorithms for representation classes adapted to specific
common (and diverse) applications, such as solutions of partial differential
equations, image processing, and database query
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past ten years there has been a
dramatic increase in data gathering mechanisms, as well as an ever-increasing
demand for finer data analysis in applications that rely on scientific and
geometric modeling. Each day, literally millions of large data sets are
generated in medical imaging, surveillance, and scientific acquisition. In
addition, the internet has become a communication medium with vast capacity,
generating massive traffic data sets. The usefulness of these data sets rests on
our ability to process them efficiently, whether it be for storage,
transmission, visual display, fast on-line graphical query, correlation, or
registration against data from other modalities. The current state of the art in
data processing is far from providing the efficient and faithful representations
required in emerging applications. With few exceptions, previous work has not
provided algorithms whose efficiency or output quality, though typically
validated experimentally, has been analyzed rigorously and thoroughly. The
investigators carry out fundamental mathematical and algorithmic research to
significantly increase our capacity to process and manage large data sets. The
research makes significant mathematical progress in providing rigorous
algorithmic results that are of great need in this field. The research also
makes significant improvements through highly efficient algorithms in the sizes
of data sets that are analyzable and in the types of data processing tasks that
can be carried out. Finally, the investigators create a library of software for
massive data processing applications.&lt;br/&gt;