* 0354924
* Conference:  Algebraic Cycles, K-Theory and Modular Representation Theory:  Progress and Prospects; September 16-19, 2004
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Roy Joshua, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2005
* USD 12,100.00

DMS-0354924 Roy Joshua

This grant will partially support a conference which will bring together many of
the world's leading mathematicians to survey current developments, report on
recent progress, and anticpate future developments in algebraic cycles, K-theory
and modular representation theory. The link between these topics is the blend of
algebra and algebraic geometry, influenced by techniques and motivation from
algebraic topology. Progress in algebraic cycles, with related results in
algebraic K-theory, has been dramatic. The principal contributors to motivic
cohomology which underlies this progress, Bloch, Suslin, and Voevodsky, have
agreed to participate. Related investigations include work of Lawson,
Lichtenbaum, Walker, and Weibel, all of whom have agreed to participate.
Developments in modular representation theory involving cohomological techniques
such as support varieties have also generated considerable excitement, and some
of the leading researchers in this area (Benson, Nakano and Parshall) will also
participate in this conference.

The occasion of this conference is the 60th birthday of Eric Friedlander; the
venue is Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, from Thursday, September
16- Sunday September 19, 2004. Indeed, most of the lecturers will be
mathematicians who have collaborated with Friedlander on aspects of the topics
mentioned above. The conference plans to support participation by a number of
young people, at both the post-doctoral and advanced graduate student level, so
that it will serve to stimulate increased interest and participation in these
exciting mathematical topics. For details please see
http://www.math.northwestern.edu/conferences/friedlander