* 0354941
* Particle Astrophysics with VERITAS
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Rene Ong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 03/31/2009
* USD 916,609.00

This proposal is to support researchers at the University of California, Los
Angeles (UCLA) to participate in the VERITAS gamma-ray telescope project.
VERITAS (Very Energetic Radiation Imaging Telescope Array System) consists of
four atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes presently under construction at a mountain
site in southern Arizona. Mounted in the focal plane of each telescope is an
array of fast light detecting sensors. VERITAS detects high-energy gamma rays
from the products of their interactions in the atmosphere. A gamma-ray creates a
shower of particles in the atmosphere, most of which are moving faster than the
speed of light in air. These particles radiate Cherenkov light that propagates
to the ground in a short flash. For very brief periods of time (few
nanoseconds), this flash is brighter than the night sky background light,
allowing VERITAS to detect them on clear, moonless
nights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of very high-energy gamma-ray astronomy
has been revolutionized in the last decade by discoveries made by NASA's Compton
Gamma Ray Observatory in space and by ground-based Cherenkov telescopes built
with support from the National Science Foundation and the Department of Energy.
We have discovered many new sources that produce very high-energy radiation,
including active galaxies, gamma-ray bursts, supernova remnants, and pulsars.
The energies in the detected gamma rays are comparable to or exceed the energies
produced in man-made accelerators. Thus the astrophysics sources typically
involve harnessing the enormous energies contained near black holes or energies
produced in the explosions of massive stars. In spite of these exciting
discoveries, however, there is still a great deal that we do not understand -
for example, we do not fully understand how these extremely violent systems
work, and to date only a few percent of the overhead sky has been surveyed with
sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VERITAS represents a major step forward in our
ability to detect and understand the sources of these very high-energy
particles. The VERITAS array will be able to discover sources that are ten times
fainter than previously detected. The fact that each Cherenkov shower will be
viewed by multiple telescopes greatly improves the telescope's ability to
determine the direction and energy of the incoming gamma ray. VERITAS' four
telescopes will be constructed between 2003 and 2006. When completed, VERITAS
will be the most sensitive instrument ever built for astronomy at these
wavelengths. The UCLA group is playing a major role in the construction of
VERITAS, participating in the development of the electronics to read out the
telescope sensors and in the development of computer software to analyze the
telescope data and to simulate the telescope performance. Our efforts will
involve both graduate students and postdoctoral research associates. In
addition, UCLA will have a major involvement in the VERITAS Outreach Program,
which is currently under development.&lt;br/&gt;