* 0354776
* Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* George Sterman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Cooper
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,479,000.00

This group proposal has two parts, one is to investigate supersymmetric field
theories and String Theories to better understand their properties, and second
to understand the phenomenological consequences of the Standard Model (QCD) as
well as non-standard generalizations. Part of the proposal is to understand the
recent non-standard model experimental fact that neutrinos have mass. A major
effort to understand present neutrino oscillation experiences both long base
line, solar and atmospheric data to put constraints and alternative scenarios
for explaining neutrino masses and mixing. Sources of electroweak symmetry
breaking will be investigated and the properties and constraints on alternative
scenarios for symmetry breaking will be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
String theory research will focus on the effect of boundary conditions on filed
theories in spaces with boundaries, solitons, in non-commutative spaces as well
as dualities and AdS/CFT correspondences. Detailed study will be made of String
Theories with N=2 and N=3 Supersymmetry. The covariant quantization of the Green
Schwarz superstring will also be investigated. A rigorous way to study quantum
corrections to the masses of Solitons, vortices and eventually branes are being
developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QCD projects are connected with understanding
collider physics experiments. To better analyze these experiments it is
necessary to calculate perturbatively next to next to leading order
contributions to the partonic cross sections, and to apply resummation
techniques to these results. These are important for understanding the
production of the Higgs, minijets as well as dileptons at RHIC&lt;br/&gt;