* 0354259
* EMSW21-RTG: Research Training Group in Mathematical and Computational Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2012
* James Keener, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 2,397,573.00

0354259 Keener&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Training in Mathematical and
Computational Biology&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
and his colleagues will continue development of a comprehensive program of
cross-disciplinary research and training in Mathematical and Computational
Biology. The goal of this program is to bring to bear the power of mathematics
on the challenging problems of modern biology by initiating collaborative
research projects with a wide variety of laboratory life scientists and by
training young mathematicians and computational scientists in the art of cross-
disciplinary research. The research program will develop and use mathematical
and computational models to study complex biological processes, organized around
four major research themes of biofluids, ecology and evolutionary biology,
neuroscience and physiology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will begin to
address the critical need for more people with high-level mathematical skills
who have the ability to contribute in a significant way to the many challenging
problems of biological and medical significance. The program will impact young
mathematical scientists at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels,
and will provide an environment in which collaboration across levels and across
disciplines is the norm rather than the exception. Research projects will
involve investigators from several fields with the result that all participants
will receive mentoring from several individuals. Educational and training
activities supporting this research will include coursework, journal clubs,
laboratory group meetings (SIG's or Special Interest Groups), seminars and
workshops, laboratory experience and internships. Together, these vehicles of
training will help to develop young researchers with a broad knowledge of
mathematical and computational biology coupled with expertise in specific
biological problems. The long-term effect of this program will be to produce a
new generation of applied mathematical scientists who will work effectively to
build bridges between traditional disciplines and academia, industry and the
public sector.&lt;br/&gt;