* 0354373
* FRG:  Collaborative Research in Semiclassical Asymptotic Questions in Integrable Nonlinear Wave Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Peter Miller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2009
* USD 314,837.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0354373 FRG: Collaborative Research in
Semiclassical Asymptotic Questions in Integrable Nonlinear Wave Theory
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peter Miller, Kenneth McLaughlin and Jared
Bronski&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of applied mathematics is the study of
equations of scientific,&lt;br/&gt;engineering or industrial interest in a
mathematically rigorous way.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding such equations often
requires considering&lt;br/&gt;a limit in which certain parameters approach
zero. While&lt;br/&gt;some of these problems behave in a predictable manner in
the&lt;br/&gt;limit, other interesting and important problems involve
unstable&lt;br/&gt;behavior that becomes less and less predictable the smaller
the&lt;br/&gt;parameter of interest becomes. One of the best illustrations of
this&lt;br/&gt;concept is the behavior of fluid flows when the viscous drag is
small,&lt;br/&gt;and the fluid behaves in a turbulent and chaotic
way.&lt;br/&gt;The primary model under study in this project is the
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;Schrodinger equation, which is a fundamental model for the
study of&lt;br/&gt;pulses in optical fibers. The small parameter limit for
this&lt;br/&gt;model corresponds to the limit of ultra-short pulse propagation,
which&lt;br/&gt;is expected to find many applications to high-speed
telecommunications.&lt;br/&gt;This limit is known as the semiclassical
limit.&lt;br/&gt;This project constitutes an in-depth study of initial-value
problems&lt;br/&gt;for several partial differential equations (PDEs) in the
semiclassical&lt;br/&gt;limit. Existing formal theories fail because they lead
to model problems that are&lt;br/&gt;ill-posed and thus make no prediction at
all for reasonable initial&lt;br/&gt;conditions. The goal of this project is to
develop asymptotic&lt;br/&gt;theories that are not based on any particular
ansatz and do not&lt;br/&gt;require unphysical conditions on the initial data.
Among the problems&lt;br/&gt;under attack is the rigorous semiclassical analysis
of the focusing&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear Schroedinger equation for general data, a
problem that is&lt;br/&gt;generally considered to be one of the most important
open problems in&lt;br/&gt;the field of integrable systems. The specific aims of
the project&lt;br/&gt;include the development of new ansatz-free methods of
asymptotic&lt;br/&gt;analysis --- for spectral theory and for Riemann-Hilbert
problems of&lt;br/&gt;inverse-scattering theory --- that are insensitive to
analyticity&lt;br/&gt;properties of the initial data, and have a
"nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;Riemann-Lebesgue" character, directly exploiting
cancellation due to&lt;br/&gt;oscillations where analytic deformations are
impossible. These&lt;br/&gt;techniques, once developed, will also have important
repercussions in&lt;br/&gt;fields that are only tangentially related, for
example, the theory of&lt;br/&gt;orthogonal polynomials of large degree and the
statistical analysis of&lt;br/&gt;large random
matrices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the proposed work is to develop
predictive tools that&lt;br/&gt;apply to extremely unstable systems when the
initial conditions&lt;br/&gt;are rough or noisy. An example of such a system is
the one governing the&lt;br/&gt;propagation of ultrashort data pulses in certain
optical fibers, and&lt;br/&gt;therefor any new insights into such systems will
have repercussions&lt;br/&gt;in the field of telecommunications. Some of the
problems we propose to&lt;br/&gt;study admit a detailed analysis because they
are idealized and can in some&lt;br/&gt;sense be solved exactly; however our
work is also expected to lead to general&lt;br/&gt;methods that are applicable
to less idealized systems.&lt;br/&gt;These techniques will also have important
implications in mathematical&lt;br/&gt;fields that are only tangentially
related, for example, the theory of&lt;br/&gt;orthogonal polynomials of large
degree and the statistical analysis of&lt;br/&gt;large random matrices.This
project also has an important educational&lt;br/&gt;aspect. We plan to involve
both graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in&lt;br/&gt;this work, and
the advanced training of the next generation of researchers&lt;br/&gt;is an
important component of this proposal. We also plan
an&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary workshop to further disseminate the results of
this work beyond the&lt;br/&gt;boundaries of the mathematical
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;