* 0354489
* Brown v. Board of Education Conference: Psychological Research Applied to the Problems of Racism and Discrimination
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Glenn Adams, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2005
* USD 2,000.00

In one of the most important examples of psychological research applied to
public policy, the U. S. Supreme Court in 1954, announced the landmark decision
in Brown v. Board of Education that made racial segregation illegal in the
United States. The Social Psychology Program at the University of Kansas is
hosting a conference on May 13-14, 2004 to mark the 50th anniversary of this
decision. One goal of the conference is to critically reflect upon past work-
such as research about the effects of desegregation on educational outcomes and
intergroup conflict-that has applied a psychological perspective to problems of
racism and discrimination. Another goal of the conference is to describe and
publicize ongoing work-such as research on the psychological effects of
affirmative action-that continues to apply a psychological perspective to
problems of racism and discrimination. The final goal of the conference is to
draw upon research in a variety of social science disciplines to highlight
emerging directions-such as Latino or Indigenous Nations perspectives on racism-
for future application of a psychological perspective to problems of racism and
discrimination. The unifying purpose of the conference is to energize
psychologists and researchers in related fields to respond to the pressing need
for socially relevant research that serves the needs of local communities while
enhancing national unity in the spirit represented by Brown v. Board of
Education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;