* 0354420
* SLC Center:    Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center:   Studying Robust Learning with Learning Experiments in Real Classrooms
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2012
* David Klahr, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rosanna Guadagno
* 09/30/2012
* USD 25,137,245.00

The Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center (PSLC) addresses a pervasive problem
in learning research -- that few if any research results survive the transition
from the laboratory to the classroom, from one research and development setting
to another, or from one content domain to the next. Learning research has no
shortage of rigorous laboratory results and associated principles, or of
realistic classroom design experiments and associated course innovations, but
there is a persistent shortage of experimental results that are both rigorous
and realistic. The PSLC has two key goals: (1) to establish a new paradigm of in
vivo learning experimention, to produce results that survive rigorous
experimentation with laboratory-quality methods in real classroom settings; and
(2) to focus research on robust learning, that is, learning that is retained
over long durations, transfers to novel situations, and accelerates future
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PSLC researchers will pursue results within this
new paradigm that are guided by, but not limited to, the following research
clusters:&lt;br/&gt;1. Co-training. When, how, and why do students' use of
multiple inputs, representations or strategies facilitate learning by providing
an avenue for self-supervised learning that goes beyond learning supported by
teacher and peer feedback?&lt;br/&gt;2. Dialogue. When, how, and why does
classroom talk and tutorial dialog, whether by human or computer, promote robust
learning?&lt;br/&gt;3. Refinement. How do learners determine the causal
connections between cues in the environment, their actions, and desired
knowledge and how can instructional support and feedback facilitate learners in
making such connections?&lt;br/&gt;4. Fluency. How does more isolated learning
of knowledge components interact with learning within larger authentic
performances and how can instruction support such interactions to yield more
fluent and robust learning?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To amortize the demanding set
up costs required of individual researchers who want to perform in vivo
experimentation, PSLC will develop LearnLab, an international resource for
learning scientists that combines classroom testbeds, advanced technology, and a
vast, detailed database of learner interactions. In particular, the LearnLab
testbed will include seven highly instrumented courses enhanced with intelligent
tutoring systems: Algebra, Geometry, Physics, Chemistry, French, Chinese and
English as a second language. These courses will host the in vivo
experimentation. PSLC will develop the social and technological infrastructure
necessary to facilitate such experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PSLC
activities will address education and diversity goals as well as research goals.
LearnLab both requires and affords pre-doctoral and post-doctoral training of
learning scientists to take advantage of this new paradigm. LearnLab will also
enrich the scientific infrastructure by establishing extensive collaborations
among current and future psychologists, statisticians, psychometricians,
computer scientists, engineers, and instructional designers. Experimental
manipulations that demonstrate substantial learning gains will be incorporated
in LearnLab schools that reach diverse populations and eventually to many other
schools. The PSLC diversity plan includes activities that will increase the
pipeline of diverse learners and learning scientists from the high school level
to center leaders.&lt;br/&gt;