* 0355378
* REU Site: Collaborative Research Experience in Environmental Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Kathleen Fischer, Norfolk State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2007
* USD 281,376.00

Norfolk State University, in partnership with Elizabeth City State University,
will offer a 10-week collaborative research program for a total of twelve (12)
undergraduate students. The goal of this REU site is to expose students to basic
research through projects that explore various areas of environmental biology.
This collaborative venture will offer opportunities for exceptional
undergraduate students, primarily at the sophomore or junior level; however,
students who have completed the freshman year and have shown outstanding promise
and commitment to research will also be encouraged to participate to gain
experience conducting research projects. Student research fellows will
experience a program with a broad emphasis in environmental biology and
chemistry. They will participate in active research including bioremediation,
molecular biology and gene expression, water quality and meteorological effects
on habitats, and environmental chemistry. Students will be assigned to specific
faculty mentors for the summer. They will be awarded stipends and on-campus
housing and board at the respective sites. In addition to the research program,
undergraduate summer research fellows will participate in a variety of seminars,
weekly meetings and social functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will
bring together an interdisciplinary team from two Schools of Science at two
historically black colleges and universities. The result will be two model sites
that will boost minority achievement and increase significantly minority
representation in the environmental sciences. This will occur principally
through supervised hands-on laboratory and field research activities to
stimulate student interest and illustrate science concepts via hypothesis driven
research. -- Information and dissemination of program activities will be via the
Norfolk State University School of Science and Technology web page
(http://sst.nsu.edu/bioreu.htm). For more information, contact Dr. Camellia
Moses Okpodu at cmokpodu@nsu.edu) or Kathlene Fischer at
kmfischer@mail.ecsu.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;