* 0355118
* An RUI Research Proposal on Minimizing Thermal Noise in Advanced LIGO Test Mass Optics and Exploring Bilinear Noise in Initial LIGO Data
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Steven Penn, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This research project will focus primarily on understanding and reducing the
mechanical loss in fused silica. Methods of reducing the mechanical loss in
large, polished, fused silica optics through careful annealing in inert gas and
vacuum will be explored. This technique has already proven successful on small,
flame-drawn samples, and is expected to benefit larger samples as well. In
addition, a theoretical model for the mechanical loss in fused silica will be
developed in collaboration with other LIGO thermal noise researchers . Such a
model would greatly aid our understanding of the fundamental loss mechanisms and
may provide guidance as to how this loss might be further reduced. Finally,
development will continue on a bicoherence data monitor, which is a robust
method for separating bilinear noise, burst events, and chirp events from a
large background of Gaussian noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research on fused
silica holds a great deal of promise for Advanced LIGO. The PI has previously
demonstrated that annealing can reduce the mechanical loss in fused silica to a
level equal to that of sapphire, the other material proposed for Advanced LIGO
optics and better than the requirements for Advanced LIGO. The benefits of using
silica include excellent optical qualities and greater experience as an optical
material. As the PI has previously shown, the loss in fused silica, when
minimized, is entirely in the surface, at least for the geometries measured thus
far. In other words, the loss decreases as the size of the optic increases.
Therefore it is expected that large optics, when properly annealed, should,
despite being polished, have a mechanical loss below the Advanced LIGO
requirements. Lowering the thermal noise in the test masses will increase LIGO's
astronomical reach in its most sensitive frequency band and enhance the
probability for detection and study of gravitational wave events.