* 0355187
* Measures, Dimension, and Ergodic Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Boris Solomyak, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 142,378.00

DMS 0355187&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;B Solomyak&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of
Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MEASURES, DIMENSION, AND ERGODIC
THEORY&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This project is in the area of interaction
between geometric&lt;br/&gt;measure theory, fractal geometry, and ergodic
theory.&lt;br/&gt;Iterated function systems, popularly known as the ``Chaos
Game,''&lt;br/&gt;provide a convenient framework for the study of fractal
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;Invariant measures for such systems
include&lt;br/&gt;infinite sums of products of idependent, identically-
distributed random variables, which arise in many probablistic and dynamical
models, and stationary measures for random matrix products. One of the central
problems is to determine when such a measure is absolutely continuous. A closely
related line of research is concerned with topological properties of attractors,
in particular, self-similar and self-affine sets. Especially challenging are the
systems that are&lt;br/&gt;not uniformly contracting and those which have a
substantial&lt;br/&gt;``overlap.'' On the ergodic theory side, the project deals
with&lt;br/&gt;substitution and tiling dynamical systems without discrete
spectrum,&lt;br/&gt;as well as with algebraic coding of toral automorphisms.
The&lt;br/&gt;so-called non-Pisot case is of particular interest to us,
where&lt;br/&gt;it is proposed to use some variants of the beta-transformation
defined on self-affine sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To play the ``Chaos Game'' on
the plane, one should specify a family of&lt;br/&gt;planar tranformations
(called an iterated function system)&lt;br/&gt;and iteratively apply one of them
at random, with prescribed&lt;br/&gt;probabilities. Under certain technical
conditions (called&lt;br/&gt;``contracting-on-average'') the emerging picture
will almost surely&lt;br/&gt;``converge'' to a set called the attractor of the
iterated function&lt;br/&gt;system. This is a popular method to draw fractals on
the computer screen, but it is more than a game: iterated functions are widely
used in signal processing, image compression, and simulation
algorithms,&lt;br/&gt;as well as in mathematical dynamical systems
theory.&lt;br/&gt;The picture that we see on a computer screen is actually a
greytone image, which is an approximation of a measure,&lt;br/&gt;or probability
distribution. An important problem is to decide when this distribution has a
density. A related line of research&lt;br/&gt;is to classify the ``zoo'' of
fractal objects which arise in the course&lt;br/&gt;of the Chaos Game. The
second part of the project is concerned with&lt;br/&gt;another class of objects
which can be obtained by iteration:&lt;br/&gt;infinite substitutive sequences
and self-similar tilings. Now the&lt;br/&gt;iteration procedure involves
replacing each symbol&lt;br/&gt;by a block of symbols, or each tile by a patch
of tiles.&lt;br/&gt;The limiting object is then used to create a
fascinating&lt;br/&gt;dynamical system which we study. Apart from their
intrinsic beauty,&lt;br/&gt;such systems have found applications in
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;