* 0355353
* Integrative, Interdisciplinary Graduate Education:  NewConcepts and Approaches for Assessment
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Sander van der Leeuw, Social Science Research Council
* Standard Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 01/31/2009
* USD 1,400,951.00

Innovative, interdisciplinary and integrative (or I3) graduate education and
training programs are on the rise throughout the U.S. Individual programs are
conducting self-assessments and organizational contractors are evaluating
performance in conventional ways. To date, however, these efforts have not
assessed I3 programs in terms of both program processes and program outcomes as
they relate to changes in and effects on student and faculty learning, academic
identity, career trajectory, and institutional mentality. To this end, this
project, which is itself interdisciplinary and integrative, is both a formative
and a summative evaluation of the organization, functioning, and performance of
I3 programs. By exploring how, why, and in what context I3 programs lead to new
individual, professional, and institutional practices, this study accumulates
knowledge about how specific I3 programs develop, adapt, and perform under
varied conditions, as well as collects information about the generalizable
purpose, the intrinsic value, and essential components of such programs. The
former knowledge will be used to design new and/or improve existing I3 programs,
whereas the latter information will enhance current or future I3 evaluations.
Given (a) the unique goals and objectives of I3 programs as compared to more
traditional graduate education and training programs and (b) the paucity of
knowledge and information related to I3 program processes let alone outcomes, it
is critical that the empirical research be conducted in order to acquire the
right knowledge and information from which to develop the proper theoretical
framework and design the best practical methods for evaluating I3 programs.
Thus, this study is a two-stage evaluation - exploratory evaluation research
(stage 1) followed by evaluation practice design and development (stage 2). In
stage 1, the study develops a theoretically informed but empirically grounded
understanding of: (a) the skills, attributes, and attitudes that scientists and
engineers need to succeed in the new modes of knowledge production and the new
positions of scientific employment; (b) the strategies, structures and
experiences that could successfully develop these skills, attributes, and
attitudes; and (c) indicators for measuring programmatic success with the
implementation of relevant practices, processes and outcomes. This framework is
then applied to a sample of 30 I3 programs (and 60 non-I3 programs for purposes
of comparison) to analyze the conditions and processes likely to influence these
individual outcomes as well as broader professional and institutional
developments. The combination of qualitative and quantitative techniques applied
to this sample of I3 and non-I3 programs during stage 1 will produce a set of
definitions, features, and metrics of I3 program "success" from which an
evaluation framework based on valid and relevant questions, variables, and
indicators will be developed and disseminated for use by others in stage 2 of
the study.