* 0355470
* Dynamics in Miscible Polymer Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Mark Ediger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 09/30/2009
* USD 615,000.00

Polymers in multicomponent systems exhibit complex dynamics. An understanding of
these dynamics should lead to the ability to predict the rheological properties
of miscible polymer mixtures. Experiments that probe the influence of mixing on
dynamics in a number of miscible polymer systems are proposed. In all cases, NMR
relaxation time measurements will be used to characterize the segmental dynamics
of individual components in these mixtures. For some systems, these measurements
will be supplemented by work performed by collaborators (solid-state NMR
measurements of segmental dynamics, diffusion measurements, and computer
simulations). Specific systems to be studied include polybutadiene/poly(vinyl
ethylene) blends, low molecular weight blends of polystyrene and polyisoprene,
isotopic blends of two different molecular weight polystyrenes, a series of
blends containing polystyrene as a dilute component, blends of poly(ethylene
oxide) and poly(vinyl phenol), and styrene-isoprene block copolymers. Together,
these activities will couple macroscopic measurements of blend dynamics at both
the segmental and terminal level with microscopic simulations. Specific issues
to be addressed include the microscopic origin of distinct component dynamics in
miscible blends, the prediction of segmental dynamics, and the relationship
between segmental and terminal dynamics. If the proposed work is funded,
significant progress in our ability to predict blend dynamics and rheology based
upon homopolymer properties is anticipated. This work will have impact beyond
the field of miscible polymer blends. Insights obtained about how nearby
segments or surfaces impact polymer dynamics will be required for understanding
the properties of composites of polymers with nanomaterials or biological
structures. The detailed comparisons between experiment and simulation proposed
here provide a sensitive test of the simulation potentials and will lead to
improved potentials that will positively impact simulations in biology, other
materials areas, and beyond. The funding of this proposal would also advance the
training of both graduate students and students at the K-12 level. If this
proposal is funded, those supported will help run (and refine the curriculum
for) a summer education activity at the University of Wisconsin Madison for high
school sophomores. This three-week activity is part of a larger program for
students who otherwise would be unlikely to go to college.