* 0355442
* Dilute-Nitride Mid-IR (2-5 micron) Diode Lasers on InP Substrates
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Thomas Kuech, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 03/31/2008
* USD 210,103.00

0355442&lt;br/&gt;Mawst&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dilute nitride compounds, such as
InGaAsN, have recently enabled high performance diode lasers on GaAs substrates
in the l= 1.3 mm region. The performance advantages over conventional InP-based
materials are now well established; they exhibit significantly lower threshold
current density with reduced temperature sensitivity compared with conventional
InP-based lasers. Novel approaches are now needed to extend the emission
wavelength of the dilute-nitride materials beyond 1.3 mm while maintaining high
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While diode lasers in the 2-4 mm wavelength
region have been demonstrated using GaSb- or InAs-based structures, they suffer
from poor radiative efficiency and strong temperature sensitivity, allowing them
to operate CW only at low temperature for wavelengths longer than 2.8 mm. New
structures and active layer materials based on dilute-nitrides hold potential to
achieve, efficient, room temperature CW operation in this important wavelength
region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To extend emission wavelengths beyond that
achievable with a conventional InGaAsN type-I QW, a new active layer structure
is clearly needed. The PI proposes a novel dilute-nitride structure to access
the Mid-IR (2.0 - 4.0 mm) wavelength region using conventional InP substrates. A
strain-compensated, dilute-nitride active region based on In(Ga)AsN/GaAsSb type-
II quantum wells is proposed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: Mid-IR
sources, which operate efficiently at room temperature, would revolutionize
chemical sensing and free-space optical communication systems. Compact chemical
sensors could be developed based on this technology for real time portable
detection systems. Free from atmospheric disturbances, free-space communication
links could become viable from the availability of efficient, high power laser
sources in the 2-4 mm region. While providing an interdisciplinary research
environment for a graduate student, encompassing materials science, chemistry,
advanced device modeling and optoelectronic device physics, this program
integrates undergraduates into the development and execution of the research as
well as providing a vehicle for new curricular
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: New dilute-nitride materials
and superlattice structures will be developed, allowing us to study the optical
and electronic bandstructure of these new materials and structures. A closely
coupled experimental and theoretical approach will provide valuable insights
into the physics of gain, carrier recombination, and carrier leakage processes
in dilute-nitride type-II laser structures. &lt;br/&gt;