* 0355182
* University-Based Accelerator R&D For A Linear Collider
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Maury Tigner, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Morris Pripstein
* 08/31/2006
* USD 128,315.00

This proposal requests support for a university-based Physics Accelerator
Research and Development (R&D) program aimed particularly at a future Linear
Collider (LC). In recent years, a world consensus has developed that an
international LC should be the next major facility for high energy physics.
Abroad, the European and Asian communities have come to this conclusion, and
here in the U.S., the High Energy Physics Advisory Panel (HEPAP) identified the
LC as the highest priority for the US program in elementary particle physics.

The technical challenges lie in both detector and accelerator areas and derive
from the need for high luminosity and high precision of measurement. In response
to these challenges, nineteen U.S. universities have banded together to form the
University Consortium for Linear Collider R&D (UCLC) with Cornell as Project
Manager. The physics goals require a starting center-of-mass energy of 500 GeV,
upgradeable to approximately 1 TeV or more, and a luminosity of an ambitious
four orders of magnitude larger than the luminosity achieved by the Stanford
Linear Collider. Achieving the high energy and ultra-low emittance of the LC
requires significant new advances in many areas of accelerator physics and
technology. This proposal addresses leading challenges in these areas, bringing
to bear the talents of both experienced accelerator scientists and experimental
physicists with expertise in instrumentation.

There are a number of broader impacts to be expected from this proposal. The
accelerator physics R&D will push the state of the art in many areas that have
applications across the whole spectrum of accelerators. Benefits will accrue to
fields such as materials science, condensed matter physics, biophysics, and
medical science. In addition, this proposal will provide training opportunities
that can begin to address the current national shortage of accelerator
physicists. In addition, the PIs propose a new outreach program that will allow
teachers and students to join in the LC research work at UCLC universities. This
program will bring to high school classrooms a taste of the exciting energy
frontier physics to be studied by the LC and the state-of-the-art technologies
required for its implementation.

