* 0355372
* RUI:     Stochastic Background Searches with the LIGO and ALLEGRO Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Martin McHugh, Loyola University New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 05/31/2008
* USD 105,000.00

The Laser Interferometer Gravitational wave Observatory (LIGO) is currently in a
phase of sci-&lt;br/&gt;entific data collecting interspersed with commissioning
activities that are incrementally improving&lt;br/&gt;the sensitivities. The
ALLEGRO resonant mass gravitational wave detector operated by Louisiana State
University in Baton Rouge is located about 40 kilometers from the LIGO
Livingston Observatory (LLO). The detector has undergone major renovation since
being moved to a new laboratory and has also had periods of data collection
interspersed with this activity. The proximity of the LLO and ALLEGRO detectors
allows for a unique opportunity in the search for gravitational radiation. The
primary focus of this research is to exploit this proximity to search for a
stochastic background of gravitational waves. ALLEGRO has the ability to rotate
the detector with a minimum of disruption. This will allow a modulation of the
signal by aligning and mis-aligning the detector with the LLO interferometer
arms. This allows for the removal of any correlated noise that does not have the
expected quadrupolar spatial dependence of the gravitational radiation. This
project represents the continuation of research to pursue the data analysis
challenges in searching for stochastic background of gravitational waves with
the ALLEGRO-LLO pair of detectors as a complement to other such searches in
LIGO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If our current understanding of the Universe is
correct, there almost certainly exists a stochastic background of gravitational
waves at some level, originating as a remnant of inflation, a phase transition
in the early universe, or from the confusion limit of a large number of discrete
sources. An observation or upper limit placed on such a background brings us new
information about the Universe. The project will have an impact on the
educational environment at Loyola University New Orleans, a primarily
undergraduate institution in Louisiana. This project will maintain a vibrant
research activity at Loyola, while incorporating undergraduate students as
research assistants.