* 0355291
* Adsorption and Photochemical Transformations of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons at the Air-Water Interface (Fog and Ice) in the Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Jeffrey Collett, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric J. Hintsa
* 04/30/2008
* USD 611,200.00

This project involves examination of the behavior of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) at the air-water (liquid or frozen) interface to address a
number of questions. The activities include measuring the uptake of PAH
compounds into fog droplets in the laboratory, and quantification of drop-
dependent PAH partitioning into actual fogwater samples. In addition,
photochemical reactions of adsorbed PAHs will be studied as functions of
temperature, pressure and surface type, and compared with gas-phase loss by
photolysis. This information will be useful to understanding the atmospheric
fate of PAHs as air masses encounter fog and frozen surfaces (ice and
snow).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will train an undergraduate student
from an underrepresented group, and involve a faculty member from a Historically
Black College and University (HBCU) institution. In addition, several other
undergraduate students will be involved in the research. The project will be
incorporated into two senior research classes in the Chemical Engineering
Department. The results of this work will be shared with state and Federal
policy makers, in particular those from the Louisiana Department of
Environmental Quality, important given the preponderance of fog in southern
Louisiana. In addition, collaboration will be fostered between the
investigators' institutions (Louisiana State University &amp; Agricultural and
Mechanical College, and Colorado State University).