* 0355455
* Far Fields and  Remote Sensing
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* John Sylvester, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 108,544.00

&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0355455&lt;br/&gt;Title: Far fields and Remote
sensing&lt;br/&gt;PI: John Sylvester (University of
Washington)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We study inverse
scattering and inverse source problems for the&lt;br/&gt;Helmholtz equation,
Maxwell's equations, and other PDE's. Our efforts&lt;br/&gt;focus on identifying
those characteristics of size and location that&lt;br/&gt;can be computed from
data sets that are much too small to uniquely&lt;br/&gt;determine the source or
scatterer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Born approximation to time harmonic
scattering is the Fourier&lt;br/&gt;Transform. In this approximation, one such
data set would be the&lt;br/&gt;restriction of the Fourier transform of a
function to a sphere . In&lt;br/&gt;this case, it is impossible to find the
support of the function from&lt;br/&gt;this data, but we can find a smallest
convex set, a set which must&lt;br/&gt;belong to the convex hull of the support
of any function with this&lt;br/&gt;restricted Fourier transform. This set can
be stably calculated, even&lt;br/&gt;from noisy data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
other data sets, there are other "minimal supports", where
the&lt;br/&gt;definition of "support" depends on the data set. We seek to
discover&lt;br/&gt;the correct notion of support for different data sets and
different&lt;br/&gt;models. In the presence of a priori information (e.g.
polygonal shape&lt;br/&gt;or positivity), these minimal sets may even describe
true supports. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is to
develop and improve algorithms for&lt;br/&gt;acoustical and electro-magnetic
remote sensing (e.g. radar,
sonar,&lt;br/&gt;ultrasound).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical theory of
inverse scattering includes powerful&lt;br/&gt;methods for deducing the material
properties of an object from data&lt;br/&gt;measured in a remote sensing
experiment. However, there are many&lt;br/&gt;practical applications where it is
impossible to make observations at&lt;br/&gt;sufficiently many frequencies and
angles to apply these methods. In&lt;br/&gt;this project, we focus on
understanding those aspects of size and&lt;br/&gt;location that can be
unequivocally identified from limited data sets,&lt;br/&gt;and developing
algorithms to stably compute these sizes and
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;