
* 0071820
* Seiberg-Witten invariants of three-manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2000,08/04/2000
* Liviu Nicolaescu,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2003
* USD 40,000.00

Proposal DMS-0071820 Principal Investigator: Liviu I. Nicolaescu



This project involves topological and geometric aspects of the

theory of three-dimensional Seiberg-Witten monopoles and it

addresses two general guiding questions. The first question is

about the topological significance of the monopole count. Meng

and Taubes have shown that on a three-manifold with nontrivial

homology this count is given by Reidemeister-Turaev torsion. In

the case of rational homology spheres numerical experiments with

Seifert manifolds suggest that a suitably altered monopole count

determine in a very elegant fashion both

the Casson-Walker invariant and the Reidemeister-Turaev torsion.

The first part of the project is devoted to proving this. The

second question is about the geometric meaning of

three-dimensional monopoles. The link of a complex surface

singularity is endowed with a natural CR geometry and it is

natural to ask how much of it does a monopole capture. More

precisely we address the following fundamental question: how do

monopoles "look like" as the link of the singularity collapses

onto the exceptional divisor of a resolution of the singularity?





The three-dimensional world has been a source of inspiration

for many important developments in algebraic topology. It is

within the reach of our physical intuition so some visualization

is possible (think of a cube) yet there is plenty of room for

surprises (think of gluing in pairs the opposite faces of the

cube). One modern point of view is that, if presented in a

favorable light, the three-dimensional world will reveal its

mysteries. The mathematicians phrase this in a more sober way.

If one can find a nice geometry on a three-manifold then one can

unlock some of its topological features. The monopoles are

geometric objects introduced to the mathematical world by

physicists. One could think of them as "signals" produced by a

three-dimensional space. These ``signals'' depend on how we look

at the manifold. Since they appeared on the mathematical scene

they have provided us with surprising insights about the structure

of low-dimensional worlds. This project is about counting these

"signals" in a meaningful way and then understanding the

significance of each one of them individually when observed under

a favorable light.


