
* 0072158
* Mirror Principle and Modularity
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2000,07/18/2000
* Bong Lian,MA,Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2004
* USD 80,352.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0072158 Principal Investigator: Bong H. Lian

This project addresses problems in three closely related areas in the context of
mirror symmetry and duality. As a continuation of current joint work with K. Liu
and S.T. Yau, Lian proposes to both generalize and specialize their theory
("mirror principle") for studying characteristic classes of vector bundles on a
stable map moduli space. First, this work has thus far considered convex
projective manifolds. Dropping the convexity assumption is important if one
wishes to consider general Calabi-Yau manifolds. Part I of this proposal
outlines an approach which is expected to lead to the full generalization of
mirror principle in in genus zero. The main new input here is a way to combine
the difficult machinery of virtual cycles and the many ingredients of the mirror
principle. Second, the mirror principle can be specialized to surfaces and many
new questions which have recently arisen in local mirror symmetry, as well as
enumerative geometry on surfaces. In the former case partition functions of a
given genus are related to modular forms whenever the underlying surface is
elliptic. In the latter case, enumerating curves of a given genus with suitable
incidence in a surface also yields modular forms. This project seeks to
understand modularity from the point of view of characteristic classes of vector
bundles on stable map moduli spaces. For positive genus, the mirror principle
requires yet another generalization. In Part II of this project, Hosono, Lian,
Liu and Yau will examine these new questions. In recent joint work of Hosono,
Lian and Yau, they have settled the problem of constructing the ubiquitous large
radius limit for the "universal" family of Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces in a toric
manifold. In Part III Lian, Todorov and Yau will study this limit for more
general families.

String physics is an ambitious effort to unify all the fundamental forces of
nature. A remarkable prediction of String Theory is that nature apparently
allows for many different versions of spacetimes. A major current problem in
string physics is to understand how a plethora of apparently different
spacetimes are related, often in an unexpected and remarkable ways, under the
rubric of ``String Duality''. Mirror symmetry is a special yet nontrivial case
of String Duality. Though they come in vast variety, the spacetimes in questions
are still highly restricted. They turn out to be a class of geometrical objects,
known as Calabi-Yau manifolds, which have been studied by mathematicians for
over 100 years. Physicists have discovered that string theories associated to
certain pairs of Calabi-Yau manifolds ("mirror pairs") are equivalent. This
project aims at understanding the geometry of these mirror manifolds from the
mathematical point of view. A constant exchange of insights and feedback between
physicists and mathematicians on mirror symmetry and other issues has been a
hallmark of String Theory in its last 20 years of development.
