
* 0072658
* Contact Floer Homology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2000,02/28/2002
* Alexander Givental,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2004
* USD 188,283.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0072658 Principal Investigator: Alexandre B. Givental

In Symplectic Topology, the properties in question are usually formalized in the
language of Floer homology theory and Gromov- Witten invariants. The proposed
project is to extend and intertwine these two formalisms in the context of
Contact Topology. The generalization exhibits natural relationships with the
string theory and, moreover, shows how the structures of classical and quantum
field theory emerge form the stringy properties of contact Floer homology. The
project is conceived as a joint work of the P.I. with Ya. Eliashberg (Stanford
University) and H. Hofer (Courant Institute) and is a part of the larger project
"Symplectic Field Theory" started by the latter two authors several years ago.

The project originates from Symplectic and Contact Topology launched in the
beginning of the twentieth century by A. Hurwitz and H. Poincare and studying
profound geometrical properties of classical mechanical systems. The mechanical
notions of position and momentum coordinates lead to the geometric notion of a
symplectic structure, in which the Hamiltonian formulation of mechanics becomes
extremely natural. Contact structures are the odd-dimensional counterparts to
symplectic structures. In addition to their appearances in the study of
subspaces of symplectic manifolds, contact structures have been of particular
interest in dimension three, where geometric ideas are illuminating some
difficult questions in topology
