
* 0072512
* Symplectic Topology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2000,03/19/2002
* Dusa McDuff,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 01/31/2004
* USD 335,877.00

DMS-0072512 Dusa McDuff

McDuff will continue studying the structure of symplectic manifolds and of the
group G(M) of diffeomorphisms that preserve the symplectic structure on a given
manifold M. Working together with Francois Lalonde, she recently discovered that
these diffeomorphisms do not twist the manifold topologically very much. Indeed,
using ideas from quantum homology, they have shown that the homotopy groups of
the Hamiltonian subgroup H of G(M) act trivially on the rational homology of the
underlying manifold M. The conjecture is that any fiber bundle with structural
group H is a product as far as its rational cohomology is concerned. She also
plans to study other topological implications of the existence of quantum
homology, in particular its consequences for the Flux conjecture.

A symplectic structure is a very basic structure on space that underlies the
equations of classical physics. They have become very prominent recently because
of their appearance in modern theories of duality, especially in the "mirror
symmetry" phenomena of high energy physics. Mathematically, they are very
interesting and help in understanding 4 dimensional spaces (curved space-times).
Recently McDuff has focussed her attention on studying the different ways that
the points of a space can move while still preserving this structure. Working
with a collaborator, she has found that some ideas coming from string theory
(known in the field as "quantum homology") show that spaces with symplectic
structures are much more rigid than ones without, and cannot be moved and
twisted up very much. She intends to pursue this line of questioning during the
period of the grant. Many very interesting symplectic rigidity phenomena have
been discovered, but there are still plenty of open questions.
