
* 0100782
* Matrix Integrals,Combinatorics and Integral Lattices
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2001,10/08/2002
* Mark Adler,MA,Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2006
* USD 228,432.00

Abstract for DMS - 0100782

(1) What is the distribution of the eigenvalues of a random matrix, with certain
symmetry conditions to guarantee the reality of the spectrum? What happens to
the distribution, when the size of the matrix gets large? What about
universality in the limit? (2) What is the statistics of the length of the
longest increasing sequence in random permutation or random words (Ulam's
problem). This question applies to models of interface growth, polymers in
random environments, first passage percolation problem, and "dimer"
configurations. (3) Integrals over groups and symmetric spaces, (or over their
tangent spaces) lead to a variety of interesting matrix models. The coefficients
of the (perturbative) expansions have striking combinatorial or topological
significance and can be computed in a recursive way. This work originates in the
works of Feynman, 't Hooft, Bessis-Itzykson-Zuber and Witten, in the context of
string theory. (4) The sample canonical correlation coefficients (maximum
likelihood estimates) for the canonical correlation coefficients of two Gaussian
populations are the test statistic for the statistical independence of the two
populations, as studied by Hotelling, James and Constantine. (5) The four
problems above and their "time"-perturbations are all solutions to integrable
equations or lattices. For large random matrices or permutations, they are
solutions to the Korteweg-de Vries equation. In the finite case, they are
solutions to the Toda lattice, and to two new integrable lattices, the Pfaff and
Toeplitz lattices. %Besides matrix integrals solutions, these lattices %have
interesting rational solutions.



It is fair to say that matrix integrals point the way to new integrable systems,
but also to new combinatorial and probabilistic questions ! General description:
The problems above relate to a number of important questions in physics,
engineering and statistics: Problem (1) has its origin in the study of energy
levels (excitation spectra) of heavy nuclei in nuclear physics (Wigner, Dyson).
These levels are so intricate that any explicit description would be
intractable. For that reason, Wigner proposed a statistical model for these
energy levels. Concerning problem (2), it is well known that a large percentage
of computer time is devoted to the rearrangement of the data used in the course
of computations. How many data, after a complete reshuffling, are statistically
still in order? This question of random permutations also applies to statistical
mechanics, the basis of thermodynamics, and to questions of polymers. Some of
the matrix models (3) provide toy models for string theory, an important set of
ideas at the basis of the fundamental interactions in the physical world. It
turns out that certain matrix models, mentioned above, are used in testing
whether two sets of statistical data are correlated, as sketched in (4). The
Korteweg-de Vries equation, the arch-type ``soliton equation", describes the
propagation of waves in shallow water; a similar non-linear partial differential
equation governs the propagation of ultra-short pulses in optical fibers, when
the wave length is long compared to the diameter of the fiber.
