
* 0103889
* Topology & Dynamics of Moduli Spaces of Geometric Structures
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2001,03/05/2003
* William Goldman,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2004
* USD 214,214.00

DMS-0103889 William M. Goldman

This project continues the PI's investigation of locally homogeneous geometric
structures on manifolds, their moduli spaces and their symmetries. The holonomy
correspondence relates moduli of geometric structures to the representation
theory of the fundamental group. The primary geometric structures of this
investigation include conformally flat Lorentz and Riemannian structures, real
projective and affine structures, and real and complex hyperbolic structures.
Dynamical questions concerning both the action of the fundamental group, various
flows (including and generalizing the geodesic, horocycle and frame flows) and
the automorphisms of the moduli space will be studied. The close interaction
between the dynamics of the mapping class group and the global topology of the
moduli space is especially notable. The moduli spaces often possess symplectic
structures which lead to important and mysterious algebraic constructions, such
as the Lie algebra based on curves in a smooth surface.

These objects play an increasingly important role both in mathematics and
physics. Lorentzian manifolds arise as cosmological models in relativity. Moduli
spaces have become central in quantum physics, and mapping class group actions
and Teichmuller space have become prominent in 2-dimensional quantum gravity.
This study lies in the interface between geometry/topology, dynamical systems,
analysis and algebra. Despite their complicated nature, the examples studied are
extremely explicit. Thus one can profitably investigate them experimentally. Our
current computer technology is appropriate for such projects. With Dr. Richard
Schwartz and the support of the University of Maryland Mathematics Department,
the Experimental Geometry Lab has been operating for over a year. This lab has
included software projects performed by postgraduates, graduate students, and
especially undergraduates.
