
* 0103957
* Alexandrov's Geometry and Applications
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/15/2001,06/11/2001
* Anton Petrunin,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 05/31/2004
* USD 65,588.00

Abstract DMS-0103957:

The project contains the following main topics: 1. Approximation of Riemannian
manifolds by polyhedral metrics and generalization of Alexandrov embedding
theorem. The PI has proved that approximability by polyhedral metrics implies a
new kind of curvature bound which appears naturally but has never been
considered in geometry before. The proof is interesting in its own right, as it
uses a Lemma closely resembling the Alexandrov embedding theorem (which states
that any positively curved metric on a 2-sphere is isometric to a convex surface
in a Euclidean space). This brings us back to a more geometrical point of view
on Riemannian Geometry, according to which ``interesting'' curvature bounds
should arise from properties of embeddings of manifolds into Euclidean space.
This circle of ideas also gives a new approach to the old conjecture that every
simply connected Riemannian manifold with positive curvature operator is
diffeomorphic to a sphere; 2. Collapsing with lower curvature bound. The general
goal of this topic is to understand how collapsing with lower curvature and
diameter bounds happens and, in the very best case, to construct a structure
analogous to the one obtained by Cheeger-Fukaya-Gromov for the case of bounded
curvature. 3. Gate spaces. Gate spaces are related to a circle of problems
arising from the question of K.Grove of whether there is an Alexandrov space
that has two different smoothings into Riemannian manifolds of the same
dimension and lower curvature bound; 4. Applications of megafolds to collapsing
with bounded curvature and to Ricci flow. Megafolds are a generalization of
Riemannian manifolds and orbifolds that has already proved it usefulness for
collapsing with bounded curvature; in particular, they were used by the PI to
prove, in coloboration with W.Tuschmann, the main part of the Klingenberg-Sakai
Conjecture. Such a collapsing also arises naturally from the rescaling of the
Ricci flow; it can be used to construct singularity models for the Ricci flow
with no injectivity radius estimates; 5. Theory of Alexandrov spaces. Alexandrov
spaces appear naturally as limits of Riemannian manifolds with lower curvature
bound. Most geometric results which are true for Riemaninan manifolds with lower
curvature bound are also true for Alexandrov spaces; however, there are several
such results that cannot be generalized. For example, it is not known whether a
convex hypersurface in an Alexandrov space is also an Alexandrov space. Such
problems are mostly due to the lack of local analysis, and that is what the PI
proposes to study.

Riemannian manifold, which could be considered as a simplified version of
space-time, is a way too complicated object. The first topic in this proposal is
aimed at studing Riemanian manifolds by means of approximation by simpler
objects. These objects are polyhedral spaces, i.e. spaces glued of Euclidean
polyhedra. The other topics considers a different approach to studing Riemannian
manifolds. It is based on considering extremal metrics, in an appropriate sense,
for example how Riemannian manifolds collapse to lower dimenssional objects.
This method makes possible to get new results in the main stream direction of
Riemannian geometry: how to make conclusions about global structure of space
basing on local properties.


