
* 0103888
* Geometric Analysis of Vortex Sheet Evolution and Value Distribution of Harmonic Maps into Hadamard Surfaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2001,07/06/2001
* Zheng-Chao Han,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 88,000.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0103888

Han's proposal comprises of two research projects and an education project. In
the first research project Han proposes to adapt recent techniques from
geometric analysis to study certain geometrical and analytical problems in the
evolution of vortex sheets in two dimensional Euler equations. In particular,
the project proposes to study a possible notion of weak solution in terms of
rectifiable varifolds, which, if successful, should provide more geometric
description to the evolution of singular vortex sheet than the currently
available notion of weak solution in terms of integrable vorticity functions. In
some prototype situations, Han also proposes to study the more precise geometric
behavior in the roll up of intersecting vortex sheets. In the second project,
Han proposes to establish a value distribution theory for harmonic maps into
negatively curved surfaces. Recent results in this area have suggested very rich
geometric behavior of such harmonic maps in terms of induced foliation
structures and tree-like structures in the vicinity of infinity. The geometric
description of such behavior is closely related to the solvability of asymptotic
boundary value problems of the relevant system of partial differential
equations. The interaction of geometric analysis, partial differential
equations, and their application to some interesting applied analysis problems
is the thread connecting the two projects. In the education project, Han
proposes to rejuvenate an undergraduate geometry course mostly for math
education majors and an undergraduate differential geometry course to better
serve the need of a wider audience that has grown out of today's rapidly
changing technological environments and emergence of new interdisciplinary
fields.

A good understanding of the evolution of concentrated vortices, such as vortex
sheet, has immensely important practical values. The mathematical equations that
govern the evolution of vortex sheets exhibit many features very similar to
those that have been successfully studied in geometric analysis in recent years.
The PI hopes that the interactions of ideas and tools from across the fields
will bring some fruitful results in understanding better the geometric aspects
of vortex sheet evolution. In his second project, the PI also hopes to combine
closer the geometric and the analytic approaches, the success of which may
provide further insight back to purely geometrical or analytical problems. The
successful implementation of the third proposed project will will be a positive
contribution to the K-12 math education through better training of math
education majors.
