
* 0103884
* The Differential Geometry of Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2001,05/04/2005
* Robert Bryant,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2006
* USD 446,495.00

Abstract for DMS - 0103884 (Bryant, Duke)

Robert Bryant plans to apply the theory of differential systems, the method of
equivalence, and methods from the calculus of variations to study a collection
of problems in differential geometry and mathematical physics. In the first
problem, motivated by mathematical physics, Bryant intends to study the geometry
of connections compatible with either a Riemannian or pseudo-Riemannian metric
that admit parallel spinor fields and that differ from the Levi-Civita
connection by a closed 3-form. In the second problem, Bryant wants to continue
his investigations into the nature of singular special Lagrangian subvarieties
and special Lagrangian foliations of Calabi-Yau manifolds. In the third problem,
which concerns the study of the space of almost complex structures on
6-manifolds, Bryant proposes to investigate several natural functionals on the
space of such almost complex structures and the geometry of the extrema of these
functionals. Fourth, Bryant plans to continue his study of the space of
homologically volume minimizing cycles in compact Lie groups, with the goal of
finding a complete classification of the volume minimizing cycles in each
homology class in a compact, simple, simply connected Lie group. Finally, Bryant
plans to continue his investigations into Finsler geometry, particularly the
problem of classifying the spaces of constant flag curvature (the natural
generalization to Finsler geometry of constant sectional curvature in the
Riemannian case).

Optimization is a central problem in mathematics, in which one tries to select
the 'best' configuration in a space of possible configurations of a model for a
physical system. An example is the problem of navigating on a body of water in
which one must take water currents into account in planning the 'best' path from
origin to destination, where 'best' is taken to mean 'shortest time of
traverse'. A path that is optimal for a short period (a 'geodesic') might not
remain optimal if pursued far enough. This is known as instability. (For
example, in a river where the current is faster in midstream it turns out that
downstream geodesics are stable, but that upstream geodesics are not.) The
geometric quantity that measures this notion of stability is known as
'curvature', since it was first identified in studies of the curvature of the
Earth. Bryant's work studies curvature and 'over-determined' systems of
differential equations, and is relevant to optimization problems in motion
planning, control theory, robotics, and string theory models in high energy
physics. Some of the specific problems he works on are aimed at applications to
mathematical physics (e.g., connections with parallel spinor fields) or control
theory (e.g., Finsler geometry, which is the subject that studies problems such
as the navigation problem mentioned above), while others are aimed at more
foundational questions about the nature of minimizers (e.g., volume minimizing
cycles in Lie groups) or the limits and/or possibilities inherent in the current
methods and techniques for minimization problems (e.g., special Lagrangian
geometry and almost complex 6-manifolds).


