
* 0104163
* Differential Geometry and Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2001,03/28/2005
* Richard Schoen,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 838,649.00

Abstract for DMS-0104163 PI: Richard M. Schoen

Professor Schoen is proposing to study the existence of an extremal metric which
defines the Bartnik quasilocal mass for a domain in a spacetime of general
relativity. This would yield an existence theorem for asymptotically flat
solutions of the static vacuum Einstein equations with suitable boundary
conditions. It is part of a variational approach for constructing three
dimensional geometries. Schoen's second project involves the construction of
special lagrangian, and more generally minimal lagrangian, submanifolds in
Calabi-Yau and Kaehler-Einstein manifolds. The approach is to construct
hamiltonian stationary submanifolds by direct volume minimization among
lagrangian submanifolds, and to obtain sufficient regularity to show that they
are minimal lagrangian. Schoen's third project is to further develop the
harmonic map approach to prove the rigidity of smooth actions of lattices in
semisimple Lie groups on compact manifolds. Professor Mutao Wang proposes to
study the mean curvature flow for special classes of submanifolds of codimension
greater than one. The major thrust is to obtain stability and regularity
properties of the flow. Dr. Baozhang Yang will study singular behavior of Yang-
Mills connections in arbitrary dimension. This study will include an
investigation into the structure of blow-up sets and asymptotic behavior near
singularities.

This research project concerns the study of geometric shapes which optimize
certain physical and geometric energies. For curved spacetimes in general
relativity, there is no natural mass-energy density which can be assigned to the
gravitational field, so Bartnik proposed to measure the gravitational mass of a
region in a spacetime by minimizing the total mass of all physical spacetimes
which contain this region as a subset. This minimal mass spacetime, if it can be
shown to exist, will be a static solution of Einstein's equations. One of the
goals of this project is to find a way to construct such static solutions, and
to use them to study three dimensional geometry. It is expected that three
dimensional spaces have natural geometries on them which are uniquely
characterized by their curvature properties. Another goal of this project is to
construct certain special surfaces in Calabi-Yau manifolds, the spaces of string
theory. These (three dimensional) surfaces, called special lagrangian
submanifolds, are analogous to soap films in that they are surfaces of least
possible area. Finally, it is proposed to study the evolution problem for
surfaces which is called the mean curvature evolution. This is an evolution
problem which moves a surface in space in such a way that its area is decreased
most rapidly. Understanding the behavior of this evolution is important for
simplifying and smoothing complicated surfaces in an optimal way. Mathematically
this is a difficult problem because the surfaces may develop singularities such
as cone points and tears which must be accounted for.


