
* 0104402
* Global existence problems for the Einstein equations
* DMS,Gravity Theory, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2001,05/24/2001
* Lars Andersson,FL,University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 05/31/2004
* USD 99,387.00

DMS-0104402 Lars Andersson

This proposal is concerned with the global existence and cosmic censorship
problems for the Einstein equation, and related issues in Lorentzian and
Riemannian geometry. One of the primary goals is to prove a nonlinear stability
result for the Einstein equation in the cosmological case. For large data,
global existence is a very hard problem, and here the aim is to identify and
study model problems as well as lower dimensional problems derived by symmetry
reductions. The structure of cosmological singularities will be studied from the
point of view of the BKL proposal. For flat, spatially compact spacetimes,
global constant mean curvature foliations will be studied, in particular their
asymptotic behavior in the expanding direction and near the singularity.

The Einstein equation, which describes the interaction of matter with spacetime
geometry, is one of the fundamental classical field equations of modern physics.
According to the world view of modern physics, our universe is described on
large scales by one of the simplest solutions to the Einstein equations, the
Friedman-Lemaitre solution. According to this picture, the universe has
developed from a singularity (big bang) and is expanding. The work in this
project is concerned with the nonlinear stability of this model, the behavior of
spacetime in extreme conditions near the big bang and its ultimate fate in the
expanding direction.
