
* 0104006
* Configuration Spaces on n-gon Linkages
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2001,06/25/2001
* John Millson,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2005
* USD 174,169.00

DMS-0104006 John J. Millson

Millson and his collaborators will explore the geometric properties of
configuration spaces of n-gon linkages in Lie algebras, symmetric spaces,
compact Lie groups and Euclidean buildings beginning with the question of
deciding when these moduli spaces are nonempty (finding the generalized triangle
inequalities). In addition they will study the finer structure of these moduli
spaces. In particular, they will study commutative and noncommutative
Hamiltonian systems of differential equations on these spaces and use the
quantizations of these systems to obtain results about the representation theory
of compact Lie groups and of the Artin groups of Lie type. Millson and B.Leeb
have obtained necessary and sufficient conditions for the moduli spaces of n-gon
linkages in Lie algebras to be nonempty generalizing well-known results of
Klyachko for sl(n,C). Millson, M.Kapovich and B.Leeb have found necessary and
sufficient conditions for the moduli spaces of n-gon linkages in Euclidean
buildings and symmetric spaces to be nonempty. In some cases, Millson and
H.Flaschka have constructed (commutative) integrable Hamiltonian systems on
these spaces but the flows are not periodic. For applications to the
representation theory of compact Lie groups it is critical to find the
associated "action variables," i.e. find Hamiltonians with periodic flows which
are functions of the original Poisson-commuting Hamiltonians. Millson and
Toledano-Laredo have constructed representations of Artin groups of Lie type by
quantizing certain noncommutative Hamiltonian systems. They hope to construct
the trigonometric analogues of their quantum systems. The results just mentioned
may be found at http://www.math.umd.edu/~jjm. Millson's work begins with one of
the first theorems of high-school geometry - the theorem that if two triangles
have the same set of side lengths then they are congruent. The analogue for
quadrilaterals is clearly false: one can change a square into a rhombus without
changing the side lengths. So one is led to try to parametrize the set of all
planar n-gons with the same side lengths. From there one is led to a favorite
theme of nineteenth century mathematics, the study of planar linkages (systems
of rods and hinges). In the nineteenth century such a study was of immense
practical significance - the problem was to convert linear motion (of a piston
rod) to circular motion (turn a wheel) by a linkage. The problem was solved by a
French naval officer, Peaucellier. It turns out that from the modern point of
view the nineteenth century work is insufficiently precise. Millson and Kapovich
have corrected the errors and written up a proof of a result (often attributed
to Thurston) that, given any smooth manifold M, there is a planar linkage whose
configuration space is diffeomorphic to a disjoint union of a number of copies
of M. This result will appear in the journal "Topology". The above work on
planar linkages led to a study of n-gon linkages in space. This theory is
enormously richer, connecting with symplectic geometry, integrable Hamiltonian
systems and representation theory. The analogous theory in spherical and
hyperbolic three-space and their generalizations (compact Lie groups and the
symmetric spaces of their complexifications) appears to connect up with some of
the newest objects in geometry and algebra, for example Poisson Lie groups and
quantum groups.


