
* 0200877
* Complex Hyperbolic Geometry, Arithmetic, and Commutative Algebra
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2002,09/03/2003
* Domingo Toledo,UT,University of Utah
* Continuing grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2006
* USD 277,499.00

The principal investigators study the complex hyperbolic geometry of the moduli
spaces of cubic surfaces and cubic threefolds. For stable cubic surfaces over
the complex numbers, previous work of D. Allcock and the investigators gives a
period map from the moduli space to the quotient of the four-ball by a lattice
defined over the Eisenstein integers, which is an isomorphism between these two
spaces and which takes the subspace of moduli of singular surfaces to a
configuration of hyperplanes in the ball. The investigators now study the
arithmetic properties of cubic surfaces whose periods are Eisenstein rational
points. For stable cubic threefolds over the complex numbers, there is a period
map from their moduli space to the quotient of the ten-ball by a lattice also
defined over the Eisenstein integers. The investigators study detailed
properties of this period map in order to prove that this map is an isomorphism
between the two spaces (after some blowing up and down) which carries the
subspace of moduli of singular threefolds to a hyperplane configuration in the
ball. The main technical point under study is the computation of the
differential of the restriction of the period map to each stratum that
parametrizes equisingular varieties. The extension of the Griffiths residue
calculus to this situation turns out to be quite involved and to require new
techniques in commutative algebra.

The understanding of cubic equations has been a central theme in mathematics,
whith deep implications for mathematics, science and engineering. In the
sixteenth century cubic equations in one variable were solved by finding a
formula for its solutions analogous to the well-known formula for the solutions
of quadratic equations. This formula led to the introduction of complex numbers,
which are now a standard tool in science and engineering. In the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries it was realized that quadratic equations in any number of
variables could be understood, and that, for a fixed number of variables, all
quadratic equations are essentially equivalent by a change of variables. It was
also realized that cubic equations in two or more variables are not all
equivalent by change of variables. The different equivalence classes are now
called the moduli space. The moduli space of cubic equations in two variables is
the hyperbolic plane of non-Euclidean geometry. This connection has led to many
discoveries, from special functions used to solve problems in physics and
engineering, to advances in number theory and cryptography. The aim of this
project is to study the special non-Euclidean geometry that has recently been
discovered on the moduli spaces of cubic equations in three and four variables.
The reason for carrying this study is not only the solution of the problems
posed in the proposal, but also the expectation that this study of cubics in
more variables will continue to be a point of departure for new ideas that will
affect other areas of mathematics, science and engineering.
