
* 0200732
* Semi-Classical Analysis
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2002,06/25/2007
* Maciej Zworski,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/30/2007
* USD 421,407.00

PI: Maciej R. Zworski, UC-Berkeley. DMS-0200732

Abstract:

The main interest of the PI is the study of quantum mechanics from the
mathematical point of view, and of its many manifestations in the theory of
partial differential equations and geometry. Specific current interests are the
classical/quantum correspondence, resonances, geometric scattering, and non-
hermitian quantum mechanics. More precisely, the PI is interested in resonances,
which are mathematical objects modeling states which have certain frequencies of
oscillations (or rest energies) and rates of decay, such as unstable molecules
or classical system responding to resonant forcing terms. Despite a long
tradition and a lot of recent progress our understanding is still very limited.
Current experimental and numerical advances provide new stimuli for our studies.
Another interest of the PI is non-hermitian quantum mechanics, which deals with
systems in which energy is not conserved. That is almost always present when we
localize a part of a system and the global conservation of energy disapears. In
a subtle way resonances already fall into this category of phenomena. The
mathematical problems present here are the stability of eigenvalues and
measuring the size of the resolvent of non-self-adjoint operators. That leads to
the study of ``pseudospectra'' which is then related to many interesting
phenomena in PDEs. Finally, the PI's interest involves mathematical scattering.
It replaces spectral theory for problems on non-compact domains, and in physics
almost all the data comes from scattering experiments. Many new things are
constantly discovered now, ranging from scattering on locally symmetric spaces
to problems related to conformal field theory.

Many of the phenomena discussed in this proposal are in fact more general: for
instance, electromagnetic scattering can be used to model quantum scattering,
and its understanding can benefit from the development of the classical/quantum
correspondence. The PI's work focuses on the search for general mathematical
principles, and the detailed study of specific examples is motivated by that.




