
* 0203926
* Analytic and Geometric Aspects of Ricci Flow
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2002,08/27/2003
* Bennet Chow,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 228,000.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0203926.

The objective of this project is to study analytic and geometric aspects of
Hamilton's Ricci flow of Riemannian metrics, and related topics. In particular,
the principal investigator proposes to investigate injectivity radius estimates
for solutions to the Ricci flow. The PI proposes to study Li-Yau-Hamilton
(Harnack) inequalities for both the Ricci flow and the linearized Ricci flow.
The PI also proposes to study collapsing sequences of solutions to the Ricci
flow and the related compactness theory. Finally, the PI proposes to study
estimates for the linearized Ricci flow and their applications. The PI will
focus on dimension 3, where there are the most tools available and the problems
posed have the most topological applications.

The Ricci flow is an evolution equation which deforms geometric structures on
surfaces and manifolds both improving and smoothing out the structures. It has
been at the cutting edge of the recent rapid progress in geometric evolution
equations and has greatly influenced the study of the mean curvature flow and
many other geometric evolution equations. The work on understanding the
singularities which develop under the flow has led to the development of new and
powerful analytic and geometric tools, which have found applications in the
study of many geometric evolution equations. Many phenomena are modeled by
geometric evolution equations, such as heat transfer, the evolution of
interfaces between molten and solid metal, and the interfaces between ice and
water. Geometric evolution equations are also used to smooth out images and have
applications in computer vision.
