
* 0204496
* Geometric Analysis with Applications in Low Dimensions
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2002,09/04/2003
* Richard Wentworth,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 204,000.00

NSF Grant DMS-0204496 Title: Geometric Analysis with Applications in Low
Dimensions Principal Investigator: Richard A. Wentworth (Johns Hopkins
University)

The PI proposes three research projects in the area of geometric analysis. This
work will produce new results on rigidity problems in low dimensional topology,
a better understanding of certain geometric structures on 3-manifolds arising
from complex analysis, and a new approach to regularity issues for a type of
minimizing subvariety. The first project deals with homomorphisms from
fundamental groups of Riemannian manifolds to the mapping class group of a
compact oriented surface. Examples arise as monodromy representations of surface
bundles. Building on previous work in this area, the PI will use harmonic map
theory to give a new proof of the finiteness theorem of Farb-Kaimanovich-Masur
for lattices in higher rank Lie groups. New results for lattices in rank one
groups will be obtained from these techniques. Symplectic Lefschetz pencils also
provide especially interesting examples to which this method may be applied. The
second project studies spherical CR structures on 3-manifolds. The PI will
consider three aspects of the subject: uniformizability, rigidity, and
compactness. The research will develop a new approach to these problems based on
subelliptic analogs of harmonic map equations. A goal of the work will be to
prove a compactness theorem which will have implications for new 3-manifold
invariants. The third part of the proposal seeks to extend the method of Taubes
to prove regularity results for certain calibrated rectifiable currents. This
will provide a clarifying framework for a variety of geometric constructions
that are of current interest. In addition to these new projects the PI will
complete previous work on a conjecture of Bando-Siu concerning the Yang-Mills
flow on higher dimensional Kaehler manifolds.

One of the most fascinating subjects in contemporary mathematics is the study
of spaces of dimensions three and four. These are also the most important from a
physical point of view, since we live in three dimensional space, and dynamical
behavior takes place in four dimensional space-time. The use of analytic
techniques to understand the geometry and topology of low dimensional spaces
continues to be a fruitful avenue of research, but there is much work still to
be done. The focus of the PI's research in the area of the geometry of low
dimensions and mathematical applications of new ideas in physics. .
