
* 0204730
* Degenerate Microlocal Methods and Geometric Analysis
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2002,06/28/2004
* Rafe Mazzeo,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 248,491.00

NSF Proposal DMS - 0204730: Rafe Mazzeo

The proposed work in this project involves the continuing development of
analytic tools to study a variety of problems in geometric analysis. These
include the global theory of the moduli space of constant mean curvature
surfaces in Euclidean space, the application of new gluing techniques to
construct new types of Einstein metrics, a more detailed study of the analytic
and geometric behaviour of conformally compact Einstein metrics and the
deformation theory of such metrics, with special attention to self-dual
conformally compact Einstein metrics in four dimensions. The proposed techniques
here include further extensions of Cauchy data matching, as developed by the PI
and Pacard, as well as refinements of the PI's `edge calculus'.Abstract for
Other parts of the proposal involve use of the pseudodifferential calculus of
fibred boundary operators, as developed by the PI and Melrose, to the study of
gravitational instantons, particularly their L2 cohomology. Finally, the PI and
Vasy propose to investigate the connections between geometric scattering theory
on symmetric spaces of rank greater than one, as well as a class of spaces
asymptotically modelled on these, and the microlocal theory of quantum N-body
scattering. For the human resources component, the PI proposes to continue his
directorship of the Stanford University Math Camp, a residential summer program
for talented high school students, and also to continue his other outreach
efforts to disseminate mathematics appreciation to the general public.

From a more general point of view, the PI's research concerns problems arising
in geometry and analysis involving what are known as curvature equations (the
theory of Einstein metrics in general relativity being the best-known case) as
well as scattering theory on spaces which possess high degrees of symmetry `at
infinity'. A central concern throughout is the application of somewhat novel
techniques from harmonic and microlocal analysis to these problems. The theme is
that one should develop analytic techniques which are specifically adapted to
each geometric problem, and these geometric settings in turn should suggest new
developments in the analytic technology. This approach has proved very
successful in the PI's previous research. The problems considered here are
inspired by main trends in various aspects of mathematical physics, most
specifically the two somewhat separate fields of quantum scattering and some
parts of string theory. Some of the current and proposed work has already
stimulated interest on the part of some communities of physicists, and their
intuitions provide an interesting guide for further mathematical directions in
this work. Beyond these motivations, the PI regards this particular interplay
between geometry and analysis as an important one, particularly because the
types of geometric objects studied here are becoming increasingly important in
many other places in mathematics. The PI has also undertaken extensive human
resources development, including the above-mentioned summer program, and is
active in mentoring a number of young researchers.
