
* 0204927
* Noncommutative Geometry, Supergeometry, Gauge Theory and M-Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 07/01/2002,05/01/2004
* Albert Schwarz,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2006
* USD 258,000.00

Abstract - DMS 0204927 The main goal of the proposal is to apply methods of
noncommutative geometry and supergeometry to the mathematical problems arising
in theoretical physics. The development of (super)string theory led to the idea
that this theory should by embedded into more general theory called M-theory.
This hypothetical theory should live in 11-dimensional space and the
corresponding low energy action should be given by 11-dimensional supergravity.
At this moment a rigorous definition of M-theory is not known. Nevertheless,
using various heuristic tools (first of all, dualities) physicists have created
a beautiful and consistent picture, where all versions of (super)string theory
can be obtained as limiting cases.A promising approach to a rigorous definition
of M-theory is based on so called M(atrix) theory. The action functional of BFSS
M(atrix) model can be obtained from ten-dimensional supersymmetric Yang-Mills
theory ( 10 D SYM theory) by means of dimensional reduction to (0+1)-dimensional
space.(This means that we should consider only gauge fields that do not depend
on spatial variables, but can be time-dependent.) It was shown by A.Connes, M.
Douglas and A. Schwarz (1998) that compactification of M(atrix) theory can lead
to gauge theories on noncommutative spaces, in particular, on noncommutative
tori.This paper opened the way for application of Connes' noncommutative
geometry to string/M-theory . It became very popular, especially after the
appearance of the influential Seiberg-Witten paper (1999) , that contains
together with important new results, the understanding of Nekrasov-Schwarz
noncommutative instantons (1998), gauge (complete) Morita equivalence defined by
A.Schwarz (1998),and Pioline-Schwarz background independence (1999) from the
string theory viewpoint. The number of papers considering the relation of
string/M-theory to noncommutative spaces grows exponentially (today it is close
to a thousand); many of these articles were influenced by the papers of A.
Schwarz and his collaborators. A. Schwarz intends to continue his work on
applications of noncommutative geometry to string/ M-theory. He is planning to
analyze thoroughly the general theory of gauge fields on noncommutative spaces
and its relation to the duality in physics. He would like to apply (in
collaboration with M. Movshev) this general theory to the construction and
analysis of gauge theories on noncommutative curved spaces. One more direction
the PI would like to pursue ( also together with M. Movshev) is a search of
formulation M(atrix) theory ( and, more generally, maximally supersymmetric
gauge theory) in a manifestly supersymmetric form. The solution of this problem
is interesting by itself, but M. Movshev and A. Schwarz are planning to use it
also as a starting point in the construction of a maximally supersymmetric
Dirac-Born-Infeld action for nonabelian gauge fields and on noncommutative
spaces. A. Schwarz is planning to develop a complex version of Connes'
noncommutative geometry and the theory of noncommutative theta functions having
in mind possible applications to noncommutative instantons and other BPS
fields.He aims also to study the role of K-theory in string/ M-theory. M.
Movshev is planning to analyze algebraic structures arising in open string field
theory.

It is clear now that noncommutative geometry is quite useful in physics. The PI
intends to develop methods of noncommutative geometry and to apply these methods
to various problems arising in string/ M-theory. It seems that noncommutative
geometry should play an important role in rigorous formulation of M-theory. The
PI hopes that his work will contribute to the search of appropriate mathematical
formalism.
