
* 0204421
* Spectral Invarinats of Deformed Dirac Operators on Open G-Manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2002,03/28/2002
* Maxim Braverman,MA,Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2006
* USD 96,128.00

ABSTRACT: DMS 0204421.

In this project we will continue to study the deformed equivariant Dirac
operators on open manifolds. We will use the nice spectral properties of these
operators to construct new invariants of manifolds. In particular, we introduce
the regularized cohomology of equivariant holomorphic vector bundles over open
Kaehler manifolds. One of the goals of the project is to extend the vanishing
theorems and the semi-continuity theorem to non-compact setting. The
applications will include the non-compact versions of Witten's holomorphic Morse
inequalities and of the formula for the cohomology of the Mumford quotient, as
well as new proofs of these results in the compact case. We also introduce an
analogue of the Quillen metric on the determinant of the regularized cohomology
and are planning to study this metric. This will shed a new light on the
properties of the Quillen metric on compact manifolds. In particular, in a joint
project with A. Abanov we suggest a mathematically rigorous description of the
non-linear sigma-model describing the superconductivity. Jointly with P.-E.
Paradan we a planning to use the deformed Dirac operator in the study of
discrete series representations of Lie groups.

The elliptic operators on compact manifolds have very nice properties. In this
project we introduce a class of operators on non-compact manifolds with similar
properties. The study of these operators not only leads to a generalization of
many theorems from compact manifolds to non-compact ones, but also provides new
results and methods in the theory of compact manifolds. The applications of
these results and methods range from the mathematical theory of
superconductivity to representation theory and complex geometry.


