
* 0204154
* Automorphic Forms, Moduli Spaces, and Quantization
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2002,05/09/2002
* Tatyana Foth,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 79,595.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0204154. PI: Tatyana Foth I will study holomorphic automorphic
forms on bounded symmetric domains and related problems of quantization. Let X
be a quotient of a bounded symmetric domain by a lattice. The space of
holomorphic automorphic forms can be identified with the space of holomorphic
sections of a tensor power of the canonical line bundle on X. In the context of
geometric quantization this is the quantizing line bundle, X is the classical
phase space, and automorphic forms are quantum states, i.e. wave functions of a
particle. I shall investigate properties of Poincare series and relative
Poincare series associated to real submanifolds of X. From the point of view of
quantization they are components of the delta-function. Explicit construction of
relative Poincare series associated to closed geodesics in finite volume smooth
ball quotients and the spanning result can be used to obtain rational structures
on the spaces of cusp forms for arithmetic subgroups of SU(n,1). Another problem
I shall address is the computation of curvature of a natural connection in the
vector bundle over a space of compatible complex structures on a symplectic
manifold X, whose fiber over J is the space of J-holomorphic sections of k-th
tensor power of the quantizing line bundle. To begin with, I will compute the
symbol of the curvature in the semiclassical limit for certain types of X. The
first interesting example would be the case when X is a hyperbolic Riemann
surface, where an explicit basis in the space of automorphic forms can be used
as a moving frame.



The main object of my research is automorphic forms on bounded symmetric
domains. They are functions with very special properties on spaces which have
interesting geometry and many symmetries. In addition to being an important and
intensively studied subject by itself it has a very close relation to geometric
quantization which is a part of mathematics whose development was strongly
motivated by physics and by general desire to understand better the nature of
the world and to describe it in terms of suitable mathematical formalism. The
main goal of geometric quantization is to find a rigorous mathematical way to
pass from classical mechanics to quantum mechanics in a space which may have a
very complicated geometry. More precisely, the question is how one can establish
a suitable correspondence between classical observables and quantum observables.
The space of wave functions is, clearly, a fundamental and very important
object. It turns out that for certain classical phase spaces automorphic forms
are wave functions of a particle. Properties of automorphic forms are strongly
related to the complex structure. One of the questions I shall address is to
what extent the procedure of geometric quantization depends on the complex
structure. That leads to discussion of connections in vector bundles on certain
moduli spaces which are of great interest and significance for both
mathematicians and physisists.
