
* 0244834
* Geometric Measure Theory and Free Boundary Regularity Problems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2003,05/15/2003
* Tatiana Toro,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 92,999.00

PI: Tatiana Toro, University of Washington DMS-0244834

*****************************************************************************

This proposal addresses two main questions. The first one concerns the free
boundary regularity problem below the continuous threshold. In the search of the
right formulation for the two-phase free boundary regularity problem below the
continuous threshold, the PI and C. Kenig made an important discovery. The
common theme to most of the results in the literature concerning the regularity
of the free boundary is that near a flat point the free boundary is regular. The
PI and her co-author found a global criterion which guarantees the regularity of
the free boundary but which does not involve flatness. Motivated by this, they
are in the process of developing a new set of techniques to prove regularity of
the free boundary in several different setups. The second question addressed in
this proposal concerns the existence of smooth solutions for the Schroedinger
flow. In the last couple of years several authors have focused their attention
on the Schroedinger flow, which is the geometric equivalent of a dispersive PDE.
The approach of the PI and co-authors establishes a bridge between the theory of
dispersive equations and the traditional techniques in geometric analysis.

Free boundary problems arise naturally in physics and engineering. The free
boundary may appear as the interface between a fluid and the air, or water and
ice. In the filtration problem, which studies how water filtrates from a dam
made of a porous medium (say earth), the free boundary separates the wet part
from the dry part. Many authors have studied the central problem of
characterizing the regularity of the free boundary. For the last 8 years the
investigator and C. Kenig have undertaken a joint program whose main goal has
been to fully understand the boundary regularity problem below the continuous
threshold (in the example above this corresponds to the case when the speed of
the water is not a continuous function). The success of this program has
enhanced the idea that weak notions of regularity are suitable to study problems
that so far had only been considered in terms of classical notions of
regularity. The approach proposed to study free boundary regularity problems
should have an everlasting impact. It offers an alternative to the standard
techniques used in geometric analysis to prove that a set is ``smooth'' which
require that it be flat, in some appropriate sense, which is well adapted to the
given problem. The proposed program concerning the Schroedinger flow is a
significant step forward in the development of the area of geometric dispersive
systems. The success of this project will benefit both geometric analysis and
the field of dispersive equations. Furthermore by virtue of being related to the
Heisenberg model for a ferromagnetic spin system it might yield some insight
into this physical problem.




