
* 0301207
* Problems in Hyperbolic Field Theories
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Abdolreza Tahvildar-Zadeh,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/2008
* USD 102,000.00

PI: Abdolreza Tahvildar-Zadeh, Rutgers University DMS-0301207

--------------------------------------

Problems in Hyperbolic Field Theories

This is a three-year proposal for studying some of the hyperbolic systems of
partial differential equations arising in physical theories that are derivable
from a Lagrangian, focusing on questions of long-time existence and asymptotic
behavior of classical solutions, mapping properties of the linear operators
involved, and nonlinear dynamical stability of static and stationary solutions.
Specific problems proposed are (1) Obtaining space-time Strichartz estimates for
solutions of the linear wave and Schroedinger equations in presence of
potentials with critical (i.e. inverse-square) decay at infinity and/or with
local singularities. (2) Proving stability of vortex-like wave maps from the
Minkowski space into the sphere, utilizing the above estimates. (3) Obtaining a
sharp dispersive estimate for solutions of the anisotropic Maxwell equations of
crystal optics, one that encodes the direction-dependence of the decay. (4)
Proving global existence of small-amplitude waves for the Euler-Maxwell system
describing the dynamics of plasma modeled by an electron fluid moving in a
constant ion background. (5) Using the wave map formulation of symmetry-reduced
Einstein equations of general relativity to obtain results on the future and
past asymptotic behaviors of Gowdy metrics, on the existence of constant mean
curvature hypersurfaces in symmetric spacetimes with twist, on the oscillatory
approach to the initial singularity in these spacetimes, and on the global
existence for the Einstein-Vlasov system in cylindrical symmetry.

Field Theory is the most enduring paradigm of classical as well as modern
physics. Electromagnetics, fluid and solid mechanics, weak and strong
interactions of elementary particles, and Einstein's theory of gravitation are
all describable in the framework of a field theory. One of the most important
physical phenomena to be understood in this framework is the phenomenon of
waves, their creation, propagation, interaction, and dispersion. Some examples
are electromagnetic waves, material waves, and gravitational waves. Each of the
problems proposed here has a direct consequence in the understanding of a
specific aspect of the wave phenomenon. With the dawn of a new century, as
advances in technology force scientists to address the inherently nonlinear
behavior of nature in more detail than ever before, mathematical analysts are in
a position to take up the challenge of doing research in those areas of physical
mathematics that have long been neglected by others. This fundamental research
involves going beyond numerical simulations and approximate equations, and
addressing the hard problems that lie at the core of the subject, i.e. in the
theory of nonlinear partial differential equations. Understanding nonlinear
waves is an important step in this direction. This is very much a collaborative
effort, and in particular collaborations with members of mathematical
communities in other parts of the world where a tradition of caring about
physical problems is well-maintained, provides us with an opportunity to play a
role in preventing the erosion of the leading status of the US in these key
areas of mathematical sciences.




