
* 0302812
* Random Gaussian Curvatures, Image Centroids and Caustic Surfaces in Gravitational Lensing
* DMS,EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/15/2003,05/06/2005
* Arlie Petters,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2007
* USD 141,500.00

ABSTRACT: NSF Proposal, DMS-0302812 (Petters)

This proposal presents a two part research program that creates a synergistic
interaction between mathematics and astrophysics. Program 1 aims at developing a
mathematical theory to determine the probability distributions of Gaussian
curvatures at critical points of random time-delay functions. This research
program opens up new mathematical directions that bridge singularity theory with
probability theory (e.g., zeros of random polynomials and limit theorems in
Rayleigh-Levy statistics). In addition, Program 1 has direct applications to
understanding the nature of dark matter in galactic halos via the flux ratio
anomalies in the lensing signatures of galaxies. Program 2 seeks to extend the
classification of light curves and image centroids of sources near caustics in
thin-screen, weak-field microlensing to the strong gravitational field of a Kerr
spacetime. This involves studying the global topology, geometry, and singular
theoretic structure of light caustic surfaces in a spacetime. Program 2 points
to new mathematical issues relating the geometry of light caustic surfaces to
topological invariants of the matter singularities of gravitational lenses. This
program may also yield tests of Einstein's General Theory of Relativity,
especially as it pertains to the massive black hole believed to lie in the
nucleus of our galaxy.

The dark matter in galactic halos and the black hole in the center of our
galaxy are two central and pressing topics in astrophysics. These issues are
directly impacted by the powerful mathematical methods of geometric analysis
because gravitational lensing is simultaneously a unique tool for probing the
nature of dark matter distributions and black holes, and a theory that is built
on geometric, analytical, and probabilistic concepts. The dark matter study
requires developing a mathematical theory that allows one to differentiate
generic dark matter lensing signatures from features that are specific to the
particular choice simple lens model used for dark matter. The first part of the
proposal deals with formulating such a mathematical theory. This work would open
up new mathematical directions that bridge the geometric aspects of singularity
theory with several areas in probability theory (Rayleigh-Levy statistics, zeros
of random polynomials, etc.). The second part of the proposal focuses on one of
the fundamental predictions of Einstein's General Theory of Relativity,
namely,the existence of black holes. Though a black hole cannot be seen
directly, its extremely strong gravitational field warps the spacetime about the
black hole causing light rays that managed to get through the region to be bent
with impressively large angles (e.g., rays can loop around a black hole numerous
times before arriving at the observer). The probing of such extremes of gravity
would be a critical test of our understanding of the nature of space and time.
The proposal explores mathematically the lensing signatures of the strong
gravitational field due to the massive black hole generally believed to be at
the center of our galaxy. This should draw upon techniques from differential
geometry and singularity theory, and create synergies between these mathematical
topics and the physics of black holes.
