
* 0302647
* Analysis of Spectral Invariants on Manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2003,04/30/2003
* Kate Okikiolu,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2006
* USD 120,000.00

Proposal 0302647 P.I.: Kate Okikiolu (UCSD)

Analysis of Spectral Invariants on Manifolds: Abstract

Associated to a Riemannian manifold, there exist natural geometric operators
such as the Laplace-Beltami operator, and one can study the relationship between
the geometry of the manifold and the spectra of these operators. (A famous
question on this theme is ``can you hear the shape of a drum?".) This leads to
the study of spectral invariants of geometric operators, which are geometric
invariants of the manifold. The zeta invariants of geometric elliptic operators
form a family of such spectral invariants which includes in particular the
determinant of the Laplacian and certain integrated local invariants such as the
Yamabe functional. It is well known that among metrics of a given volume and
conformal class, the Yamabe functional is extremized at a metric of constant
scalar curvature, and the same is true for the determinant of the Laplacian on
surfaces. This raises many questions regarding how the determinant of the
Laplacian behaves in higher dimensions, what happens for different types of
Laplacian, and how other zeta invariants behave. There has already been progress
on several of these questions, the motivation being both to understand the
behavior of specific zeta invariants and to investigate possible applications of
zeta invariants to geometry. Okikiolu proposes to study a number of issues
related to the existence, uniqueness and behavior of critical metrics for the
determinant of the Laplacian and other zeta invariants, including questions
concerning global upper or lower bounds, gradient flow, behavior across
conformal classes, behavior of model problems, and development of the basic
analytic theory of zeta invariants. In addition, Okikiolu proposes to work on
related questions concerning spectral invariants of Toeplitz operators on
manifolds, and in a somewhat different direction, on the problem of extending
the Verlinde formulas from quantum field theory.

Understanding the relationship between the geometry of a space and the spectra
of natural geometric differential operators on the space is a problem which
arises in a number of branches of science. Individual eigenvalues are hard to
analyze and often the geometry of a space is more clearly reflected by certain
weighted averages of the eigenvalues such as zeta invariants. In particular,
determinants of Laplacians on manifolds have been studied and applied in several
fields of mathematics and physics including topology, quantum field theory,
string theory, algebraic geometry, and conformal geometry. The research proposed
here should lead to a more complete mathematical theory of zeta invariants for
geometrical and physical applications.


