
* 0305048
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in Geometry and General Relativity
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Daniel Pollack,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 120,512.00

This proposal presents a broad array of projects within three distinct areas of
geometric analysis. The first area concerns the application of nonlinear gluing
techniques to the Cauchy problem in General Relativity. Nonlinear gluing
techniques have played a central role in geometric analysis over the last 20
years. It is only recently that they have been introduced as a useful tool in
General Relativity. Applications have included the existence of asymptotically
flat vacuum spacetimes with arbitrary spacial topology and those with no maximal
slices. The PI will extend and apply these powerful tools in a number of
important ways. The second set of projects studies the existence and behavior of
smooth Schr\"odinger maps. From a geometric point of view the Schr\"odinger flow
is the most natural dispersive equation as it arises as the Hamiltonian flow of
the Dirichlet energy for maps between manifolds. This work will establish a
bridge between the well-developed theory of dispersive equations and important
techniques from geometric analysis. The third area is a continuation of the PI's
work on surfaces of constant mean curvature (CMC) in Euclidean 3-space. The
local structure of the moduli space of all such surfaces with a fixed topology
was previously worked out by the PI and his co-authors. The development and
application of new gluing techniques for CMC surfaces has led to important
advances in our ability to describe the global structure of these moduli spaces.
The PI will carry this work significantly forward so that we may begin to obtain
a more thorough understanding of these basic geometric objects. General
Relativity is the physical theory which forms the cornerstone to our
understanding of the large scale structure of the Universe, and has been
intimately intertwined with differential geometry and partial differential
equations since its inception at the beginning of the 20th century. As with any
physical theory, its dynamical formulation (the Cauchy problem) is of central
concern. The PI's research on the Cauchy problem will develop and apply new
analytic techniques to General Relativity. The resolution of these problems will
bring us further in the long term goal of understanding how to model physical
phenomena via the mathematics of the initial data sets. Analytically, the
Schroedinger flow is a generalization of the classical nonlinear Schroedinger
equation, which has been intensively studied. The proposed program concerning
the Schroedinger flow will foster the development of a new area of geometric
dispersive systems. Surfaces of constant mean curvature arise naturally as the
surfaces which locally minimize their surface area while maintaining a fixed
enclosed volume. Soap bubbles form a familiar and important class of examples of
surfaces of constant mean curvature. The significance of these research projects
lies both in the importance of the particular results which the PI will obtain
and also in the continual development of sophisticated techniques which enable
one to approach and understand problems which exhibit increasingly complex
phenomena. Much of this research is interdisciplinary both between distinct
areas within Mathematics and between Mathematics and Physics. While important
results have already been obtained, there is great potential for expansion in
these areas.




