
* 0306624
* Non commutative geometry, microlocal analysis, and symplectic geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2003,05/09/2003
* Boris Tsygan,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 139,500.00

The aim of this project is to extend the study of non-commutative differential
geometry of deformation quantization algebras, and to apply it to symplectic
geometry. A deformation quantization is a new multiplication law on an algebra
of function on a manifold which depends on a formal parameter. When the value of
the parameter is zero, then this product becomes the usual product of functions.
All such deformation quantizations were classified by Kontsevich. The simplest
examples of them arise from algebras of differential operators on manifolds. In
our previous work, we computed for all deformed algebras basic invariants of
non-commutative differential geometry (Hochschild and cyclic homology, etc.). We
applied these results to prove generalized Atiyah-Singer index theorems. Our
main tool was what we call non-commutative differential calculus, which is an
extension of classical algebraic constructions with forms and multi-vectors to
non-commutative setting. The new project is aimed at developing both non-
commutative geometry and algebra of deformation quantization, in particular a
theory of modules over deformation quantization rings, and at applying them to
symplectic geometry, in particular to the Fukaya theory of Lagrangian
intersections and to mirror symmetry.

The main aim of this project is to develop what we call non-commutative
differential calculus. By this we mean an extension of the clasical multi-
variable calculus to the case when the variables no longer commute, i.e. when
the value of the product is no longer independent of the order of factors. Such
situations arise very naturally in mathematics and physics; in quantum
mechanics, the non-commutativity expresses mathematically the uncertainty
principle of Heisenberg. We intend to apply the non-commutative calculus to so
called deformation quantization, a geometric setup very much motivated by
quantum mechanics. Our previous work in this direction yielded new proofs and
generalizations of classical theorems about solutions of partial differential
equations; our new project aims at applications to geometric questions of
mathematical physics, such as string theory, mirror symmetry, and Lagrangian
intersections.


