
* 0306600
* Differential Equations in Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2003,06/21/2007
* Shing-Tung Yau,MA,Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2008
* USD 834,804.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0306600 Principal Investigator: Shing-Tung Yau

We propose to bring together ideas from the subject of nonlinear partial
differential equations, differential geometry and algebraic geometry to study
questions raised in general relativity and string theory. Not only many
questions in theoretical physics should be answered, but also a coherent picture
in the previous unrelated subjects in mathematics should be constructed. The
motivation to understand black hole formation has already led active research in
minimal surfaces, inverse mean flow and various global nonlinear differential
equations. They should also guide numerical relativities to do precise
calculations. Our recent work on quasilocal energy should provide a way to
understand the structure of Einstein equation when the gravity field is strong.
The Einstein equation is much related to the Ricci flow which was pioneered by
Hamilton. Some new ideas were obtained by Perelman by looking at the entropy
that come from physics.

By deeper understanding the underlining equation, we should understand topology
of three dimensional manifolds. The desire to understand mirror symmetrics and
calculation of instantons has led to important discovery in algebraic geometry.
We expect that analytic aspects of mirror symmetry will bring geometers to study
special Lagrangian surfaces in Calabi-Yau manifolds. It will be an important
contribution to both differential geometry and mathematical physics. Both
existence theorems for special Lagrangian and the detail structure of family of
such manifolds will head to deeper understanding of geometric structures on
manifolds. The ultimate grand unification of mathematics and physic led by
geometry is exciting.


