
* 0306242
* Directions in Index Theory and Riemannian Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2003,03/24/2005
* John Lott,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 138,228.00

ABSTRACT

DIRECTIONS IN INDEX THEORY AND RIEMANNIAN GEOMETRY

This proposal concerns geometric questions about various types of spaces, namely
smooth Riemannian manifolds, measured metric spaces, singular spaces and
noncommutative spaces. The questions about smooth Riemannian manifolds concern
curvature conditions, such as when a compact manifold-with-boundary can admit a
metric having nonnegative scalar curvature on the interior and nonnegative mean
curvature on the boundary, and when a closed manifold can admit a metric with
positive p-curvature tensor. The questions about measured metric spaces concern
possible extensions of the Ricci tensor to such spaces. The questions about
singular spaces concern elliptic analysis. The questions about noncommutative
geometry concern local proofs of the general foliation index theorem.

As mathematics and physics have evolved, the concept of space has also evolved.
Some evident examples from physics are the evolution from flat space to curved
space, and the evolution from the classical phase space to the quantum
mechanical Hilbert space. There have also been reasons intrinsic to mathematics
that lead one to extend the notion of space. Of course, one does not want to
make arbitrary definitions, but one rather wants to consider concepts that arise
naturally from real problems. A more recent notion of space falls under the
heading of ``noncommutative geometry'', in which a traditional space is first
considered to be defined in terms of the functions on it, and then the ring of
functions is generalized from the commutative case to allow for a noncommutative
ring of ``functions''. Noncommutative geometry is rooted in the branch of
geometric analysis called index theory. Sometimes problems about ordinary
``commutative'' spaces, such as foliations, can be translated into problems
about noncommutative spaces and attacked from that angle. Many of the questions
considered in this proposal have their roots in physics. Throughout the years
there has been much fruitful interaction between mathematics and physics, and
the proposed work will hopefully contribute to this interaction. In particular,
questions about positive scalar curvature arise in general relativity theory,
and noncommutative geometry touches on many areas of modern theoretical physics.
