
* 0306487
* Uniformization of Projective Manifolds and Global Properties of Embeddable CR-manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/15/2003,08/12/2003
* Bruno De Oliveira,FL,University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2007
* USD 98,984.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0306487 Principal Investigator: Bruno De Oliveira

The principal investigator will investigate the geometric and analytic
properties of complex manifolds and their real submanifolds. The first topic of
the investigator's research is the uniformization problem for Kahler manifolds.
More precisely, the study is of the geometric properties of the algebra of
holomorphic functions on the universal cover of a Kahler manifold. There is a
conjecture of Shafarevich formulated in the early 1970's stating that the
universal cover of a compact Kahler manifold is holomorphic convex. This
conjecture proposes that the function theory of noncompact universal covers of
compact Kahler manifolds is very rich. The difficulty in proving the conjecture
is that there is a lack of methods to produce holomorphic functions on universal
covers. The investigator has developed a methodology to produce holomorphic
functions on universal covers. Holomorphic functions are shown to arise from the
identification on the universal cover of the pullback of distinct vector bundles
on the Kaehler manifold. This methodology will be expanded, and in conjuction
with the work of Kollar, will obtain variations of the Shafarevich conjecture.
The second topic of this project is about the interaction between the properties
of special real submanifolds and the properties of the complex manifolds that
contain them. More precisely, how does the presence of a given CR-submanifold in
a compact complex manifold influences the global analytic and geometric
invariants of the latter? A flexible construction of projective varieties with
given prescribed singularities shows that even though CR-submanifolds impose
restrictions in analytical properties of the ambient complex manifold like the
Kodaira dimension, they are expected to be less restrictive on topological
properties like the fundamental group.

Complex manifolds are natural objects in mathematics and in particular in the
field of complex geometry. They appear in the mathematical models of engineering
and physics. The research program proposed will contribute to a better
understanding of the properties of complex manifolds and the theory of their
functions. Advances in complex geometry will have a significant impact on the
development of the models of physics, such as string theory, describing the
forces that shape our universe. This project will also allow the principal
investigator to organize seminars that will bring experts of the field from
other parts of the country to his institution. This will help foster the
research in complex geometry in the area and it will be essential to the
education of the graduate students at his institution. The principal
investigator hopes to foster an environment of scientific curiosity and
investigation that will have a wide range of applications.




