
* 0315184
* Conference Proposal: Unity in Mathematics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2003,05/28/2003
* Pavel Etingof,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2004
* USD 36,000.00

Principal Investigator: Pavel Etingof, Joseph Harris, Isadore Singer Proposal
Number: DMS-0315184 Institution: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Title:
Unity in Mathematics

Abstract:

The goals of the conference "Unity of mathematics" are to discuss important
recent developments in mathematics, to chart promising new directions, and to
focus on connections between different fields. Specifically, the conference will
emphasize two areas where there have been significant advances in recent years,
namely 1) geometry and physics, and 2) representation theory. The discussion of
advances in geometry and physics will focus on new ideas coming from quantum
field theory and string theory, and their geometric consequences. This
discussion will involve diverse topics, such as mirror symmetry, Seiberg-Witten
theory, twisted K-theory, chiral algebras, noncommutative Yang-Mills theory,
formality theory, intersection theory on moduli spaces, etc. The discussion of
advances in representation theory will focus on the interactions between
representation theory and geometry; these interactions have recently led to the
development of powerful new methods of studying representations. Some of the
methods are the geometric Langlands program, quiver varieties, geometric
realizations of quantum groups and their representations.

The conference ``Unity of Mathematics'' is designed to bring together a diverse
group of leading senior mathematicians and young researchers for a discussion of
the most important recent developments in mathematics, with the focus on the
topics "geometry and physics", and "representation theory". The first topic
involves developments in geometry that were triggered by recent breakthroughs in
quantum field theory (which describes the motion of elementary particles) and
string theory (which attempts to unify quantum field theory and Einstein's
general relativity). Although string theory has not yet made successful
experimental predictions, it is striking that it did make successful predictions
in geometry. These predictions are the first example in the history of science
when geometry served as a ``lab'' for theoretical physics, and provide as much
evidence that string theory is ``correct'' as an experimental verification would
be. The second topic involves developments in representation theory (a branch of
algebra that could be very roughly defined as spectroscopy of symmetry), which
have resulted from systematic use of deep ideas from geometry and topology
(theory of shape). The conference will attract numerous mathematicians working
in different fields, as well as many theoretical physicists. Young researchers
are expected to find the conference especially useful because it will discuss
developments occurring at boundaries between fields. This may well be an
epiphany to those trained in a narrow specialty. The meeting will be a unique
occasion; prominent mathematicians will not only review recent advances but will
discuss their broad implications for mathematics. Special provisions will be
made to encourage young researchers, graduate students, women and minorities to
participate.
