
* 0332333
* CAREER: Classical Problems in Differential Geometry, Topology, and Convexity
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2003,07/18/2003
* Mohammad Ghomi,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0332333 Principal Investigator: Mohammad Ghomi

The principal investigator is interested primarily in the interplay between the
geometry and topology of submanifolds, including low dimensional problems in
Euclidean space (curves and surfaces). These investigations often involve some
notion of convexity, and include the following categories: (i) Shadows (or
shades) on illuminated hypersurfaces, and their application to geometric
variational problems; (ii) Embeddings of manifolds in Euclidean space without
creating parallel or intersecting tangent lines (totally skew embeddings), and
their relation to quadric hypersurfaces and nonsingular bilinear maps; (iii)
Global properties of locally convex hypersurfaces with boundary, including
connections with Monge-Ampere equations, and a new convex hull property which is
dual to that of negatively curved surfaces; (iv) Certain deformations of space
curves (unfoldings), and their application to study of extremals of knot
energies and distortion.

Curves and surfaces are to geometry what numbers are to algebra. They form the
basic ingredients of our visual perception, and inspire the development of far
reaching mathematical tools. For instance, those aspects of the PI's work
dealing with shadows on illuminated surfaces are motivated in part by a study of
soap films, and have connections to computer vision (the ``shape from shading"
problems). Further, the investigations on knot energies may be of interest in
studying DNA. Yet, despite an abundance of potential applications and centuries
of pure study, there are still numerous open problems in submanifold geometry
and topology which are strikingly intuitive and elementary to state. The PI
believes that advertising these problems at an early stage is an excellent tool
for sparking the interest of students in mathematical research. With the aid of
computer workshops, courses, seminars, and the lecture series proposed in this
project, the PI plans to communicate the beauty and excitement of geometric
problems to as wide an audience as possible.
