
* 0337713
* PECASE: Topological Methods in Applied Mathematics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, TOPOLOGY, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 05/01/2003,05/06/2004
* Robert Ghrist,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2007
* USD 308,648.00

Proposal Title: PECASE: Topological Methods in Applied Mathematics Institution:
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

The efficacy of topological methods in contemporary applied mathematics is
primarily attributable to the fact that topological features of a system are
inherently robust and global. This project focuses on a technology transfer from
contemporary ideas in topology, geometry, and dynamics to bear upon application
domains which include the following: First, Robotics: tools from configuration
space theory, CAT(0)complexes, and computational topology will be directed
toward specific problems in reconfigurable robotics, sensor-based navigation of
mobile agents, and self-assembly systems. Second, Parabolic coupled systems: a
Morse-theoretic homotopy index for braids will be used to solve parabolic
variational problems arising in pattern-formation PDE's, discrete Lagrangian
mechanics, and coupled oscillators. A Floer-theoretic extension of the braid
index will also be developed for infinite dimensional systems. Third,
Hydrodynamics: tools from contact geometry and topology will be directed toward
solving global problems of the dynamics and stability of Eulerian fluid flows in
dimensions higher than two. In most systems of interest in science and
engineering, multiple cooperative tasks must be globally coordinated. A common
thread is that whether the tasks involve macro-scale robots, micro-scale
devices, coupled oscillators, or fluid particles, there is an abstract space of
configurations lurking behind the physical phenomena. Unearthing and examining
those properties of physically-motivated configuration spaces which capture the
global features, the topology, geometry, and dynamics, holds the promise of
providing global tools which transcend the physical instantiation of the system
at hand: ostensibly different systems possess similar topological underpinnings.
The research component of this project is the development of contemporary
topological and global-geometric techniques for analyzing the dynamics and
coordination of systems of interest in engineering and computer science. The
overall goal is an effective technology transfer from cutting-edge perspectives
in topology to bear upon systems in application domains, which include robotics,
mechanics, and fluid dynamics. This is combined with a blend of pedagogical
service across graduate, undergraduate, and high school levels, featuring a
focused research group on topological robotics and a high-school outreach
program of expository lectures on the relevance and joy of mathematical
research.

This project was originally funded as a CAREER award, and was converted to a
Presidential Early Career Award for Engineers and Scientists (PECASE) award in
May 2004.




