
* 0350730
* Rigidity, Hodge Theory and Arithmetic Applications
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 01/01/2004,12/29/2003
* Bruno Klingler,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2006
* USD 110,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0350730 Principal Investigator: Bruno Klingler The project is
concerned with fundamental questions arising in the representation theory of
Kaehler groups and discrete subgroups of Lie groups. The techniques appeal to
various fields, from geometric analysis to arithmetic. There are four aspects to
the project: 1) study the rigidity and arithmeticity of cocompact complex
hyperbolic lattices, for which Margulis's superrigidity theorem does not apply.
More generally the PI is trying to construct a reasonable moduli space for non-
archimedean representations of Kaehler groups (analogous to Simpson's non-
abelian Hodge theory for archimedean representations). 2) study the positivity
of a natural kernel on the Bruhat-Tits building of a p-adic simple Lie groups.
This would lead to strong results in the representation theory of such groups.
3) find a short-cut to prove that non-arithmetic lattices don't have property T.
4) use ergodic theory to prove some cases of the Andre-Oort conjecture for
Shimura varieties.

The concept of "rigidity" underlies many of nature's secrets: certain natural
objects (and their mathematical models, like certain curved spaces appearing in
general relativity, or certain groups appearing in quantum mechanics) can not be
deformed. A fundamental discovery of mathematical analysis was that "rigidity"
is essentially a consequence of "arithmeticity": these rigid objects have a
simple description in terms of sequences of rational numbers. These numbers
provide the cherished invariants of modern physic. This project aims to develop
new methods for investigating crucial occurences of such arithmetic structures
in some natural symmetry groups, their related spaces and the dynamical systems
where they occur.
