
* 0352061
* Program in Nonlinear Waves, Kinetic Theory and Hamiltonian Partial Differential Equations-Fields Institute, Spg 04
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 05/01/2004,04/22/2004
* Nicholas Ercolani,AZ,University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2005
* USD 45,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0352061 Principal Investigator: Nicholas M. Ercolani

This proposal is for support of junior US based mathematicians to participate in
scientific activities at the Fields Institute during the thematic program
semester in Nonlinear Waves, Kinetic Theory and Hamiltonian Partial Differential
Equations (PDE) that will take place during the Spring semester of 2004. The
focus of the semester will concern areas of research on PDE that are motivated
by nonlinear wave theory, kinetic theory, and Hamiltonian systems. Hamiltonian
PDE form a class of linear and nonlinear partial differential equations which
share the property that they can be written in the form of a Hamiltonian system
with infinitely many degrees of freedom, using various and sometimes
nonclassical symplectic structures. Principal examples include nonlinear wave
equations, nonlinear Schroedinger equations and Euler's equations for water
waves. The analogy with dynamical systems raises a number of basic questions,
which form a part of the motivation for this semester of focus on Hamiltonian
PDE. Of particular note is the connection that has been established between the
theory of kinetic equations coming from statistical mechanics, and the nonlinear
systems of PDE which arise in their macroscopic limits. The paradigm is the
fluid dynamical scaling limit of the Boltzmann equation, but there are numerous
emerging areas of relevance for this analysis, including the beginnings of a
mathematically rigorous foundation for the theory of nonlinear wave turbulence.

The organizers are expecting this thematic program to be a very dynamic focus of
research on Partial Differential Equations that model a variety of physical
phenomena, such as planetary motions, lasers and optical fiber systems, ocean
waves and fluid turbulence. The character of the program is broadly
international, and it represents an opportunity for exposure for young
mathematicians. The short course series, the four workshops and the symposia are
especially appropriate for participation by developing research mathematicians
or physicists early in their career. The organizing committee believes that the
program will engender further interaction and lasting collaboration among
participants from various disciplines. Additionally, the participation of women
and under-represented minorities will be actively encouraged.


