
* 0354270
* EMSW21-RTG: Graduate Education in Geometry and Topology at the University of Chicago
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 07/15/2004,07/02/2004
* Kevin Corlette,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2008
* USD 600,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0354270 Principal Investigator: Kevin D. Corlette

This project will support activities of the geometry/topology group at the
University of Chicago which have an impact on the training of graduate students.
This group currently consists of six senior faculty, thirteen junior faculty and
about thirty graduate students. The research interests of members of the group
span a wide array of topics in geometry and topology, including complex
differential geometry, rigidity and locally symmetric spaces, connections of
ergodic theory with discrete groups and number theory, geometric group theory,
3-manifold topology, Teichmuller theory, geometric topology of high-dimensional
manifolds, the moduli space of Riemannian metrics, complex dynamics, symplectic
topology and homotopy theory. The activities of the group include active
research seminars in geometry/topology and algebraic topology, several student
seminars and a visitors program, all of which are directly relevant to the
education of graduate students. These activities, in combination with the
general structure of the graduate program in the department, provide ideal
conditions for students to gain exposure to a broad range of current research
while pursuing their own specific research projects.

Geometry and topology are fundamental parts of mathematics which are currently
experiencing rapid development, with many new ideas and lines of investigation
being pursued. Many of these developments are internal to the subject, while
others arise, at least in part, from contact with fields such as physics and
computer science. It is particularly exciting to be a student in a field
undergoing this kind of change, but it is at the same time a challenge to orient
oneself when the landscape is rapidly changing. This project will enhance the
ability of doctoral students at the University of Chicago to learn about and do
research in these areas, thus helping to train the next generation of
researchers in geometry and topology. In addition to providing direct support
for graduate students as they do research, the project will also provide support
for graduate students to travel to conferences and the bring visitors to the
University for seminar talks and collaboration. All of this is intended to
expose graduate students to the frontlines of research as effectively as
possible.
