
* 0354948
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2004,05/12/2008
* Qing Han,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2009
* USD 108,061.00

Proposal DMS-0354948

Title: Nonlinear partial differential equations PI: Qing Han, University of
Notre Dame

ABSTRACT

The principal investigator plans to continue his work in partial differential
equations. A common theme of this project, and also of the research of the PI
over the past several years, is the important role of the nodal sets of
solutions to differential equations, or in general the level sets of the
functions involved. The problems discussed in the project involve differential
equations of various types, elliptic, hyperbolic and of mixed type. Some
problems have close connections with other fields in mathematics, including
several complex variables and algebraic geometry. One class of problems that the
PI would continue to work on includes the geometric structure of level sets of
solutions, in particular the nodal sets, the singular sets and the branch sets.
An important part of the study is the investigation of the asymptotic behavior
of solutions near these sets or the asymptotic behavior of these sets
themselves. Another class of problems that the PI would continue to work on
involves the effect of level sets of known functions in the equations on the
properties of solutions.

The problems involving singular sets originate from the material science and
the control theory. Singular sets, as the name suggests, are those sets where
singularities occur. Precise definitions vary according to problems where they
arise. In reality it is impossible to eliminate the singular sets, the so-called
`bad sets'. One of the central tasks is to identify the conditions under which
the singular sets can be controlled and the conditions under which the singular
sets are small. The proposed problems concerning singular sets in the project
are in their simplest forms. They are related to the Erickson's model for liquid
crystals and the Ginzburg-Landau equation in the superconductivity. The PI
believes that the discussion of these mathematical problems would improve the
methods to control the singular sets in various applications.


