
* 0400785
* Workshop on "Geometry and Representation Theory"
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2004,07/23/2004
* Philip Foth,AZ,University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 01/31/2006
* USD 16,500.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0400785 Principal Investigator: Philip A. Foth, Paul Bressler, Kirti
N. Joshi

A powerful influx of methods and ideas from geometry into the representation
theory led to significant breakthroughs and stimulated the emergence of
geometric representation theory as an important area of research in modern
mathematics. Geometric methods have been utilized to explore many significant
problems in representation theory. The Langlands program provides an example of
the synthesis of representation theory, arithmetic and geometry. In its
arithmetic avatar the Langlands correspondence envisages a description of
certain kinds of representations of the Galois group of a number field or a
function field in terms of automorphic representations. The geometric avatar of
the Langlands correspondence pioneered by Drinfel'd and Laumon has also
attracted a lot of attention and has turned out to be a confluence of several
areas of mathematics: representation theory, D-modules, Kac-Moody and vertex
algebras and integrable systems, Hitchin maps to name a few. Representation
theory has been omnipresent in theoretical physics and conversely, problems and
developments in physics motivated much progress in representation theory which,
in turn, was a significant input into other branches of mathematics. Conformal
Field Theory led to intensive study of the representation theory of the Virasoro
algebra, Kac-Moody algebras and vertex operator algebras. Results in
representation theory have had a significant impact on the understanding of the
structure of moduli spaces. In the theory of integrable systems it has been
observed long ago in numerous examples that physically meaningful completely
integrable systems as well as explicit formulas for the integrals of motion are
intimately related with the geometric representation theory. All these
developments serve as our motivation to organize a conference on geometric
representation theory, a forum where the majority of participants will be young
researchers and advanced graduate students, learning from leading specialists
and further advancing their research projects.

Representation theory is a quintessential branch of modern mathematics which
studies symmetries of various algebraic systems. The results and ideas from
representation theory found many important applications in pure and applied
mathematics as well as quantum physics, biology, economics, just to name a few.
More recently a powerful merge of ideas from geometry made a significant impact
on the discipline and led to important breakthroughs. The main goal of our
conference is to gather leading specialists in representation theory as well as
beginning researchers and advanced graduate students, to create a forum where
participants can exchange new ideas, communicate recent advances and assist
younger participants in developing successful research strategies. A special
emphasis is made on attracting women and underrepresented minority participants,
especially those at the dawn of their careers.


