
* 0404766
* Cycles, characters and global geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2004,08/18/2005
* H. Blaine Lawson,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2008
* USD 450,420.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0404766 Principal Investigator: H. Blaine Lawson, Jr.

This project is concerned with the study of cycles, residues, boundaries and
differential characters. The proposal has several interrelated parts. The first
concerns the groups of algebraic cycles and cocycles on a projective variety
$X$. The aim is to relate these groups to the global structure of $X$. The
investigator has, with others, established a theory of homology type for
algebraic varieties based on the homotopy groups of cycles spaces. This theory
will be used to study concrete questions about algebraic spaces. Implications
for real algebraic geometry will be explored. Striking onnections to universal
constructions in topology which emerged in prior research will also be
investigated. A second part of the proposal concerns cycles which bound complex
subvarieties in a projective manifold. Several new conjectures relate these
cycles to approximation theory, pluripotential theory, and the projective
spectrum of Banach graded algebras. A third area of the proposal concerns the
study of singularities and characteristic forms. This subject includes a
generalization of Chern-Weil theory which gives canonical homologies between
singularities of bundle maps and characteristic forms. It includes a useful
analytic tool -- geometric atomicity -- which will be studied, and it yields a
new approach to Morse Theory. Applications relating singularities to global
geometry remain to be investigated. The forth part of the proposal concerns
sparks and spark complexes. This recently developed framework for the study of
differential characters has yielded interesting generalizations which extend
Deligne cohomology and arithmetic Chow groups. They are essentially secondary
invariants which mediate between cycles and smooth data. Further development of
the theory and its application to the study of cycles is proposed. A fifth area
is concerned with special cycles in geometry, in particular Special Lagrangian
cycles in Calabi-Yau manifolds, and associative and Cayley cycles in $G_2$ and
Spin$_7$ spaces. These latter subjects relate to mirror symmetry conjectures and
to M-theory in Physics as well as many areas of geometry and algebra. This
project will also be concerned with student development, including an
undergraduate educational effort aimed at fostering mathematical independence
and developing interactive enviornments.

A concept of central importance in geometry is that of a ``cycle''. In algebraic
geometry a cycle corresponds to the simultaneous solution of a system of
polynomial equations. In differential geometry they arise in many ways: as the
large scale solutions of certain differential equations, and as the level sets
and singularity sets of differentiable mappings. Curves and surfaces in space
are simple examples. Cycles with a particular geometry also play a fundamental
role in modern physical theories

This proposal is concerned with the study of cycles across this broad spectrum.
In the algebraic setting cycles have been related to fundamental large-scale
geometry of their surrounding space. This discovery has revealed surprizing and
important relationships between spaces of algebraic cycles and fundamental
constructions in algebraic topology and has led to new insights in both fields.
This work will be continued.

Another area of investigation concerns cycles which form the boundary of subsets
with special geometric structure. They represent non-linear versions of
classical boundary value problems in analysis. Such questions arise in many
contexts. Recently the proposer has formulated conjectures relating certain
important classes of such cycles to questions in approximation theory and Banach
algebras. Successful resolution should produce significant new insights in
several fields of mathematics.

A third area of study concerns a mathematical apparatus developed by the
proposer to detect subtle relationships between cycles and the global structure
of the space they live in. This apparatus encompasses some of the most effective
tools historically developed for this purpose, and it is much more general.
Further development of this theory and its applications will be persued.

A fourth domain of investigation is concerned with special cycles in geometry:
Special Lagrangian cycles in Calabi-Yau manifolds, and associative and Cayley
cycles in G(2) and Spin(7) spaces. These latter subjects relate to gauge field
theory and gravity in Physics

This project will also be concerned with graduate student development. Students
will be part of the research team. There will also be an undergraduate
educational effort aimed at fostering mathematical independence and developing
interactive environments.
