
* 0405622
* Geometric PDE's and Monge-Kantorovich Theory in Problems of Optics and Differential Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2004,07/26/2004
* Vladimir Oliker,GA,Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2008
* USD 107,997.00

DMS-0405622

P.I.: Vladimir Oliker, Emory University

Title: Geometric PDE's and Monge-Kantorovich Theory in Problems of Optics and
Differential Geometry

ABSTRACT

The goal of this work is the development of geometric methods for solving
nonlinear partial differential equations (PDE's) arising in problems involving
maps with controlled Jacobian determinant. Many problems in differential
geometry, optics, and other areas of mathematics and engineering are in this
class. Recently discovered deep connections between such equations and Monge-
Kantorovich optimal mass transfer theory in Euclidean space and on manifolds
will also be studied. Among the topics that will be considered are the
following. (1) Development of geometrical and analytic techniques for solving
problems requiring determination of reflecting and refracting interfaces with
capabilities to transform intensity distributions in a prescribed manner. (2)
Investigation of geometric problems involving hypersurfaces with prescribed
curvature functions and geometric inequalities with emphasis on variational
methods, especially, those connected with Monge-Kantorovich theory; applications
of these variational methods to problems in convexity, in particular, to the
Minkowski problem and its various generalizations, will be studied as a part of
this program. (3) Development of geometrically motivated, provably convergent
and efficient multi-scale numerical methods for solving nonlinear second order
PDE's arising in reflector/refractor problems of optics and in geometric
problems involving curvature functions and maps with controlled volume.

Nonlinear partial differentials equations expressing energy conservation laws as
a constraint on the Jacobian of a map describing a physical phenomenon are very
common in science and engineering. For example, in optics such equations arise
naturally in problems requiring determination of interfaces with prescribed
refractive and/or reflective properties; in astrophysics these equations have to
be solved when the shape of targets in the solar system must be determined from
indirect and limited set of measurements; in weather prediction models based on
quasi- and semi-geostrophic approximations of atmospheric motion such equations
describe energy conservation laws; in computer science the same type of
equations arise in problems connected with radiosity estimates. Typically, the
theoretical analysis and numerical solution of these equations is very difficult
because of their highly nonlinear structure. Fortunately, the geometric content
common to all these problems provides important insights leading to effective
methods for their investigation and numerical solution. Development of such
methods is the main goal of this research.


