
* 0405529
* RUI: Differential Geometry of Submanifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/15/2004,06/20/2008
* Thomas Cecil,MA,College of the Holy Cross
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2009
* USD 132,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0405529 Principal Investigator: Thomas E. Cecil

The goal of this proposal is to study submanifolds of Euclidean space and the
unit sphere which have special curvature properties. Of particular interest are
isoparametric hypersurfaces, which have constant principal curvatures, and Dupin
hypersurfaces, which have the property that each principal curvature is constant
along each of its curvature surfaces. Although these important classes of
hypersurfaces have been studied since the nineteenth century, many natural
problems remain open at this time. The principal investigator and his
collaborators, Quo-Shin Chi and Gary Jensen of Washington University, will
employ the method of moving frames on Legendre submanifolds in Lie sphere
geometry in their research on these problems. This method is applicable to the
study of any submanifold in Euclidean space, not just to those mentioned here,
and it has been used successfully by the principal investigator and his
collaborators in previous research.

Dupin hypersurfaces have been studied extensively since the introduction of the
cyclides of Dupin in 1822, and great progress has been made over the past 25
years in their classification. Dupin hypersurfaces have played a major role in
various mathematical theories, such as the theory of taut embeddings, the study
of Hamiltonian systems of hydrodynamic type, and the theory of higher-
dimensional Laplace invariants. The cyclides of Dupin have also apperared in
recent papers on computer aided geometric design. The study of isoparametric
hypersurfaces in spheres was initiated by the renowned French mathematician,
Elie Cartan, in the 1930's, and many mathematicians have made significant
contributions to this beautiful theory. Included in the class of isoparametric
hypersurfaces and their focal sets are many famous geometric objects, such as
the Veronese surface and the Clifford-Stiefel manifolds, which have been studied
by research mathematicians from several different points of view. In terms of
Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) activities and the broader impact
of the proposal, the principal investigator plans to continue his successful
program of new course development and mentoring of individual students. Over the
past fifteen years, this has resulted in 13 honors theses and a total of 25
students in geometry courses, who have attended or plan to attend graduate
school in mathematics or related fields.




