
* 0405729
* Topology of Algebraic Varieties and Singularities
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2004,08/17/2004
* Anatoly Libgober,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2008
* USD 164,596.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0405729 Principal Investigator: Anatoly S. Libgober

The proposal studies several topics in the topology of algebraic varieties and
singularity theory. The author plans to consider the vertex operator algebras
attached to possibly singular algebraic varieties. Vertex operator algebras were
attached to non singular varieties by Malikov, Schechtman and Vaintrob and to
orbifolds by Frenkel and Szczesny. L.Borisov and author's work on elliptic
genera suggests that one may expect such algebras for varieties with Gorenstein
log terminal singularities. These vertex operator algebras will provide new
invariants of algebraic varieties which role should be investigated. These new
algebras should provide further clarification of McKay correspondence between
the group actions and singularities. The author plans to study new Chern class
type invariants for singular varieties which are suggested by the joint work
with L.Borisov. Secondly, the author works on finding connections between the
conformal field theory and others approaches to mirror symmetry and, as part of
this, he plans to study the relationship between elliptic genera and other
invariants of vertex operatror algebras attached to manifolds and homological
mirror symmetry. Thirdly the author proposes to study connection between the
elliptic genera and isolated singularities and possible applications to
Herling's conjecture on properties of spectra of isolated singularities. Final
part deals with problems about the topology of the complements, the Alexander
type invariants introduced by the author and the connections with the invariants
introduced in previous parts of the proposal.

Work on this project will clarify new mathematical structures which appeared
recently in theoretical physics and in particular in string theory. It fits into
ongoing process of restructuring the scope of mathematical problems and methods
for their solutions. The puropose of this research is to find applications of
the new structures which emerged in theoretical physics to a wider range of
previously unsolved problems and to expand connections between mathematics and
physics. It will bring new methods into areas of mathematics such as singularity
theory which already proved to be important link between theoretical mathematics
and science and engineering. Work on this project will help to upgrade the
instructions at UIC on graduate and undergraduate level to the level fully
representing frontiers of contemporary mathematics.
