
* 0405954
* Complexity and Variational Problems in Riemannian Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2004,07/15/2004
* Alexander Nabutovsky,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2007
* USD 115,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0405954 Principal Investigator: Alexander Nabutovsky

Firstly, we are going to study the length of a shortest closed geodesic and a
shortest closed geodesic net on a compact Riemannian manifold. Secondly, we will
also study possible topologies of closed geodesic nets on surfaces. Thirdly, we
will try to resolve the following problem posed by M. Gromov: Is it true that
all closed geodesic nets on a compact surface always form a dense subset?
Fourthly, we will be interested in curvature-free bounds for the smallest area
of a non-trivial minimal surface in a closed Riemannian manifold. In another
direction we will be studying Morse landscapes of Riemannian functionals and
functionals on spaces of submanifolds. Earlier we developed methods based on
recursion theory that enable one to prove that Morse landscape of many
interesting functionals on these spaces are extremely complicated. Now we will
try to develop methods yielding quantitative information about graphs of these
functionals and to extend our approach to a wider class of functionals that
includes Sobolev norms of various curvatures normalized by a power of volume.

When one studies the geometry of the round sphere one naturally notices the
equator, meridians and other ``big" circles on it. These curves are examples of
closed geodesics. Now let us deform the sphere so that it is not round.
Remarkably, there still will be closed geodesics on this surface, and the
shortest of them will not be too long. We would like to know how exactly its
length is related to the area and the diameter of the deformed surface. We will
also study similar questions for Riemannian manifolds that are higher
dimensional generalizations of surfaces. On the other hand note that the round
sphere has the nicer shape than all deformed spheres. It is less clear what is
the nicest shape of the torus (the ``pretzel"). We are going to investigate what
happens in higher dimensions where typically there are infinitely many competing
``nice" shapes and a lot depends on what exactly do we mean by ``nice".


