
* 0405985
* Smooth Dynamical Systems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 11/15/2004,11/05/2004
* Sheldon Newhouse,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 10/31/2006
* USD 35,000.00



We propose to study the dynamics of smooth diffeomorphisms of low dimensional
manifolds. A significant theme here is the study of the abundance of homoclinic
tangencies and its effects. It has been known for some time that homoclinic
tangencies produce interesting phenomena. They form an obstruction to structural
stability, and have a profound influence on bifurcations phenomena. While most
of the information we have about homoclinic tangencies may be considered
negative in regard to our ability to understand the underlying dynamics,
recently we obtained a positive result: generically they lead to topologically
transitive sets of maximal Hausdorff dimension. One part of the current proposal
involves understanding the relation between these maximal dimension sets and
Lebesgue asymptotic measures. These are measures obtained by taking weak limits
of the averages of the iterates of measures which are absolutely continuous with
respect to Lebesgue measure. Recently we have shown that in many dissipative
cases SRB measures on surfaces only exist on uniformly hyperbolic attractors. We
wish to extend this to area preserving cases and to make progress on the
conjecture that generically in highly smooth systems a non-Anosov area
preserving diffeomorphism of a surface has metric entropy zero. Another question
we will consider is whether the Henon family has no SRB measure for a residual
set of parameters. It is a celebrated result of Benedicks-Carleson and
Benedicks-Young that SRB measures exist for a positive Lebesgue measure set of
parameters. In addition to the above, we will study various questions on the
existence of symbolic extensions in smooth systems.

We propose to study aspects of the orbit structure of non-linear smooth
dynamical systems. Our particular emphasis will be on three dimensional systems
whose orbits return infinitely often to an embedded transverse surface. These
systems occur in models which arise in many fields of science from Biology to
Physics and even Economics. For instance, they include the problems of general
forced oscillations and the Newtoninan motion of three bodies in a plane.
Considering the so-called first return map to the embedded surface we are led to
study the iterations of smooth transformations (mappings) of a surface to
itself. There are special motions called homoclinic motions (first discovered
and named by Poincare in the three body problem) which are known to produce a
rich, interesting, and complicated orbit structure. In particular, typical
homoclinic motions imply the existence of infinitely many unstable periodic
orbits and other orbits which behave in an erratic and unpredictable way. It is
now known that in many cases such systems can be studied by comparing them to
statistical objects such as the random flipping of a weighted coin. This gives
rise to so-called "symbolic models" whose orbit structure can be understood. Our
research concerns the types of symbolic systems which can occur in modeling
various smooth systems. including the estimation of certain numerical quantities
called "entropy" and "dimension" which can be used to quantify different levels
of complicated motion.


