
* 0406454
* Analytic Studies on Pseudo-holomorphic Maps
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/15/2004,06/28/2008
* Thomas Parker,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2009
* USD 172,281.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0406454 Principal Investigator: Thomas H. Parker

This project involves analytic aspects of the theory of pseudo-holomorphic
curves. The aim is to develop effective methods for computing Gromov-Witten
invariants of symplectic manifolds and enumerative invariants of algebraic
manifolds. The main thrust is a continuing project with E. Ionel on the Gromov-
Witten invariants of six-dimensional manifolds. String Theory is especially
effective in making predictions about a special type of six-dimensional spaces
called Calabi-Yau 3-folds. One of the most fascinating predictions of String
Theory is the Gompakumar-Vafa conjecture, which claims that the plethora of
Gromov-Witten invariants are determined by a more limited collection of `BPS
numbers'. The first proposed project seeks to derive and prove the Gompakumar-
Vafa formulas by adapting the analytic methods that C. Taubes developed to
relate the Seiberg-Witten and Gromov invariants. This approach to the BPS
numbers is different and more geometric than the physicists'.

The proposed work also includes efforts to extend the PI's previous work on
Relative GW invariants to invariants relative to ``a stratified symplectic
subspace'', and to give a geometric and computationally effective description of
the virtual fundamental class for symplectic manifolds which are not necessary
semipositive. A fourth project concerns the ``modified GW invariants'' defined
by the P.I.'s student Junho Lee; those make it possible to study a class of
manifolds (Kahler surfaces with positive geometric genus) where there are
important conjectures that are not currently approachable by GW methods. The
last project is geometric analysis of a different sort aimed at understanding
how supersymmetry simplifies expressions for heat kernels on manifolds.

One of the most notable developments in mathematics in the past decade has been
the remarkable confluence of ideas coming from String Theory, Algebraic
Geometry, Partial Differential Equations, and Symplectic Geometry. A major part
of that story revolves around the idea of counting holomorphic curves in
algebraic manifolds. That problem was studied for 100 years with few results.
Then, around 1990, it was realized that the problem can be translated into
symplectic geometry and tackled using the powerful machinery of mathematical
gauge theory. (Gauge theory, originally part of physics, has been the focus of
many very fruitful interactions between mathematicians and physicists over the
past twenty years; it includes Yang-Mills and Seiberg-Witten Theory, and String
Theory). This `Gromov-Witten invariant' approach led quickly to formulas
answering some of the original curve-counting problems. The subject is now
advancing rapidly on many fronts, and is being continually stimulated by the
predictions of physics. This project is aimed toward further developing this
theory using the gauge theory that is approach most closely aligned with
physics, and to use the symplectic approach to make conceptual bridges between
the algebraic and physics viewpoints.
