
* 0406060
* The Neumann Problem for the Tangential Cauchy-Riemann Complex and the CR Embedding Problem
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2004,07/29/2004
* John Lee,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2008
* USD 107,981.00

SupermanSProposal DMS-0406060 PI: John M. Lee, University of Washington

The Neumann Problem for the Tangential Cauchy-Riemann Complex and the CR
Embedding Problem

ABSTRACT Technical description of the project:

The proposed research will study existence and regularity theorems for the
natural Neumann boundary problem for the tangential Cauchy-Riemann equations on
smoothly bounded domains in CR manifolds. All known existence results for this
problem work only on domains with very special defining functions, namely those
that depend only on the real and imaginary parts of a single CR-holomorphic
function. The key idea of this research is to use the fact that such a defining
function provides a codimension-2 foliation (near the boundary but away from
characteristic points) by compact CR-submanifolds. By using known estimates for
the Kohn Laplacian on the compact leaves, one can reduce the Neumann problem to
a (generally non-coercive) elliptic boundary problem in a plane domain. These
results are expected to have applications to such problems as the local CR
embedding problem, local deformations of CR structures, characterizing domains
on which the tangential Cauchy-Riemann complex is solvable, regularity of maps
between CR manifolds, and the existence of local frames for CR vector bundles.

Non-technical description:

The geometry of complex manifolds (geometric objects in which complex numbers
instead of real numbers can be used as coordinates) has recently begun to play a
surprisingly important role in both mathematics and physics. For example, in
string theory, physicists postulate that the fundamental particles of matter are
actually "quantum strings" that vibrate inside sub-microscopic complex manifolds
called Calabi-Yau manifolds. The principal analytic tool for studying complex
manifolds is the Cauchy-Riemann equations, a system of partial differential
equations that characterizes, among other things, those functions that have
complex derivatives. When one studies surfaces within complex manifolds (such as
the "branes" that arise in string theory), the Cauchy-Riemann equations need to
be replaced by a much more complicated system called the "tangential Cauchy-
Riemann equations," which we are just beginning to understand. This proposal
will develop new techniques for studying some deep analytic questions
surrounding the solvability of the tangential Cauchy-Riemann equations, which
are expected to be of fundamental importance in understanding the geometry and
analysis of surfaces in complex manifolds.


