
* 0406446
* The Faddeev Knots and the Skyrme Solitons
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2005,07/29/2005
* Yisong Yang,NY,Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2008
* USD 124,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0406446 Principal Investigator: Yisong Yang

This project is to develop a general existence theory for the knotted solitons
arising in Faddeev's quantum field theory model. The difficult structure of the
problem requires innovative techniques and ideas beyond the well developed tools
such as the method of concentration-compactness. Recently, the PI has
collaborated with F. H. Lin on the existence of these Faddeev knots and a series
of important results have been obtained. A notable feature in their study is
that, although compactness may fail, existence may be achieved as a consequence
of two key inequalities: the first inequality, called by them the Substantial
Inequality, ensures the existence of at least one topological minimizer; the
second inequality, giving an optimal sublinear upper growth estimate for the
Faddeev energy in terms of the associated topological charge, implies the
existence of an infinite family of topological minimizers, hence the existence
of the Faddeev knots. This progress opens new directions for achieving a higher
level of understanding of various unsettled aspects of the Faddeev knots,
including the existence of unit-charge unknots (ring-like solitons), existence
of high-charge knots and their stability, and transition pictures of knots in
view of their topological and energetical characteristics. The similarity
between the Faddeev energy and the Skyrme energy may be exploited to tackle the
difficult existence problem of the Skyrme solitons. Indeed, a by-product of the
work of F. H. Lin and the PI will be a proof of the existence of unit-charge
Skyrme solitons which corrects the flawed (but well-known) proof of M. Esteban
published in 1986. This study may also be extended to the Skyrme model in two
spatial dimensions which has applications in condensed matter physics and
cosmology. This project also suggests new directions for the study of the
existence problems of global energy minimizers with topological characteristics
in other important related areas.

The concept of knots is of foundational importance in science. For example, Lord
Kelvin first explored the idea of using knots to model atoms and molecules. More
recently, the concept of knots has inspired various fundamental areas, including
particle and condensed-matter physics, statistical mechanics, cosmology,
molecular biology, and synthetic chemistry. Up until recently, mathematical work
had been focused on topological and combinatorial classifications of knots, but
not on existence. In 1995, Faddeev and Niemi started a seminal study on the
existence of knots as the soliton solutions of a quantum field theory model
known as the Faddeev model using high-power computer simulations. The proposed
work develops a mathematical existence theory of such knots. This work will give
new insight into the mathematical structure of knots and their computer
realization.
