
* 0406504
* Applications for Potential Theory to Geometric Analysis
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2004,05/26/2004
* Denis Labutin,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 92,000.00

Proposal DMS-0406504

Title: Applications of potential theory to geometric analysis. PI: Denis A.
Labutin, University of California, Santa Barbara

ABSTRACT

The project is dedicated to investigation of main elliptic partial differential
equations arising in Riemannian geometry, namely equations with the Monge-Ampere
operator, Laplacian, and conformal Laplacian. The central question for the
project is the analysis of the singular sets arising in geometric problems. It
is proposed to approach several problems using ideas from nonlinear potential
theory. Let us describe the problems. The singular Yamabe problem originates in
the work of Loewner and Nirenberg, and Schoen and Yau. It consists of finding
conformal deformation of the metric in a domain of a Riemannian manifold (unit
sphere is the model case) to a complete metric with a constant scalar curvature.
The question is how to describe the domains for which it is possible. In the
case of the conformal deformation to the constant negative scalar curvature in
the unit sphere it was recently solved by PI. The answer is that it is possible
if and only if the complement is not thin in the potential theory sense. This
means that the Wiener-type test with a certain capacity holds at any point of
the complement. In the case of the conformal deformation to the zero scalar
curvature there is a strong evidence that the criterion will be the polarity of
of the complement with respect to another capacity. PI intends to verify it. Can
one extend the results from the sphere to general closed manifolds? Under what
additional assumptions? Can potential theory ideas contribute to the deformation
to positive scalar curvature? Another group of questions is related to the
Liouville theorems on negatively curved Cartan-Hadamard manifolds. The main
problem is easy to state. Does any such manifold of dimension greater than three
with uniform upper negative sectional curvature bound support a nontrivial
bounded harmonic function? PI believes that potential theory ideas can
contribute to better understanding of this question. The solvability of the
Dirichlet problem at infinity (and hence the failure of the Liouville theorem)
for strongly negatively curved Cartan-Hadamard manifolds was established in the
works by Sullivan, Anderson, Schoen, and Ancona. There are certain similarities
with the Dirichlet problem in irregular domains in the flat space, where
potential theory ideas are proved to be useful. Validity of Liouville theorems
in a domain is known to be equivalent to the polarity of the complement with
respect to the classical electrostatic capacity. Can one establish a similar
relation for the manifolds? Is curvature the adequate characteristic of the
metric for such problems? Results of Grigoryan and Saloff-Coste show, that for a
different but related question of the validity of Harnack inequality, the
correct language is the Riemannian volume growth and local Poincare-type
inequalities rather than the nonnegative curvature. It is certain that the new
methods will have to be developed for Liouville theorems. The main goal of the
project is investigation of the described problems using the techniques which
have not been applied to such problems before. These are the techniques of
nonlinear potential theory.

The area of interaction between nonlinear partial differential equations and
geometry is undergoing a strong development. However, the current research is
not primarily aimed at the questions proposed in the project. The project is
focused on the application of the methods from technically difficult area of
nonlinear partial differential equations, namely nonlinear potential theory, to
several concrete problems about singularities arising in Riemannian geometry.
Previously these methods were not systematically applied and developed in such
context. More complete understanding of potential theoretic methods in geometric
analysis will be of great help in detailing the way to better understanding of
singularities in geometric problems. Better understanding of singularites of
geometric objects leads in its turn to progress in problems from theoretical
physics, topology and other areas of mathematics.




