
* 0410373
* Symbolic Methods for Classification Problems In Lie Theory and Differential Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2004,07/18/2008
* Ian Anderson,UT,Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2009
* USD 177,217.00

Anderson

The investigator develops and implements algorithms for a number of
classification problems in the areas of Lie algebras, differential geometry, and
differential equations. For each of the problems of interest, the list of
representative objects is very large. Therefore he encodes these classification
results within a computer algebra system and develops software that allows for
the efficient but flexible manipulation of the large amounts of data contained
in these classification results. This work provides researchers with powerful
new tools to find examples and test conjectures on a wide range of subjects. The
specific classification problems that are addressed first deal with the
classification of low dimensional Lie algebras and their sub-algebras, the
classification of vector field systems in 2 and 3 dimensions, and the
classification of 4- and 5-dimensional space-times with symmetry.

The classification of mathematical structures is a central theme in many
branches of mathematics. While these classification problems can be easy to
state, the solutions are often very long and complex and therefore not
accessible to the larger mathematical and scientific community. A major
component of this project explores new nontraditional methodologies (based on
computer algebra systems and also data-based Java applets) for the dissemination
and generalization of these results. Applications to the automated solution of
differential equations are studied. The computer software that is being
developed to support these specific goals has applications in other areas of
mathematical research and in theoretical physics. It also has demonstrated
pedagogical value for both undergraduate and graduate mathematics education.
