
* 0504367
* Einstein Metrics, Sasakian Geometry and Kahler Orbifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2005,07/14/2005
* Charles Boyer,NM,University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 215,999.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0504367 Principal Investigator: Charles P. Boyer and Krzysztof
Galicki

Professors Boyer and Galicki propose to investigate several projects in geometry
and topology. The objective of all the projects is to study fundamental
questions in Riemannian Geometry with two main focal points: Contact Geometry of
orbifold bundles over Calabi-Yau and Fano varieties and the existence of some
special (i.e., Einstein, positive Ricci curvature, transversely Calabi-Yau)
metrics on such spaces. The questions and problems proposed here are deeply
rooted in the principal investigators' earlier work which exploited a
fundamental relationship between contact geometry of Sasakian-Einstein spaces
and two kinds of Kaehler geometry, namely Q-factorial Fano varieties with
Kaehler-Einstein orbifold metrics with positive scalar curvature, and Calabi-Yau
manifolds with their Kaehler Ricci-flat metrics. Most recently the principal
investigators and J. Kollar have solved an open problem in Riemannian geometry.
We have proved the existence of Einstein metrics on exotic spheres in a paper to
appear in the Annals of Mathematics. Furthermore, we have shown that odd
dimensional homotopy spheres that bound parallelizable manifolds admit an
enormous number of Einstein metrics. In fact, the number of deformation classes
as well as the number of moduli of Sasakian-Einstein metrics grow double
exponentially with dimension. The techniques used by the principal investigators
borrow from several different fields; the algebraic geometry of Mori theory and
intersection theory, the analysis of the Calabi Conjecture, and finally the
classical differential topology of links of isolated hypersurface singularities.
These methods can be extended much further and in various directions. More
generally the principal investigators want to address several classification
problems concerning compact Sasakian-Einstein manifolds in dimensions 5 and 7.
These two dimensions are important for two separate reasons. In view of earlier
work higher dimensional examples can be constructed using the join construction.
At the same time these two odd dimensions appear to play special role in
Superstring Theory. In the context of recent developements in String and
M-Theory the principal investigators also propose to investigate some related
problems concerning self-dual Einstein metrics in dimension 4.

Mathematics is the foundation upon which our modern technology is built, and
much of its understanding and development must preceed technological progress.
Nevertheless, our research into a particular type of geometry is closely linked
to some important problems in modern Theoretical Physics and should provide an
important mathematical basis for their understanding. For example, the
mathematical models that we are studying are currently being used in
supersymmetric string theory which is a model for the unification of gravity
with the other fundamental forces of nature. This also has applications to the
Physics of black holes.
