
* 0505645
* Curvature rigidity, quasi-local mass and related problems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2005,06/23/2008
* Xiaodong Wang,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2009
* USD 95,666.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0505645 Principal Investigator: Xiaodong Wang

One of the central themes in differential geometry is to understand curvature
and its implications in terms of geometric and topological properties. Despite
the enormous progress made during the last several decades, there remain many
fundamental problems. This project is to study several such problems involving
the scalar curvature. The first one is to understand the boundary effect on
manifolds with convex boundary and positive scalar curvature. This is closely
related to understanding quasi-local mass in general relativity. A key specific
case is whether a compact three-manifold with scalar curvature bigger or equal
to six whose boundary is totally geodesic and isometric to the standard two-
sphere is isometric to the three dimensional hemisphere. The second problem is
whether on a compact hyperbolic three-manifold the Yamabe number is achieved by
the hyperbolic metric. If true it will be a remarkable generalization of several
deep results in Riemannian geometry. It is equivalent to the question whether
the hyperbolic metric has smaller volume than any other metric with the same
scalar curvature. These problems definitely will serve as great source of
inspiration and lead to many other fascinating problems.

This project will have a broad impact outside the field of geometric analysis.
These important problems are closely related to theoretical physics,
particularly general relativity. Their solutions will greatly enhance our
understanding of spacetime structures. It is also conceivable that understanding
boundary effect under various curvature assumptions will have applications in
other areas of science and engineering. The author hopes that the project will
also have a positive contribution to undergraduate and graduate education and
training. It will be part of the author's joint efforts with his colleagues to
strengthen the graduqate program in geometric analysis at Michigan State
University.
