
* 0514070
* Complex Analysis and Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2005,09/23/2009
* Daniel Burns,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2010
* USD 153,800.00

The PI will work on some problems in symplectic geometry (moduli of singular
toric spaces and degenerations), Akhiezer-Gindikin domains (bounded realization
problem), realizability of the Beauville class in Hodge theory, and the rigidity
of asymptotically complex hyperbolic manifolds and of some new examples of
extremal cycles in flag varieties.

Put less technically, the PI will carry out several research projects in closely
related areas of mathematics in complex geometry and analysis. These are areas
which are direct descendants of the work of Descartes on the geometry or shape
of solution sets of equations. The motivations for these studies are primarily
geometric, and most employ analysis, the descendent of the calculus. One project
deals with geometry related to that of special mechanical systems in classical
physics (Hamiltonian dynamics and integrable systems), and one deals obliquely
with complex geometry related to quantum physics, specifically string theory, a
highly speculative but geometrically attractive theory of elementary forces on
the smallest scales. Two of the subprojects deal with what is called the growth
of spaces as one travels far out in them towards the horizon. Properties that
are visible at this scale are known as asymptotic properties, and the PI will
study whether certain local geometric conditions can lead to regular patterned
behavior in distant regions of these spaces. These projects refer to a kind of
rigidity: if a modest amount of control over the growth or complexity of a space
as it stretches out to its horizon, then it will ``freeze'' into a very specific
and determined form. Finally, one of the subprojects deals with more algebraic
problems. This means that ultimately they are questions about polynomials rather
than more complicated functions. They deal with special spaces which are cut out
of simpler spaces by equations, and which have maximal intersection with fixed
reference spaces. Can one conclude the exact geometry from this maximal
intersection property? The point is to use geometric differential equations, not
dissimilar to the ones originating in mechanics. Most of these projects will be
carried out with young researchers, colleagues or former students of the PI.
Hopefully, they will serve to develop the research interests of these young
mathematicians. In another direction, the PI hopes as well to further his
interests in molecular biology and genetics, working with students on projects
to understand the mathematical nature of the information carried by genetic
molecules, though this grant application does not seek funding for such
activities beyond a couple of undergraduate students who might have a summer
research experience on such aspects of math and biology.
