
* 0542162
* Conference: Spectral Theory and Partial Differential Equations; July 17-August 11, 2006; Cambridge, England
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2005,08/24/2005
* Richard Melrose,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/28/2007
* USD 25,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0542162 Principal Investigator: Richard B. Melrose, Victor Guillemin

This proposal is to support U.S. participants in a program in partial
differential equations to be held in summer 2006, in Cambridge, England at the
Newton Institute. The focus of the program is spectral theory: in particular,
lowest eigenvalue estimates, Weyl asymptotics, trace formulae, scattering
phenomena and properties of periodic Schroedinger operators. These are all very
active areas of research. Moreover, there are celebrated problems in these areas
which have proved intractible for decades (such as the "hot spot" conjecture of
Rauch or the spectral gap conjecture of Bethe-Sommerfeld) which seem, in light
of recent developments, be on the verge of being settled, and for which the
underlying phenomena have recently become much better understood. Hence this
program is occurring at a very exciting time for researchers in these areas, and
we should have a lot to learn from each other next summer.

The spectrum of an object is the set of its natural frequencies of vibration.
These include the spectral lines in the light emitted (or absorbed) by
molecules. In many situations the frequencies arise as the set of values of a
parameter for which a partial differential equation has a non-trivial solution.
The most important mathematical questions concern the dependence of these
frequencies on the geometric attributes of the object and the degree to which
information about the object can be recovered from the frequencies. Several of
the world's leading analysts will participate in this program, and it is
important opportunity for younger researchers, to gain direct access to the
general subject. The future prospects of research in this branch of analysis,
which is vitally important for applications to physics, chemistry and the other
sciences, depend very much on the influx of persons in their twenties and
thirties, and summer programs of this type provide the opportunity to learn
first hand about developments that are still on the drawing boards, not
accessible in books and journals. More information on the program is available
at http://www.newton.cam.ac.uk/programmes/STP/index.html.
