
* 0545984
* CAREER: Investigating Ricci flow singularity formation
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2006,02/13/2006
* Dan Knopf,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0545984 Principal Investigator: Dan F. Knopf

The broad goals of the investigator's research program are to find and classify
optimal geometries using curvature flows. This subject is currently enjoying a
period of intense interest and rapid progress, inspired by Perelman's landmark
results in Hamilton's program to resolve the Poincare and Geometrization
Conjectures by Ricci flow. In applications of Ricci flow, one evolves a
Riemannian metric on a manifold to simplify and improve its geometry. In many
cases, these improvements involve changes in topology that are triggered by
singularity formation. Such improvements are possible because solutions of Ricci
flow (like many other nonlinear PDE) are expected to exhibit very special,
highly symmetric profiles in a space-time neighborhood of a developing
singularity. A thorough and deep understanding of singularity formation is
therefore of critical importance for extracting topological and geometric
information from Ricci flow behavior. The investigator's immediate objectives
focus on singularity formation for curvature flows, particularly (1) analytic
aspects (asymptotics) of singularity formation, (2) the structure of
singularities in dimension four, (3) singularities of Kaehler-Ricci flow, (4)
the structure of Perelman's entropy and reduced distance, and (5) applications
of geometric flows to problems in physics. Progress toward these objectives will
lead to new applications of Ricci flow in the geometry and topology of
manifolds, productive insights into parallels between various geometric flows,
and new applications of curvature flows to problems motivated by materials
science and physics. These objectives are well suited to collaborations with
other researchers in geometric evolution equations and in related fields like
comparison geometry, low-dimensional topology, and nonlinear analysis.

The partial differential equations that arise in curvature flows are remarkably
similar to equations used to model heat propagation, the movement of oil in
shale and thin films, combustion in porous media, and certain effects in plasma
physics. By increasing our understanding of singularity formation for such
equations, the research elements of this project may contribute to progress in
these applications. The education elements of the project are very tightly
integrated with its research focus. The cornerstone of this integration is a
series of annual workshops: each will contain a graduate education component, a
research component, and an undergraduate outreach component. The education
component includes an organized seminar to prepare graduate students for
participation in the research component. The outreach component includes
invitations to local undergraduate students to interact with the visiting
researchers with the goal of attracting those students to further studies in
mathematics. The project will benefit undergraduate education in two other ways:
the investigator will develop a new course in optimal geometry and integrate it
into the liberal-arts honors curriculum at the University of Texas, and the
investigator will organize and direct an undergraduate learning-by-discovery
project in which students investigate combinatorial curvature flows.
