
* 0600148
* Lefschetz fibrations in symplectic topology and applications to mirror symmetry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2006,04/24/2009
* Denis Auroux,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2010
* USD 364,127.00

DMS-060148 Denis Auroux

Denis Auroux's research project aims to use Lefschetz fibrations, branched
coverings, and their monodromy invariants (mapping class group or braid group
factorizations) to study the topology of symplectic 4-manifolds. In particular,
Auroux is studying isotopy and non-isotopy phenomena for singular symplectic
curves, the relationship between complex projective surfaces and symplectic
4-manifolds, and the role of Luttinger surgery along Lagrangian tori in this
context. This leads him to explore some algorithmic aspects of monodromy
invariants, most notably algorithms for manipulating braids and braid
factorizations, and the Hurwitz problem. He also plans to investigate
enumerative invariants for Lefschetz fibrations over the disc, and the relation
between the contact homology of a contact manifold equipped with an open book
structure and the Floer homology of its monodromy. In a different direction,
Auroux is exploring Kontsevich's homological mirror symmetry conjecture and some
of its generalizations, building upon recent joint work with L. Katzarkov and D.
Orlov. The main ingredient is the study of Landau-Ginzburg models and their
symplectic geometry, in order to understand mirror symmetry for some examples of
varieties of general type and explore various constructions in algebraic
geometry from the perspective of homological mirror symmetry.

Symplectic manifolds are geometric spaces with special structures (allowing area
measurements, but not distance measurements). While they first arose in the
Hamiltonian formulation of classical mechanics, mathematicians have recently
become very interested in their geometry and topology (their intrinsic "shape"),
in part due to motivating questions from theoretical physics (string theory).
This project aims to study the topology of symplectic manifolds using an
approach developped first by S. Donaldson and subsequently by Auroux, which
consists in projecting them onto simpler manifolds and studying the points where
this projection is "folded". This yields a complete description by combinatorial
data, reducing much of the geometry to purely algorithmic considerations. One of
the main goals of the project is to relate the topological features of
symplectic manifolds with those of complex algebraic manifolds (a more special,
much better understood class of geometric spaces). In addition, Auroux is also
investigating the phenomenon of mirror symmetry, by studying the symplectic
geometry of spaces that are "mirror" to some well-understood families of complex
manifolds; this is an important question at the interface between mathematics
and theoretical physics.
