
* 0603355
* SM: Geometry and Topology of Moduli Spaces and Applications
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2006,04/18/2006
* Ralph Cohen,CA,American Institute of Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2012
* USD 448,800.00

Understanding the geometry and topology of the moduli space of Riemann surfaces
and the corresponding mapping class groups has been a goal of central importance
in mathematics for many years. In the last 15 years there have been several new
perspectives on moduli spaces that have not only increased our understanding of
these important objects, but have fundamentally affected major research
directions of several areas of topology and geometry, including Hyperbolic
Geometry and Geometric Group Theory, Algebraic and Symplectic Geometry, and most
recently, Algebraic Topology. In the last five years there have been several
startling advances in several of these areas. Taken as a whole, these areas
have, in the last few years, represented some of the most exciting directions of
study in topology and geometry, and they promise to continue to do so in the
forseeable future. This proposal is for the funding of a major, three year
emphasis program in the topology and geometry of moduli spaces and related
topics. Each year a different mathematical perspective of this topic will be
emphasized, but all three years will involve participants from a broad range of
subfields. The three areas of emphasis will be Hyperbolic Geometry and Geometric
Group Theory, The Algebraic Topology of Moduli Spaces and String Topology, and
The Algebraic Geometry of Moduli Spaces and Symplectic Geometry.

The study of surfaces has been a major driving force in mathematics since the
time of Riemann in the mid 19th century. The space of geometric structures on a
given two dimensional surface is known as the moduli space of Riemann surfaces.
These moduli spaces have been classically studied in algebraic geometry. With
the pioneering work of M. Gromov in the 1970's, these moduli spaces became
instrumental in the study of symplectic geometry as well. They are also central
in the modern view of low dimensional topology and hyperbolic geometry initiated
by Thurston around the same time. With the development of conformal field theory
and string theory in the 1980's, these moduli spaces also began to play an
important role in theoretical physics. Most recently, techniques of algebraic
topology have been brought to bear on the study of these moduli spaces over the
last few years with exciting results. Conversely, formalisms from physics and
geometry have had a major impact on recent research directions in algebraic
topology. The last five years have seen exciting developments in all these
geometric and topological areas affecting and affected by moduli spaces of
Riemann surfaces. As one can imagine, the excitement produced in these areas of
study have attracted many graduate students and young mathematicians. To be
effective researchers, it is important that these young mathematicians gain an
understanding of the various different perspectives on these moduli spaces and
related objects. Cross pollination between these areas both in terms of
techniques and directions of research, can have a powerful effect on the
development of these central topics in topology and geometry. This proposal is
for the funding of a major, three year emphasis program in the topology and
geometry of moduli spaces and related topics. The program will be organized by
the Mathematics Research Center of Stanford University, one of the leading
centers of research in geometry and topology, and by the American Institute of
Mathematics, which is a major independent research institute. Each year a
different mathematical perspective of this topic will be emphasized, but all
three years will involve participants from a broad range of subfields. Some of
the world's leading senior mathematicians, their junior colleagues, as well as
students will participate in these programs, share and compare their different
perspectives and areas of expertise, and will work together to deepen our
understanding of this central area of mathematics, and produce new and exciting
methods, techniques, and results.
