
* 0604857
* Rigidity Phenomena in Geometry and Dynamics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2006,06/29/2006
* Ralf Spatzier,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 238,811.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0604857 Principal Investigator: Ralf Spatzier

The research proposed lies at the interface of dynamical systems and
differential geometry. Its principal goal is the investigation of the dynamical
and geometric structures of "higher rank" systems. Such systems appear naturally
in dynamical systems, geometry and even other seemingly quite differnt areas
such as number theory. The investigator will study rigidity properties of
actions of higher rank abelian and semisimple Lie groups and their lattices with
the ultimate goal of classifying such systems under suitable geometric or
dynamical hypotheses. In particular, he will study higher rank hyperbolic
abelian actions, and actions by semisimple groups and their lattices preserving
affine and geometric structures. The investigator will also investigate rigidity
properties of actions of discrete groups in rank one semisimple Lie groups. In
addition, he will analyze Riemannian manifolds (especially higher rank ones) and
their geodesic flows. Geometric, dynamical and group theoretic tools will be
used in this research.

Dynamical systems and ergodic theory are relatively young fields that
investigate the evolution of a physical or mathematical system over time (e.g.
turbulence in a fluid flow). New ideas and concepts from dynamics such as chaos
and fractals have changed our perception of the world fundamentally. Dynamics
and ergodic theory provide the mathematical tools and analysis for these
investigations. Dynamical systems have had a major impact on the sciences and
engineering. Symbolic dynamics for instance has been instrumental in developing
efficient and safe codes for computer science. Tools and ideas from smooth
dynamics are used as far afield as cell biology and meteorology. Geometry is one
of the oldest fields in mathematics, and generally studies curves, surfaces and
their higher dimensional analogues, their shapes, shortest paths, and maps
between such spaces. Differential geometry had its roots in cartography, and is
now studied for its close ties with physics and other sciences and applied areas
(computer vision e.g.) as well as internal aesthetic reasons. Geometry and
dynamics are closely related as some important dynamical systems originate from
geometry, and geometry also provides tools to study dynamical systems. One main
goal of this project studies when two dynamical systems commute, i.e. when one
system is unaffected by the changes brought on by the other. Important examples
of such systems arise from geometry.
