
* 0604769
* The Topology of Symplectomorphism Groups
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2006,03/25/2008
* Dusa McDuff,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 538,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0604769 Principal Investigator: Dusa McDuff Symplectic manifolds all
look alike at small scales, which means that they have many symplectomorphisms,
that is, structure preserving self-mappings. These form very interesting groups,
which one can try to understand from a topological/algebraic viewpoint as well
as a geometric viewpoint. McDuff has been studying their structure for several
years, and proposes to continue this work. One project is to extend her analysis
(in previous joint work with Abreu) of the symplectomorphism group for
rational/ruled manifolds of dimension four to similar manifolds in higher
dimension. Many new problems arise here because the manifold is no longer
fibered by pseudoholomorphic curves. She proposes to study the internal
structure of symplectic manifolds (such as spaces of embedded symplectic balls
or Lagrangian tori), to see how this is reflected in the structure of the group
of symplectomorphisms. She also proposes a joint project with Hofer, which would
develop a theory of branched manifolds that could be used in an equivariant
version of the new polyfold theory. In order to understand our physical world it
is important to develop a variety of ways of measuring objects in space. The
most familiar is the measurement of distances and angles, which leads to the
usual notions of geometry. This proposal concerns a different kind of geometry,
called symplectic geometry, that is based on measurements of two-dimensional
objects. As first discovered by Hamilton over 150 years ago, many spaces of
interest to physicists have this kind of structure. For example, it underlies
the equations of motion of energy-conserving systems such as the planetary
system, since here each position coordinate is paired with a momentum coordinate
to form a basic two-dimensional object. Symplectic geometry also has much
relevance to modern theories of physics such as string theory and mirror
symmetry. In recent years there has been a very important exchange of ideas
between mathematics and physics that is largely expressed in symplectic terms.
Hence it is very important to further our understanding of the fundamentals of
symplectic geometry. This project will develop our basic knowledge in this area,
concentrating particularly on understanding the properties of the group of
motions that preserve this geometry. It will exploit the new invariants coming
from physics (such as quantum cohomology and symplectic field theory) in order
to understand the topological structure of these groups. Besides its theoretical
interest, the new symplectic geometry has led to the development of better
methods for computing Hamiltonian motions such as the orbit of a satellite.
