
* 0604861
* Spectral Analysis on Riemannian Manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2006,05/07/2008
* Zoltan Szabo,NY,Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2010
* USD 142,813.00

This proposal is concerned with spectral analysis both on compact and open
Riemannian manifolds. On compact manifolds, one of the fundamental questions is:
To what extent is the geometry of Riemannian manifolds encoded in the spectra of
their Laplacians? This is a very extensively investigated question in the
literature. The PI is one of the initiators of spectral investigations developed
on manifolds having different local geometries. Among the isospectrality
examples the PI constructed the most surprising are the isospectrality families
containing both homogeneous and locally inhomogeneous metrics. Although this
field became very developed in the past 15 years, it is far from being a closed
area. All the constructions performed so far deal with the function-spectra and
nothing is known about the form-spectra. For instance, no metrics with different
local geometries are known, upto this day, whichare isospectral also on forms.
The extension of the isospectrality investigations to the forms and the ultimate
solution of this long standing problem of finding p-isospectral compact
manifolds with different local geometries belong to the main objectives of this
proposal. This goal is aimed by the new explicit intertwining operator found by
the PI just recently. This new technique opens up the possibility also for
explicit spectrum computations, both on functions and forms. Spectral analysis
on open manifols is a developing area of mathematics. Because of the infinite
trace of the fundamental kernels (such as the heat-or Schroedinger-kernel) on
the open manifolds, all the methods and tools applied on compact manifolds break
down in the non-compact cases. The only tool by which these infinities are
handled today is the so called "regularization" by which the desired finite
quantities are produced by differences of infinities. This perturbative tool has
been borrowed from quantum theory ("renormalization"), where the above
infinities appear as infinite self mass or self charge of particles. Just
recently, the PI has a new non-pertubative tool found by which these infinities
can be handled on a rather wide range of Riemannian manifolds, called Zeeman
manifolds. By the explicit spectrum computation, developed in isospectrality
constructions, the Hilbert space of functions on a Zeeman manifold decomposes
into subspaces (zones) which are invariant under the actions of the Laplacian
and the natural Heisenberg group representation. Therefore, this operator can be
investigated on each zone separately, meaning that important objects such as the
heat flow, Schroedinger flow, partition- and zeta-function, e. t. c. can be
introduced on each zone separately. In other words, a well defined zonal
geometry (de Broglie geometry) can be developed, where the most surprising
result is that quantities divergent on the global setting are finite on the
zonal setting. Even the zonal Feynman integral is well defined. Since the
Laplacian on Zeeman manifolds is nothing but the Zeeman-Hamilton operators of
free charged particles, these investigations are most relevant to the quantum
physics.

The main focus of this proposal will be some of the fundamental questions of
spectral theory on Riemannian manifolds. On compact manifolds this field might
as well be called audible versus nonaudible geometry, which designation readily
suggests the fundamental question of the area: To what extend is the geometry
encoded into the eigenvalues of the Laplacian (spectrum) of a Riemannian
manifold? A wide range of examples show that the spectrum bears just little
information about the geometry. Yet, until the early 90's, a general expectation
was that the spectrum does determine the local geometry. The PI was one of the
first ones who disproved this conjecture and initiated spectral investigations
on manifolds having different local geometries. Among the examples the PI
constructed the most interesting are the isospectral metrics such that one of
them is homogeneous (having a huge group of isometries acting transitively on
the manifold) while the other is locally inhomogeneous (having just a "thin"
group of local isometries which do not act transitively on the manifold). These
examples show that one of the most important geometric data, the group of
isometries, is not spectrally determined. Though this field developed very
rapidly in the past 15 years, this theory has not been extended to the forms
yet. This extension of the theory, including also the solution of the long
standing difficult problem of finding locally non-isometric yet p-isospectral
metrics, is one of the main objectives of this proposal. Spectral theory on non-
compact manifolds is struggling with the infinities appearing in calculating the
trace of natural kernels such as the heat kernel. Due to these infinities, all
those methods break down on non-compact manifolds which are perfectly working in
the compact case. This problem of infinities is parallel to the problem of
infinities appearing in quantum theory. In both cases the problem is handled by
a perturbative device (regularization resp. renormalization), producing the
desired finite quantities by differences of infinities. As a second subject,
this proposal introduces a new, natural, non-perturbative device which produces
the desired finite quantities on non-compact manifolds directly. This tool is
relevant also to quantum theory.


