
* 0604552
* Differential geometry, noncommutative geometry and quantization
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2006,06/07/2006
* Xiang Tang,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Zhongmin Shen
* 12/31/2006
* USD 65,361.00

Tang works on several problems in differential geometry and noncommutative
geometry. Mainly he applies the methods and ideas from noncommutative geometry
to the study of differential geometry, and vice versa. Tang studies orbifolds
from the point of view of proper etale groupoids and their groupoid algebras. He
computed Hochschild and cyclic cohomology of the deformation quantization of
these groupoid algebras. He is further studying the Gerstenhaber algebra
structure on the Hochschild cohomology of the groupoid algebras to address the
Ginzburg-Kaledin conjecture on the Chen-Ruan orbifold cohomology. As an
extension to the study of orbifolds, Tang will investigate more complicated
quotient singularities. In particular, he will continue his study of flat
connections on groupoids and stacks. Another application of noncommutative
geometry to differential geometry concerns algebraic index theorem. The
algebraic index theorem of deformation quantization was developed by Fedosov-
Nest-Tsygan. Tang will apply their ideas to study index problems on orbifolds
and quantized contact transformations. In the other direction, applying
techniques from differential geometry to noncommutative geometry, Tang studies
Connes and Moscovici's Rankin-Cohen deformation of a Hopf algebra, which was
originally constructed on modular form in number theory. The main geometric
input is symplectic geometry of the space of leaves of a foliation. The
connection between symplectic geometry and number theory will also be
investigated. Tang is working on developing a notion of a hopfish algebra as a
generalization of a Hopf algebra. It is known that a noncommutative torus
algebra is not a Hopf algebra, however, a candidate for a hopfish structure on a
noncommutative torus algebra has been discovered. The analysis of this structure
will be will continued. Finally, noncommutative super geometry and complex
geometry will be investigated, e.g. Q-algebras and gauge theory, examples of
noncommutative complex manifolds.

Tang's research concerns the interplay between two fields of mathematics,
differential geometry and noncommutative geometry. Differential geometry
provides a mathematical formulation of classical physics, and noncommutative
geometry gives a rigorous foundation for quantum physics. Analogous to the
relation between classical and quantum physics, the development of differential
geometry provides tools, intuition, and inspiration for the study of
noncommutative geometry and vice versa. In one direction, Tang uses differential
geometry to understand deformation of quantum groups, which was originally
constructed from modular forms in number theory, and to develop more general
notion of quantum symmetry, and to look for more examples of noncommutative
supermanifolds and complex manifolds; in the other direction, using tools
developed in noncommutative geometry, Tang studies problems in differential
geometry which are hard to solve using classical geometry tools, e.g. orbifolds
and singular spaces, and various index problems.


