
* 0605003
* Gromov Witten Invariants of Singular Spaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2006,05/19/2006
* Eleny-Nicoleta Ionel,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2011
* USD 333,104.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0605003 Principal Investigator: Eleny-Nicoleta Ionel

The proposal is aimed at increasing understanding of the structure of the
Gromov-Witten invariants of symplectic manifolds by combining together
geometric, topological and analytical methods. The first project aims to define
the Gromov-Witten invariants of a symplectic manifold relative a singular
subspace (with mild singularities, e.g. normal crossings) and to use those
invariants to prove a generalized symplectic sum formula. The project uses both
geometric and analytical methods to investigate what happens to the moduli
spaces of holomorphic maps during certain kinds of natural degenerations,
revealing surprising new features but also new challenges and complications.
There are several interesting applications of this work, one of them presented
as a separate project, which involves the idea of using a Donaldson divisor to
give a simple geometric definition of the virtual fundamental cycle. The third
project is motivated by a conjecture made by two string theorists, R. Gopakumar
and C. Vafa. The PI has been working with Thomas Parker on a structure theorem
for Gromov invariants in 6 dimensions; this would have many of the same
consequences as the Gopakumar-Vafa Conjecture, and it ties in nicely with C.
Taubes deep work on the relation between Seiberg-Witten and Gromov invariants in
4 dimensions.

The proposed work lies at the intersection of string theory and symplectic
topology. String theory developed as a potential candidate for unifying general
relativity and particle physics. The details of this theory have turned out to
be extraordinarily rich, and have inspired many remarkable results in
mathematics. But results in mathematics have also guided and inspired many new
discoveries in string theory. It is hoped that this project will have the
broader impact of adding momentum to the growing interaction between
mathematicians and theoretical physicists. In particular, one of the themes
running through all the projects in this proposal is that symplectic topology
can contribute insights into string theory. The research and other activities of
the PI also have impact on the education of next generation of mathematicians.
One of the proposed projects will involve graduate students, engaging them in
cutting-edge research early in their graduate career. The PI has also been
active in encouraging and guiding women graduate students and will continue to
strongly support young women entering mathematics.


