
* 0605247
* Spectral and geometric problems in global analysis
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2006,06/13/2008
* Carolyn Gordon,NH,Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2010
* USD 209,477.00

Inverse spectral geometry is the study of the extent to which the geometry of a
Riemannian manifold can be recovered from spectral data. The principal
investigator, along with her research collaborators, will study Inverse spectral
problems in both the compact and noncompact settings. For compact Riemannian
manifolds, the natural spectral data are the eigenvalues of the Laplacian. To
obtain information concerning Riemannian invariants that are not spectrally
determined, constructions of isospectral manifolds will be investigated.
Continuing joint work with E. Makover and D. Webb, the principal investigator
will study the extent to which the spectrum of a Riemann surface determines its
Jacobian. She and Webb, along with E. Dryden and S. Greenwald, will also
consider inverse spectral results on orbifolds. For noncompact manifolds,
natural spectral data include the scattering resonances and scattering phase.
The principal investigator and Webb, along with P. Perry, will study of
obstacles with the same scattering resonances and scattering phase. They will
also study isopolar and isophasal potentials for the Schrodinger operator.

In spectroscopy, one attempts to understand the chemical composition of an
object such as a star from the characteristic frequencies of light emitted.
Analogously, the question phrased by Mark Kac as "Can one hear the shape of a
drum?" asks whether one can determine the shape of a vibrating membrane such as
a drumhead from its characteristic frequencies of vibration. In earlier work,
the principal investigator, along with D. Webb and S. Wolpert, constructed
examples of polygonal shaped "membranes" (bounded domains in the plane) that
have exactly the same characteristic frequencies, thus answering Kac's question
in the negative. Kac's question generalizes to nonplanar surfaces and higher
dimensional objects (Riemannian manifolds), with the analog of the
characteristic frequencies being the Laplace spectrum. The principal
investigator, along with her collaborators, will continue her investigation of
the extent to which spectral data determines the geometry of a Riemannian
manifold. Constructions of manifolds with the same spectrum will be studied to
identify geometric properties that are not spectrally determined. Singular
spaces (orbifolds) will also be considered.


