
* 0607107
* Variational problems in optimal mass transportation and intersection homology theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2005,01/17/2006
* Qinglan Xia,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2007
* USD 23,869.00

VARIATIONAL PROBLEMS IN MASS TRANSPORTATION AND INTERSECTION HOMOLOGY

PI: QINGLAN XIA

ABSTRACT: The goal of the proposed projects is to study geometric variational
problems derived from optimal mass transportation as well as from the
intersection homology theory of singular varieties. The first proposed project
is building a model to simulate ``tree shaped'' objects in nature, and apply it
to optimal mass transportation problems. The problems proposed here include
building a transport theory of rectifiable varifolds, finding connections of
this model with other problems, and extending this theory to more general
spaces. The second project concerns minimal surfaces that live in singular
spaces such as singular complex projective varieties under their intersection
homology groups. In his thesis, the PI gave a rectifiable currents' version of
intersection homology theory on stratified subanalytic pseudomanifolds. He
showed that there exists a modified mass minimizer (which is a rectifiable
current) in every intersection homology class. The associated mass minimizers
turn out to be almost minimal currents. The mass minimizers the PI considered
may intersect (in a controlled fashion) the singular locus of the singular
space. In this proposal, the PI will continue his investigation on regularity
properties of the associated mass minimizers, and possible link with Hodge
theory. One of the main methods used in both projects is geometric measure
theory. The phenomenon of ``tree shaped'' path is very common in nature. Trees,
railways, airlines, lightning, the circulatory system, and neural networks are
common examples. The research of optimal ``tree shaped'' path not only expands
the research area of mass transportation, but also of both theoretical and
applied interest. Biologists are currently looking for a model to give a
fundamental explanation for biological scaling laws which are mathematical
expressions of how organisms' biology varies with their size. The model proposed
in this research might be the desired one. As Monge's mass transport problem is
strongly linked with many areas of mathematics, especially with partial
differential equations, it is also possible that this new approach of mass
transportation will find its applications in economics, biology, image
processing and some other subjects. Soap films are physical model for minimal
surfaces. These surfaces play an important role as a tool in the study of
topology, geometry and physics. The research of the second project concerns
global properties of soap films that live in more general singular spaces and
possible links to Hodge theory and optimal mass transportation. It might
provides some hint to the famous Hodge conjecture.


