
* 0643546
* CAREER: New Analytic Techniques in Group Theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2007,06/27/2011
* David Fisher,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2014
* USD 409,598.00

Abstract

DMS 0643546 PI: David M. Fisher

The main thrust of the proposed research is to introduce and develop new
analytic techniques in group theory and the study of group actions. Major
projects include: (a) studying quasi-isometries using a new notion of coarse
differentiation (introduced in recent joint work with Eskin and Whyte) (b)
developing harmonic map techniques in rigidity theory, particularly in the
context of infinite dimensional target spaces and (c) developing a normal form
theory for group actions based on new generalizations and variants of hard
implicit function theorems.

All research lies in the broad interdisciplinary area of rigidity in dynamics,
geometry and topology. The grant will also support summer schools devoted to new
developments in rigidity theory. The field is broad and not entirely well
defined, new developments frequently involve ideas from other areas of
mathematics. These summer schools will provide students and young scientists the
opportunity to learn about new developments quickly and to build the
professional networks required to remain abreast of future new developments.

In the study of mathematical objects, a key role is often played by the
symmetries of the object -- particularly when the object has many symmetries.
The PI investigates ways of characterizing, describing and studying spaces with
many symmetries in various dynamical, geometric and topological settings. These
questions are interdisciplinary in nature and often require learning, adapting
and applying ideas and techniques from many areas of mathematics. The PI's work
has connections with diverse areas of mathematics: from celestial mechanics (KAM
theory and stability of the solar system) to theoretical computer science
(expander graphs, Kazhdan's property (T) and coarse embedding problems). Many
proposed projects involve applying analytic ideas and techniques to problems
traditionally studied by dynamical, geometric or topological methods.
