
* 0704404
* Einstein Manifolds and Analysis on Metric Measure Spaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2007,03/23/2009
* Jeff Cheeger,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2011
* USD 331,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0704404 Principal Investigator: Jeff Cheeger

The first main goal (joint with G. Tian) is to describe the how Einstein metrics
can degenerate. In our previous work we gave a good local description of
collapse of Einstein metrics in dimension 4, showing that away from a definite
number of points collapse occurs with bounded curvature and in the limit, gives
rise to Einstein metrics with continous symmetries. We want to globalize this
local description and, in so far as possible, extend it to higher dimensions. A
second main goal of the project, joint with B. Kleiner, is to study first order
calculus on metric measure spaces for (Lipschitz) functions with values in
infinite dimensional Banach spaces. In this context, differentiation theorems
can give rise to bi-Lipschitz nonembedding theorems. For applications arising in
computer science, the most interesting target is the space "Ell-One". In this
case, a Lipschitz function need not be differentiable (anywhere) unless (as
Kleiner and I discovered) differentiability is understood in a suitable extended
sense. This sense was still strong enough to enable us give a counter example to
the Goemans-Linial conjecture. An important aspect of the present project (joint
with Kleiner and A. Naor) is to make this nonembedding theorem quantitative
(which is what computer scientists really want). Our approach requires the
developement of new techniques in geometric measure theory.

The study of certain special (higher dimensional) smoothly curved objects called
Einstein manifolds is important in mathematics and in modern physics e.g. in
connection with the theory of relativity and in string theory. In particular, we
want a theory which tells us what can be the "most distorted" examples of such
objects. Our project is concerned with this issue. A second main focus has to do
with "metric spaces". By a metric space, one can understand any collection of
objects where there is a notion of distance between any two of them. For
example, the objects might be finger prints and a suitable notion of distance
would enable a computer to detect which finger prints closely matcheda given
one. A key issue in both the pure and applied aspects of the subject, is to be
able to decide whether a "complicated" metric space which one wants to
understand, can be realized (perhaps in a non-obvious way) as a subset of a
"simpler" metrric space which one already understands. In our project,
sophistocated tools from pure mathematics are developed which can be used in
various cases (of pure and applied interest) to decide the feasibility of such
an approach.
