
* 0704213
* The Space of Shapes: A mathematical approach with applications to computer vision
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2007,07/09/2009
* David Mumford,RI,Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2010
* USD 247,657.00

Object recognition tasks in computer vision and particularly medical imaging,
require a theory of shape. There are many mathematical theories of geometry-
Euclid's theory of triangles, Gauss's theory of the obstructions to flattening a
surface, Poincare's theory of the most abstract properties unique to a sphere.
But none of these seem to have captured what humans mean when they say this
object is heart-shaped but that one is kidney-shaped. Automated analysis of
medical scans requires that these issues be addressed. Humans have no difficulty
answering questions about how similar two shapes are. This suggests two types of
mathematical models. On the one hand, one might define precisely a measure of
dissimilarity of two shapes, a so-called metric on the set of all shapes. On the
other, one might define a probability distribution whose values represent the
probability that one shape is likely to belong to the same category as the
first. Both constructions are, however, not simple extensions of known
mathematics because the set of all shapes is infinite dimensional: this means
that any given shape can be wiggled or stretched in infinitely many distinct
ways, that no finite set of numbers can fully describe any given shape. Thus new
mathematics is needed to create the tools to work with shapes. It is hoped that
the ideas behind this study may impact work in recognizing, identifying and
comparing the objects present in any type of imaging such as MRI's and CAT-
scans.

More precisely, this study starts from the observation that a shape (a closed
surface in 3-space or a curve in the plane) can be viewed as a point in an
infinite dimensional manifold. Even though the space of shapes is not linear,
i.e. two shapes cannot, in any natural way, be added, the set of small
deformations of a shape does form a vector space, namely the vector space of
normal vector fields along the shape. Having a manifold, differential geometry
can be used to define and study metrics on the space of shapes. Recent work has
shown that a rich family of Riemannian metrics exists on this space with many
different properties. Each one has its own geodesic equations and curvature
tensor which have strikingly different properties. This project proposes to
study two questions in particular: (a) the curvature for the Riemannian metric
inherited from Sobolev norms on the diffeomorphism group of the ambient space
and (b) the relationship between the features of the plane curve and its
representation in the arguably most natural metric, the Weil-Petersson metric.
We also seek to study the probability distributions on the space of shapes
obtained as the marginals of diffusion processes associated to these metrics. We
finally propose to make a database of scanned 2D shapes on which to compare the
many metrics which have been proposed and to study clustering and the fitting of
probability models to data. At present, there seem to be several good candidate
metrics for applications so a comparative study is very important.


