
* 0707115
* Periodic orbits of Hamiltonian systems and symplectic topology of coisotropic submanifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2007,06/06/2007
* Viktor Ginzburg,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2011
* USD 173,404.00

The present proposal focuses on two projects closely related to the PI's
previous work. The first group of problems addressed concerns the so-called
Conley conjecture and the almost existence theorem for periodic orbits. The
general form of the Conley conjecture asserts the existence of infinitely many
periodic points of a Hamiltonian diffeomorphism of a symplectically aspherical,
closed manifold. This conjecture has recently been established by Hingston and
the PI. However, many aspects of the problem require further investigation. For
instance, one can expect the conjecture to hold even when the manifold is not
aspherical, but the Hamiltonian diffeomorphism has sufficiently many fixed
points. The proposed research addresses this and some other aspects of the
Conley conjecture. The almost existence theorem guarantees the existence of
periodic orbits on almost all levels of a proper, autonomous Hamiltonian for a
broad class of symplectic manifolds. This theorem is closely related, on both
conceptual and technical levels, to the Conley conjecture and the Weinstein
conjecture. A project described in the proposal aims at complementing the almost
existence theorem by showing that the set of energy values without periodic
orbits is nowhere dense. The second part of the proposal focuses on symplectic
topological properties of coisotropic submanifolds. These properties generalize
the Lagrangian intersection property and the Maslov class rigidity and have
important application in dynamics. Moreover, a general picture is emerging,
enabling one to treat such facts as non-existence of exact Lagrangian embeddings
and the existence of closed characteristics on a contact type hypersurface as
particular cases of one phenomenon. The main goal of the program started
recently by the PI and outlined in the proposal is to further analyze and extend
this picture.

Hamiltonian dynamical systems describe many classes of physical processes in
which dissipative forces can be neglected. For example, planetary motion in
celestial mechanics and some electro- or magneto-dynamical processes can be, and
usually are, treated as Hamiltonian dynamical systems. One of the classical
subjects lying at the very core of modern theory of Hamiltonian dynamical
systems and symplectic geometry is the study of periodic orbits (i.e., cyclic
motions). Periodic orbits are ubiquitous: a vast majority of Hamiltonian systems
have periodic orbits and the number of distinct periodic orbits is infinite for
a broad class of systems. The analysis of this phenomenon, building on the PI's
recent work, is among the main objectives of the proposed research. The class of
dynamical systems in question includes those describing the motion of a charge
in a magnetic field and the proposed research has potential applications to
physics and mathematical aspects of mechanics.
