
* 0707064
* Microlocalization and Mirror Symmetry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2007,06/08/2007
* Eric Zaslow,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2010
* USD 148,480.00

The goal of this project is to expand our understanding of mirror symmetry and
illustrate how it incorporates new dualities in mathematics. In particular, the
homological mirror symmetry conjecture of Kontsevich expresses this physical
phenomenon as an equivalence of brane categories. One such category is the
Fukaya category, constructed from Lagrangian submanifolds. A central focus of
this project will be the relationship, found recently by the Principal
Investigator with D. Nadler, between the Fukaya category of the cotangent bundle
of a manifold and constructible sheaves on the base. This construction will be
used: 1) to study mirror symmetry for the cotangent bundle; 2) to characterize
perverse sheaves in terms of their corresponding Fukaya objects; and 3) to
construct Hecke eigensheaves in the geometric Langlands program, following the
proposal of Kapustin-Witten to look at torus fibers of the Hitchin fibration.
Another aspect of the proposal focusses on constructing the mirror map of moduli
purely from techniques of homological mirror symmetry, thereby bridging
Kontsevich's point of view with the historical approach to mirror symmetry.

Over the past few decades, mathematics and theoretical physics have become
linked in a profound way. The field of string theory best illustrates this
interdependence. Within string theory, mirror symmetry is the prime example of
how one phenomenon in physics can link seemingly disparate fields of
mathematics. This proposal will broaden the mathematical scope of mirror
symmetry through lines of research that both create, and capitalize on, recent
advances. In particular, connections between topology, representation theory,
and the geometric Langlands program have emerged, as have new methods for
constructing examples of mirror symmetry from homological algebra. This research
could thus lead to progress in several longstanding goals: understanding mirror
symmetry in its most general setting, and constructing eigensheaves for Hecke
operations in the geometric Langlands program.


