
* 0707086
* The Full Penrose Inequality, the Hoop Conjecture, and Quasi-Local Mass
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2007,06/22/2007
* Marcus Khuri,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2010
* USD 102,547.00

In 1973 R. Penrose proposed a conjecture which relates the total mass of a
spacetime to the area of its event horizons (boundary of black holes) via the
inequality: total mass squared is greater than or equal to the total area of the
event horizons divided by 16 pi. The primary goal of this research is to prove
the full Penrose Inequality, and to use the methods developed to study several
related problems concerning mass in General Relativity. It is best to view this
conjecture as an inequality for an arbitrary spacelike slice of a spacetime, and
it has been confirmed (by Huisken and Ilmanen for one black hole, and by Bray
for finitely many black holes) in the case that the slice has zero second
fundamental form (the time symmetric case). For the first time the conjecture
for a general slice appears to be within reach in light of a recent discovery by
H. Bray and the author, which reduces the problem to solving a canonical system
of partial differential equations. Unexpectedly, this new method has revealed a
significant connection between the Penrose Inequality, the Hoop Conjecture, and
the Liu-Yau quasilocal mass. The author intends to further investigate and
develop these connections, with the aim of obtaining a definitive necessary and
sufficient condition for black hole formation, as well as a modified version of
the Liu-Yau mass which overcomes some of its inherent difficulties.

The Penrose Inequality was originally put forth by Penrose to study the most
important open question in classical General Relativity today, namely the Cosmic
Censorship Conjecture. This conjecture asserts that whenever singularities occur
in the evolution of spacetime (which is expected to be a generic phenomenon)
they must always be hidden from the outside world by an event horizon, that is,
they must always lie inside a black hole. According to Penrose's heuristic
derivation, the Penrose Inequality is essentially a necessary condition for
cosmic censorship to hold. Thus if the Penrose Inequality were to be confirmed
it would add significantly to the general belief in the validity of cosmic
censorship, which in turn is fundamental for determining how well General
Relativity is behaved as a physical theory. Furthermore, a correction to the
Liu-Yau quasilocal mass would possibly lead to the first fully meaningful
expression of local energy density for the gravitational field. This in turn
should lead to new advances in the study of the Cauchy problem for the Einstein
Equations, as well as in the study of black hole formation (the Hoop
Conjecture). Lastly, it is a general theme in General Relativity that theorems
involving initial data sets for the Einstein Equations (such as the Penrose
Inequality and Positive Mass Theorem) are often proved first in the easier time
symmetric case, while the general case is then some how reduced back to time
symmetry. It is expected that the methods developed for the full Penrose
Inequality will provide a new powerful tool for making such a reduction to time
symmetry, and will therefore have numerous applications to a wide range of
problems in General Relativity.
