
* 0707005
* Regularity properties and singularity structure of solutions to linear and non-linear variational problems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2007,06/22/2007
* Neshan Wickramasekera,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 103,201.00

The main goal of the proposed project is to understand the nature of the branch
point singularities of stable minimal hypersurfaces. The work proposed in this
direction is aimed on the one hand at developing a local regularity theory for
stable branched minimal hypersurfaces, generalizing the proposer's recent work
in the case of multiplicity 2, and on the other hand at estimating the size and
obtaining information concerning the structure of the set of their branch point
singularities, focusing on multiplicity 2 case first. As a step in the
regularity theory, and also as an interesting variational problem in its own
right, it is also proposed to develop an independent theory for the
corresponding "linear" variational problem; i.e. to study the regularity
properties and the branching behavior of co-dimension 1 multiple valued critical
points of the Dirichlet's integral.

The research proposed here is directed towards reaching in two specific
previously unexplored contexts a goal that is common to a broader class of
problems; namely, understanding the critical points of functionals occurring in
various mathematical and physical problems. One often faces the problem of
finding an extremum of a mathematical or physical quantity such as volume or
some energy. In order to find an extremum, one has to work in a sufficiently
large space of competitors which often need to be allowed to carry certain
undesirable properties (singularities), with the expectation that a critical
point will have nicer behavior than a typical competitor in the class. It is
indeed often the case that a critical point found this way has more regularity,
but it is also typical that it carries some small set of essential
singularities. In order to fully understand the nature of the critical point, it
is therefore necessary to study its singularities as well as its behavior near
the singularities.


