
* 0708048
* Metric Differential Geometry and Mathematical Gravity
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/15/2007,08/03/2007
* Gregory Galloway,FL,University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2012
* USD 168,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0708048 Principal Investigator: Gregory J. Galloway

This proposal is concerned with research projects at the interface of spacetime
geometry and general relativity. In particular, properties of marginally trapped
surfaces, which have played an important role in theory of black holes, will be
investigated. Although physically well motivated, very few rigorous results
about marginally trapped surfaces, and associated objects, such as dynamical
horizons, had been known til recently. This situation has changed, and there are
now rigorous results concerning existence, uniqueness, and other issues.
Motivating this study in part is the realization of a deeper connection between
marginally trapped surfaces in spacetime and minimal surfaces in Riemannian
manifolds. The PI will conduct research on a number of topics pertaining to
marginally trapped surfaces, such as the topology of black holes, rigidity and
regularity of outermost marginally trapped surfaces, and aspects of dynamical
horizons. String theory has increased interest in gravity in higher dimensions,
and, in particular, there has been a great deal of recent research concerning
black holes in higher dimensional spacetimes. Schoen and the PI recently
obtained a generalization to higher dimensions of a classical result of Hawking
concerning the topology of black holes. One part of the present proposal,
involving joint work with Schoen, concerns an effort to obtain an important
strengthening of this result, which would close a gap in the conclusion
concerning allowed topologies. This circle of ideas should also be useful in
obtaining lower entropy bounds for higher dimensional stationary black holes in
the asymptotically AdS setting that extend known results in four dimensions. The
PI will also conduct research on a continuing project with Andersson and Cai
concerning the positivity of mass for asymptotically hyperbolic manifolds, and
research pertaining to a problem of Penrose concerning the classical stability
of string theory.

Modern theories of gravity are geometrical in nature. The gravitational field
and other fields, black holes and related objects, may be described and analyzed
using geometric methods. In more general terms, this project is concerned with
the study of certain features of gravity of current scientific interest from
this geometric point of view, utilizing the tools of Riemannian geometry, a
mathematical theory of space, and Lorentzian geometry, a mathematical theory of
spacetime. These theories provide a method for studying the relationship among
three fundamental aspects of the spacetime universe: curvature (i.e., the
bending of space or spacetime), topology (i.e., the global shape and complexity
of space or spacetime) and causal structure structure (i.e., the large scale
behavior of light rays and light cones).
