
* 0710477
* Spectral Problems in Geometry and Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2007,05/31/2007
* Peter Perry,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2012
* USD 139,859.00

This project will focus on three areas of spectral theory for partial
differential equations: (1) resonances in geometric scattering, (2) harmonic
analysis on two-step nilpotent Lie groups, and (3) inverse spectral methods in
the theory of nonlinear dispersive equations. In the first project, the
principle investigator will continue his work on spectral and scattering theory
for asymptotically hyperbolic manifolds and complex manifolds, studying
properties of scattering resonances and their relationship to underlying
geometric invariants. In the second project, he will work toward understanding
the asymptotic behavior of heat kernels and singularities of the wave trace for
two-step nilpotent Lie groups. Nonlinear dispersive equations with singular
initial data may be viewed, via the inverse scattering method, as linearized
flows for the scattering data of a very singular potential. We hope to extend
the inverse scattering picture for the KdV and mKdV equations to such singular
data and obtain greater insight into these dynamical systems--by constructing
the flow on Hilbert spaces of initial data which are singular but very natural
from a dynamical point of view.

Partial differential equations provide underlying mathematical models for such
diverse physical phenomena as wave propagation and heat flow. An equally
important part of any physical model is the geometry of the system it describes:
for example, differently-shaped musical instruments produce sound waves with
different frequencies, even though in all cases the production and propagation
of waves is governed by the same differential equation. The first two projects
above study the interaction between solutions of a certain partial differential
equation and the geometry of the domain where the solutions are defined, and
seek to relate quantifiable properties of the solutions to quantifiable
properties of the underlying geometry. These projects are part of a larger
effort in the mathematical community to understand "inverse problems" in which
the geometry of a physical system is reconstructed from measurable data which
are the solutions of a partial differential equation: seismology and medical
imaging are among the areas of applied mathematics where such inverse problems
occur. The third project is a contribution to the study of a class of equations
arising in physics which describe the propagation of nonlinear waves by
extending powerful solution methods to a richer set of data.


