
* 0758601
* Partial differential equations in conformal and CR geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2008,04/07/2010
* Alice Chang,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2013
* USD 719,392.00

This project will study the higher order Q-curvature equations in conformal
geometry and CR geometry. These equations are closely related to the Gauss-
Bonnet integral in the case of conformal geometry and to the logarithm term in
the Szego kernel in the case of CR geometry. The previous work of the principal
investigators has established the significance of these equations in helping to
understand the geometry of the spaces in questions. The current project takes
further steps to explore the analytic development of these Q-curvature equations
and basic questions relating to the positivity of the underlying operators. In
the case of CR geometry, the research seeks to relate the Q-curvature equation
to the notion of mass for a CR structure. Again the positivity of the underlying
operator is the focus of the investigations. A successful outcome would lead to
a strong characterization of the standard sphere in complex space.

The principal investigators of this project have pioneered the use of a natural
partial differential equation involving a larger number of differentiations as
analytic tools to study the geometry of four-dimensional spaces. The scientific
part of the proposal is a natural continuation of this development, where the
focus is on verifying certain conjectural pictures of the space-time universe
created by physicists. A good portion of the project will involve the training
of the next generation of mathematicians as researchers and teachers of
mathematics. The principal investigators will also continue their past record of
mentoring a number of successful women mathematicians.
