
* 0804541
* The Geometric Background of biHamiltonian Systems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2010,08/27/2010
* Gloria Mari-Beffa,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2014
* USD 155,998.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0804541 Principal Investigator: Gloria Mari-Beffa

In this project the PI proposes to research the existence of geometric
realizations for nonlinear biHamiltonian PDEs and the implications of this
existence for the biHamiltonian system and for the realizing manifold alike. In
particular she intends to describe possible realizing manifolds and to link
their geometry to the type of system they realize. In the past the PI has
studied how biHamiltonian structures are generated by the geometry of curves in
realizing manifolds. She also studied geometric realizations of equations of KdV
type in Hermitian Symmetric manifolds, linking the projective character of
differential invariants to equations of KdV-type. In this project she proposes
to deepen this relation and to expand it to parabolic manifolds. In joint work
with M. Eastwood she will be using tools in classical differential geometry to
find projective structures on flows. Resolving this differential geometry
problem will very likely create geometric realizations of KdV-type in parabolic
manifolds. She will also investigate the possibility of a similar connection in
other geometries, for example that of Schr√∂dinger, mKdV and sine-Gordon flows to
Riemannian geometry. Finally, in joint work with Calini and Ivey, the PI will
study geometric and topological properties of solutions to realizations of
soliton equations, in particular those corresponding to finite-gap solutions
(periodic case). The study will try to link properties of these solutions to
their spectral parameter.

Setting an appropriate geometric background is often a fundamental step in the
resolution of a problem. A choice of geometry establishes the properties and
laws we wish to keep unchanged: Relativity (with Lorentzian geometry setting the
interaction between space and time) and computer imaging (using projective
geometry when 3D perspective needs to be preserved) are some of the best-known
examples. But nowadays many engineers and physicists, including some groups
working on data collection, consider a basic knowledge of differential geometry
to be fundamental. Geometric thought is commonplace, as often finding the right
choice of geometry for a problem is an initial step in its resolution - it all
depends on how (or with which geometric eyes) you look at it -. BiHamiltonian
nonlinear equations are very rich in structure and they are often used to model
different types of phenomena. Their rich structure allows us to find a great
deal of information about the system they model and to predict behavior. The
best-known completely integrable systems are bi-Hamiltonian, and their solutions
predict the behavior of fluids, from water waves in shallow water to the
trailing vortices behind the wing tips of an airplane. These phenomena do not,
in principle, exist within any given geometric background. When we find
geometric realizations for a completely integrable system we gain information in
two different ways: 1) We learn that the behavior of these phenomena can be
visualized within a certain geometry, and we learn how to visualize it. In
particular, the same phenomena can be described in more than one geometry; 2) We
learn that some geometries are hosts to phenomena that were not known to exist
in that context before. For example, by linking projective and centro-equi-
affine geometries, we can find evolutions of star-shaped curves that behave like
solitary waves. The better we understand the relation between these two
apparently unrelated subjects, the more we can transfer our extensive geometric
knowledge, their connections and properties, to the understanding of completely
integrable systems. And vice-versa.
