
* 0804099
* PDE's in complex and symplectic geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2008,05/29/2008
* Benjamin Weinkove,MA,Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Weiqing Gu
* 10/31/2008
* USD 136,272.00

The PI plans to investigate projects in four areas, related by the theme of
nonlinear PDE's and their interaction and applications to complex and symplectic
geometry. In the first project, the PI will work on Donaldson's program of
extending Yau's theorem in Kahler geometry to symplectic 4-manifolds. The
ultimate goal is to tackle some fundamental questions in symplectic and almost
complex geometry, such as: given an almost complex 4-manifold, when does there
exist a compatible symplectic form? The second project deals with the constant
scalar curvature equation on Kahler manifolds. It is believed that the existence
of a solution to this nonlinear PDE should be equivalent to the algebraic
stability of the manifold. The PI will examine this via the natural energy
functionals associated to this problem, building on his work with Phong, Song
and Sturm. The third project concerns the Kahler-Ricci and Calabi flows and aims
to elucidate the relationship between the convergence properties of these
parabolic flows and conditions of stability and positive curvature. The final
project also involves parabolic PDE's: the geometric flows of Donaldson which
arise naturally from considerations of moment maps and diffeomorphism groups.
The PI will investigate the behavior of these flows, on Kahler and hyperkahler
manifolds, and possible applications to the study of canonical metrics and the
space of symplectic forms.

The fundamental laws of physics are described, in the language of mathematics,
by differential equations. Understanding the behavior of solutions to
differential equations (such as Einstein's equations) is key to unravelling the
mystery of the geometry and structure of the universe. This proposal concerns
equations which arise naturally in the study of geometry and are related to, and
inspired by, the physical laws. There is a complex interaction between such
differential equations, which are described locally, and the underlying
geometry, which is global. This project aims to investigate this rich interplay
between local and global and in the process touch on some basic problems in
mathematics: what are the natural structures in geometry, and how do we find and
describe them?


