
* 0805841
* Low Dimensional Topology and Gauge Theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2008,06/11/2012
* Tomasz Mrowka,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2014
* USD 839,652.00

The PI will continue his investigations into Floer homology invariants for three
manifolds and knots in them. One particular focus will be joint work with Peter
Kronheimer concerning a Floer homology theory built from connections with a
prescribed singularity along a link in a three manifold. When specialized to
links in the three sphere this will invariant appears to be closely related to
the Khovanov homology of the link. Kronheimer and the PI intend to further
explore this theory and understand more clearly its relation to Khovanov
homology. With a student, Maksim Lypyanskiy, the PI intends to further explore a
new foundation for Floer homology based on a theory of semi-infinite dimensional
cycles. This appears to lead to a drastic simplification of theory. With another
student, Ben Mares, the PI hopes to begin to put into place the mathematical
theory of the N=4 supersymmetric Yang-Mills equations. Finally with third
student, Timothy Nguyen, he hopes to understand the hyperbolic Yang-Mills
equations especially in dimensions 3+1.

The models physicists have constructed for understanding particles in high
energy physics, like that Yang-Mills and Seiberg-Witten equations, have proved
to be a source for many exciting developments in mathematics as well. Most
notably these models figure crucially in understanding phenomena in dimensions
three and four that still seem out of reach by other methods. The PI has been a
leader in the mathematical developments of these models and will continue
research in a number of different directions on these models. One project with
Peter Kronheimer seeks to relate two quite different seeming models. Another
seeks to development new mathematical foundations for exploration of these
models and will hopefully lead to a great simplification in the rigorous
mathematical construction of these models. Finally with some students Mrowka
will explore new models in hopes that they too will have interesting
mathematical consequences.
