
* 0805143
* Nonlinear geometric evolution equations
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2008,05/20/2008
* Lei Ni,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2011
* USD 119,923.00

Abstract - DMS - 0805143

There are two classes of problems on which this project is focused. The first is
about the geometric and analytic properties of the Ricci flow equation and their
applications to the study of geometry and the topology of manifolds. Secondly,
there are a couple of nonlinear partial differential equations appeared in the
applied science, to which some techniques and results obtained by the PI are
related and can be applied. The first part of project consists of the
classifications of self-similar solutions, namely gradient solitons, and the
convexity type estimates for Ricci flow solution in high dimensions. Such
results have far-reaching consequences in the applications of Ricci flow in the
study of geometric-topological structure of the manifolds. The second theme of
the project is about the sharp gradient estimates of Li-Yau-Hamilton type,
related monotonicity formulae and their applications in geometric nonlinear
PDEs. Their relations to physics, statistical mechanics in particular, shall be
studied too. The aim is to discover a fundamental physical/geometric principle
to unify various sharp estimates and monotonicity formulae. It will also provide
the guideline for further discovery of the new monotonicity formulae in other
geometric partial differential equations.

The project is on the geometric and analytic properties of Ricci flow, one of
the most important geometric partial differential equation in mathematics and
physics. The completion of the project will enhance the current understanding of
the singularity formation of the Ricci flow equation and its relation with
several branches of applied science and theoretic physics. By giving lectures
for general audience including high school students, writing several monographs
and survey articles, the project contributes to the dissemination of enhancing
the scientific understanding of mathematical community as well as the general
publics.
