
* 0806016
* Manifolds with Lower Ricci Curvature Bounds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2008,05/20/2008
* Guofang Wei,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2012
* USD 144,574.00

Abstract-DMS-0806016

This proposal is to study manifolds with lower point-wise or integral Ricci
curvature bounds. Recent development shows the extraordinary power of Ricci
flow. It thus deserves studies from various viewpoints. The PI will study Ricci
flow via comparison geometry. Many geometric problems lead to integral
curvatures; for example, the isospectral problems, geometric variational
problems and extremal metrics, and Chern-Weil's formula for characteristic
numbers. Thus, integral curvature bounds can be viewed as an optimal curvature
assumption. The fundamental group is the most basic topological information. The
PI will study the structures of the fundamental groups for manifolds with lower
integral Ricci curvature bound. Its understanding will greatly advance the
understanding of the effect of curvature bounds on the global topology of
Riemannian manifolds.

Ricci curvature is a fundamental concept in geometry as well as Einstein's
general relativity. Einstein manifolds are important both in mathematics and
physics. They are good candidates for canonical metrics on general Riemannian
manifolds and they are the vacuum solutions of Einstein's field equation (with
cosmological constant) in general relativity. General relativity is the study of
gravity, the one fundamental force that should play a crucial role in
understanding our universe. The proposed activities would have impact on all
these directions.
