
* 0807545
* Conference and Mittag-Leffler Institute Program on Geometry, Analysis and General Relativity
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/15/2008,06/13/2008
* Gregory Galloway,FL,University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2009
* USD 49,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0807545 Principal Investigator: Gregory J. Galloway

The Mittag-Leffler Institute in Djursholm, Sweden is running a semester long
program on Geometry, Analysis, and General Relativity from August to December,
2008. The program will start off with a conference at the Royal Institute of
Technology (KTH) in Stockolm, August 25-29, 2008. This will be a comprehensive
program focusing on analysis and geometry problems revolving around the Einstein
equation, the the field equation of general relativity. The purpose of this
award is to help U.S. researchers and students with travel expenses to Sweden,
and with local expenses pertaining to their participation in the KTH conference.
The Einstein equation is one of the most important geometric partial
differential equations, in both the Lorentzian and the Riemannian settings.
Spectacular progress has been made in recent years in the study of the Einstein
equation, wih progress being made on many fronts. These developments have
brought into focus the deep connections between the Einstein equation and other
important geometric PDE's, including the wave map equation, the Yang-Mills
equation, the Yamabe equation and the Ricci flow equation. The main aim of this
Mittag-Leffler Institute program is to bring together the leading contributors
to these developments to promote collaboration in the study of the global
structure of solutions to the Einstein equation and related geometric PDE's.

Rapid progress on experimental and numerical aspects of gravitational physics
has been made in recent years, and it is of increasing physical importance to
understand effects such as gravitational radiation, gravitational collapse and
inflation, where the strong field features of the Einstein equation play a
fundamental role. The results of the collaborative research and analysis to be
carried out during the program will have a significant bearing on these
fundamental physical problems. Participation of graduate students and recent
PhD's is a key component of the program, and is crucial to the continuing
vitality of the area. Further details concerning this Mittag-Leffler program and
the kick-off conference at KTH may be found at: http://www.mittag-
leffler.se/programs/0809f/ http://www.math.kth.se/ag08/
