
* 0846408
* CAREER: Higher Teichmuller Theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/15/2009,06/25/2013
* Anna Wienhard,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2015
* USD 320,195.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0846408 Principal Investigator: Anna Wienhard

The goal of the proposed project is to further develop the emerging field of
higher Teichmueller theory. Higher Teichmueller spaces are connected components
of the variety of representations of the fundamental group of a surface into
semisimple Lie groups, which share essential properties with Teichmueller space.
Classical Teichmueller space plays an important role in various fields of
mathematics due to its rich structure and the fact that it is a smooth cover of
the moduli space of Riemann surfaces. For higher Teichmueller spaces many
potentially interesting structures are yet to be discovered and the relation to
the moduli space of Riemann surfaces still needs to be clarified. The proposed
research focusses on identifying the geometric objects (similar to hyperbolic
surfaces in the case of classical Teichmueller space) which are parametrized by
higher Teichmueller spaces. These objects will then be used to define algebraic,
geometric and dynamical structures on higher Teichmueller spaces, and we expect
that they will help to construct a natural map from higher Teichmueller spaces
to classical Teichmueller space.

Teichmueller space is the space of all geometric surfaces with a fixed
combinatorial type. Because it parametrizes all surfaces, Teichmueller space is
a fundamental mathematical object which also plays an important role in
theoretical physics. Every point in Teichmueller space corresponds to a tiling
of the Euclidean plane, the two-dimensional sphere or in most cases the
hyperbolic plane by one polygon and its images under subsequent reflections in
the sides. (Nice pictures inspired by such tilings appear in M.C. Escher's
work.) The combinatorial type of the surface is determined by the number of
vertices of the polygon and the gluing data, but the geometry of the surface
depends on the length of the sides and the angles at the vertices of the
polygon. Teichmueller space is the example of a moduli space of a pattern (the
tiling) with rich symmetries (the reflections in the side of the polygon). Such
moduli spaces can be efficiently studied via the group generated by the
symmetries of the pattern. Higher Teichmueller spaces are moduli spaces of more
complicated patterns in higher dimensional spaces. However, the symmetry group
of these patterns is the same as the symmetry group of the tilings associated to
classical Teichmueller space. Therefore one expects higher Teichmueller spaces
to parametrize geometric objects which are not surfaces themselves, but closely
related to surfaces. The proposed research focusses on identifying these
geometric objects and studying their finer structure.

The project proposes various activities to involve graduate students in research
and teaching, as for instance a yearly mathematical retreat for graduate
students to study, explore and present a mathematical topic in a group, and
small workshops with mini-courses which allow graduate students to get insight
into the working of modern research collaborations.
