
* 0854977
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Mirror Symmetry & Tropical Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2009,07/15/2009
* Ludmil Katzarkov,FL,University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2012
* USD 642,875.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This FRG builds on various recent successes in mirror symmetry and tropical
geometry. On one hand, the Strominger-Yau-Zaslow conjecture has led to work by
Kontsevich, Soibelman, Gross, Siebert, Zharkov and others to view mirror
symmetry in terms of integral affine manifolds and tropical data on them. On the
other hand, Mikhalkin's pioneering work on holomorphic curve counting using
tropical geometry demonstrated that Gromov-Witten invariants were accessible by
tropical methods, and increasingly, tropical methods are being seen as a tool
for studying algebraic varieties. The aim of this FRG is to make further
connections between tropical geometry and mirror symmetry with the aim of
creating a new synthesis of these two fields. Some of the research directions of
this project include the study of mirror symmetry for Fanos and manifolds of
general type; Lagrangians and SYZ fibrations in this new setting; non-
archimedean integrable systems in hyper-Kaehler manifolds; tropical enumerative
geometry of real and complex curves; the development of non-commutative Hodge
theory, tropical homology and its relation to classical homology and the Hodge
conjecture; Welschinger invariants, open Gromov-Witten theory and their
applications to mirror symmetry. These should greatly extend the realm of mirror
symmetry and applications of tropical geometry to the classical algebro-
geometric world. Members of this FRG include: Ricardo Castano-Bernard (Kansas
State), Mark Gross (San Diego), Ilia Itenberg (Strasbourg), Ludmil Katzarkov
(Miami), Viatcheslav Kharlamov (Strasbourg); Maxim Kontsevich (I.H.E.S & Miami),
Diego Matessi (Alessandria); Grigory Mikhalkin (Geneva), Yan Soibelman (Kansas
State), Jake Solomon (Hebrew U), Ilia Zharkov (Kansas State).

During past 25 years there has been intensive interaction between string theory
and geometry which has led to a creation of entirely new mathematical areas.
String theory also suggested that "conventional" geometry emerges from the
quantum theory at certain limits. Then various "string dualities" give
equivalent but mathematically very different descriptions of the same physical
quantities. A beautiful and deep example illustrating all these ideas is mirror
symmetry. An important component of this project is to expand the existing
collaborative links of the FRG members exploring tropical methods of mirror
symmetry into a solid collaborative network of postdocs, graduate students and
experts in an integrated research-training environment. This includes the
organization of workshops, summer schools and local seminar series at the local
FRG nodes. International exchange of young and senior researchers is one of the
key aspects of this project bringing together well-established groups in Europe
and in the U.S. The participation of mathematicians and young researchers from
underrepresented groups will be promoted.
