
* 0854930
* FRG: Collaborative Research: generalized geometries in string theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2009,09/05/2012
* Melanie Becker,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 09/30/2013
* USD 50,400.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Generalized geometries form a class of almost complex manifolds with reduced
structure groups, which have become of central importance to the study of
realistic string theory models. These are natural generalizations of Calabi-Yau
manifolds and are of mathematical interest in their own right. In one class
important for string theory, the canonical structure one seeks on a generalized
Calabi-Yau manifold is governed by a ``warp factor equation'' that couples a
balanced Hermitian metric to an anti self-dual connection of a vector bundle.
When the manifold is Kahler Calabi-Yau and the vector bundle is the tangent
bundle, this system reduces to the Calabi conjecture for Ricci-flat metrics. The
mathematical understanding of generalized geometries is still in its nascent
stage. The purpose of this proposal is to develop this field further, into a
full-fledged extension of Kahler Calabi-Yau geometries. We will focus on the
following tightly interconnected problems: constructing new solutions to string
theory in this class; characterizing the deformations and specifically the
moduli of these spaces; understanding "worldsheet instantons" and their
enumerative geometry in these manifolds; and an understanding of "generalized
calibrations," the analog of calibrated submanifolds of special holonomy
manifolds.

The proposed project is to study the mathematics of a new class of geometric
objects called "generalized geometries", and the appearance of this class in
string theory. Mathematically, these structures provide interesting and natural
extensions of a well-known class of geometric constructions in Calabi-Yau
geometry. Physically, these extensions are known to be required to capture
essential features of particle physics and cosmology, and will push string
theorists closer to the goal of making contact with observations. The project is
a multi-institutional and interdisciplinary effort, involving mathematicians and
physicists at Brandeis, Harvard, and Texas A&M.
