
* 0902942
* Nonnegative Curvature on Lie Groups and Bundles
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2009,08/25/2009
* Kristopher Tapp,PA,St Joseph's University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2013
* USD 78,740.00

Although tremendous progress has been made towards understanding relationships
between curvature and topology, the classical topic of positive/nonnegative
sectional curvature still suffers from an insufficient supply of examples. The
PI proposes two different methods for exploring rigidity and constructing new
examples of Riemannian manifolds with nonnegative and positive sectional
curvature. The first method begins with the question: classify the left-
invariant metrics with nonnegative curvature on each compact Lie group. Almost
all known constructions of nonnegative curvature begin with a bi-invariant
metric, so answering this question would help us measure the rigidity of the
known constructions, and could lead to new examples of nonnegatively curved
manifolds with (at least points of) positive curvature. The second method is
related to past research in which the PI developed conditions under which vector
bundles admit nonnegative curvature. More precisely, if a vector bundle admits
nonnegative curvature, then a fundamental differential inequality relates the
three curvatures which are visible at points of its soul: the curvature of the
soul, the curvature of the connection in the normal bundle of the soul, and the
curvature of planes orthogonal to the soul. Conversely, if a vector bundle
admits structure which strictly satisfy this inequality, then the unit sphere
bundle admits positive sectional curvature. The PI proposes to use this theorem
to find new examples, obstructions, and rigidity theorems for metrics with
nonnegative (respectively positive) curvature on vector bundles (respectively
sphere bundles).

Differential Geometry provides the mathematical language for precisely
describing Einstein's theory of relativity, particle physics, and high
dimensional curved shapes (called manifolds). The PI's proposed work within this
field involves the study of manifolds with positive curvature, which is a
visually natural restriction on the way in which a manifold curves about in
space. Past examples come from Lie groups, which are indispensable tools in
diverse fields of mathematics, physics, cosmology, computer animation, and other
disciplines in which simplification is achieved through symmetry. The search for
new examples of manifolds with positive curvature has a long history, yet
frustratingly few examples have been found. The PI proposes substantially new
methods for constructing more examples, which could thereby lead to a better
general understanding of the relationship between curvature and global shape.
