
* 0906391
* Noncommutative geometry, microlocal analysis, index theorems and symplectic geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/15/2009,09/18/2009
* Boris Tsygan,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2012
* USD 154,999.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0906391 Principal Investigator: Boris Tsygan

This project is devoted to studying microlocal methods in index theory and in
symplectic geometry. A part of the project deals with noncommutative
differential calculus which is one of the central tools in the above. By
noncommutative differential calculus we mean the study of algebraic structures
arising from the standard differential calculus on manifolds, defined in terms
in such a way that is valid of the algebra of functions on a manifold and in
such a way that is valid if this algebra is replaced by any algebra, commutative
or not. This leads to the study of algebraic structures on Hochschild chain and
cochain complexes of an algebra; those complexes play the role of differential
forms and multivector fields, a development of works of Dolgushev-Tamarkin-
Tsygan, Kontsevich-Soibelman, Costello, Lurie and other authors. The techniques
of noncommutative calculus will be applied to obtain new index theorems and
theorems about the determinant of the cohomology of elliptic systems,
generalizing recent results of Beilinson. Also, the project will study a new
object on a symplectic manifold that we call an oscillatory module. These
objects are modules over deformed algebras of functions on a manifold, but with
extra structures that make their category much closer to the Fukaya category.
This extra structure is largely motivated by microlocal methods in partial
differential equations, in particular the WKB method. This is a part of a series
of works that try to understand mirror symmetry microlocally (Bressler-
Soibelman, Kapustin-Witten, Nadler-Zaslow, Gukov-Witten, Tamarkin).

There are three related parts in the project: noncommutative calculus, index
theory, and oscillatory modules. Noncommutative calculus is a theory that
describes parts of the standard differential calculus in such a way that it can
be applied in situations more general than that of an ordinary space, in
particular when, for coordinates on our imaginary "space", the equation xy=yx is
no longer required. Index theory is a part of the theory of differential
equations that expresses the number of solutions of an equation in terms of the
topology of the underlying space. Oscillatory modules are objects on geometric
spaces that describe the motion of quantum particles on these spaces (in other
words, they treat the space in question as the phase space of a quantum
mechanical system). These objects are intended to be applied to study other
invariants of these spaces, also physically motivated and much more complicated;
they are called A-branes and describe the motion of a quantum string on our
space. They are called A-branes and are subject of much current research in
mathematical physics and geometry. Let us finish by explaining why
noncommutative calculus is natural for applications both in differential
equations and in quantum mechanics. Indeed,if x and y are basic operations with
functions, for example multiplication by some function and differentiation, then
xy differs from yx, in the sense that, if you apply them in different orders,
you get different results. Similarly, in quantum mechanics, if x is the position
of a particle and y is its momentum, then xy differs from yx; this is a
mathematical expression of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
