
* 0906038
* Non-variational Plateau problems in geometry and general relativity
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/15/2009,02/04/2010
* Michael Eichmair,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2012
* USD 127,671.00

The projects in this proposal aim to advance existing and to create new
approaches to attack existence problems of prescribed curvature type that are of
interest in geometry and mathematical physics. The P.I. proposes to refine
techniques from his previous work to address existence, regularity, and global
properties of apparent and generalized apparent horizons in general relativity.
In particular, the P.I. plans to investigate these quasi-local notions of the
event horizon in light of certain lower order features, much akin to those of
minimal and constant mean curvature surfaces, for their relation to positive
mass type theorems, and in particular to the space time Penrose conjecture. In a
separate project, the P.I. plans to study the extent to which these techniques
can be adapted to include an existence theory for a wide range of embedded
hypersurfaces of prescribed curvature. A second, independent direction in the
proposed research is a potentially open-ended collaboration with N. Kapouleas on
gluing problems for constant mean curvature surfaces.

The projects in this proposal are inspired and driven by allowing analytical,
geometric, and physical intuition to guide one another in the spirit of R.
Schoen and S.-T. Yau. The special surfaces whose existence and properties will
be investigated here are relevant in a wide variety of geometric and physical
contexts, in particular in mathematical relativity - Einstein's theory of
gravitation. A major objective of the proposed research is to exploit a parallel
between well-known properties of soap films on the one hand and the geometry of
black hole boundaries on the other hand. Through this connection, powerful
techniques from analysis and geometry have entered the picture and are now at
hand to further our understanding of the geometry of black holes.
