
* 0907446
* Lie Group and Their Discrete Subgroups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2009,08/02/2009
* John Millson,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2013
* USD 221,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The PI (John Millson) proposes three main lines of research all within the
general framework of reductive algebraic groups and geometry. In the first main
line (with Jens Funke) the PI continues his project of using the theta
correspondence and differential geometry to construct Siegel (resp. Hermitian)
modular forms that are generating functions for the intersection numbers of
certain (special) cycles in locally symmetric spaces of orthogonal (resp.
unitary) groups. The second main line deals with the ring R of projective
invariants of n ordered points on the projective line. This ring was much
studied by the invariant theorists in the late eighteenth and early twentieth
centuries. In 1894, A. Kempe found that R was generated by certain invariants of
lowest degree. In the last year, working with Ben Howard, Andrew Snowden and
Ravi Vakil, the PI computed the relations between the Kempe generators. They are
quadratic, binomial and have a simple graphical description. The third main line
is a continuation of the project dealing with the generalized triangle
inequalities and related (saturation) problems from algebra. This project was
the subject of the PI's most recent NSF grant, an FRG grant with Prakash
Belkale, Thomas Haines, Misha Kapovich and Shrawan Kumar. This project is joint
with Thomas Haines and Misha Kapovich.

The PI (John Millson) proposes three main lines of research all within the
general framework of reductive algebraic groups and geometry. The first part of
the proposal should have applications to number theory along the lines described
by S. Kudla in his Beijing ICM talk and also to string theory (according to a
preprint of Ai-Ko Lu).. The second part of the proposal is motivated in part
because the problem completes work of mathematicians working in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries solving a one hundred year old problem.
The third part deals with basic problems in representation theory e.g.
decomposing tensor products and branching formulas which if solved would be of
use in many disciplines.All the above projects are in collaboration with other
mathematicians from within the USA or abroad. The PI presently has
collaborations with eight mathematicians continuing a history of extensive
collaboration (over forty joint papers).
