
* 0940878
* Southeast Geometry Seminar
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 11/15/2009,12/16/2010
* Gilbert Weinstein,AL,University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 10/31/2014
* USD 49,355.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0940878 Principal Investigator: Gilbert A. Weinstein, Mohammad Ghomi,
John E. McCuan, Vladimir I. Oliker, Fernando A. Schwartz

The proposed program continues in expanded format a multi-year a series of
semiannual one-day events focussing on geometric analysis titled Southeast
Geometry Seminar (SGS). These events will be hosted in rotation by the following
institutions: The University of Alabama at Birmingham, The Georgia Institute of
Technology, Emory University, and The University of Tennessee Knoxville. Five
speakers will be invited for each event. A poster session will be hosted. Annual
proceedings, including an open problems section, will be published. The main
goal of these short and frequent meetings will be to attract researchers and
students, working in geometry and related fields, who can travel to the sites
above at a relatively low financial cost, and to foster collaboration between
neighboring geometric analysis research groups.

Geometric analysis is at the intersection of a number of important fields of
mathematics and mathematical physics. It has enjoyed a fast growing interest in
recent years, partly due to the interaction with other scientific and
technological fields. The activities proposed are aimed at fostering
collaboration between geometers and researchers in related fields in the
southeast. SGS has been running for seven years and has had an strong impact on
geometric analysis in the southeast. A continuation of this program will assure
that geometry research groups at participating institutions and other
neighboring institutions grow further, and attract graduate students and post-
doctoral trainees. The training of these young researchers will supply personnel
needed in this area both for academic positions and in related technological and
scientific disciplines.

The website for the conference series is: http://www.math.uab.edu/sgs/


