
* 0956374
* Isoperimetric filling problems and the large scale geometry of metric spaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 03/02/2009,09/04/2009
* Stefan Wenger,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2012
* USD 97,560.00

The proposed research is located at the intersection of metric geometry and
analysis on metric spaces. The principal aim of the project is to gain a deeper
understanding of the large scale geometry of various classes of metric spaces
through the study of higher-dimensional isoperimetric inequalities. The
project's first and main part focuses on simply connected geodesic metric spaces
of non-positive curvature in the sense of Alexandrov, called Hadamard spaces. In
this setting, a particular goal is to establish connections between the behavior
of higher-dimensional isoperimetric functions (and other filling invariants) and
various notions of rank. If successful, the research will result in an answer to
Gromov's conjecture on linear isoperimetric inequalities which asserts Euclidean
behavior in the dimensions below and linear behavior in the dimensions above the
Euclidean rank in a proper cocompact Hadamard space. The proposed approach
relies on methods from geometric measure theory and analysis on metric spaces,
in particular on the notion of metric currents, the theory of which has recently
been developed by Ambrosio and Kirchheim. An important second part of the
project will thus be to further develop the theory of metric currents, which
provides a suitable notion of surfaces in a metric space and also gives powerful
tools in the study of many other problems in geometric analysis, e.g. such
involving energy minimization. Isoperimetric inequalities also play a
fundamental role in geometric group theory. For finitely presented groups one-
dimensional isoperimetric functions measure the complexity of the word problem
and have been extensively studied over the past 15 years. The study of higher-
dimensional isoperimetric functions, on the other hand, has only recently become
a very active field of research. A last part of the project investigates filling
problems in the context of nilpotent Lie groups.

The study of isoperimetric problems has a long history. Not only has it inspired
many mathematicians, but it has also led to many new theories in mathematics. In
the most classical setting-known already to the Ancient Greeks-the isoperimetric
inequality asserts that a closed curve in the plane encloses an area no larger
than that of a disc of the same circumference. Higher-dimensional analogues are
concerned with the question of how well a k-dimensional closed surface can be
filled with a (k+1)-dimensional surface. Filling problems appear in many
different fields of mathematics, including analysis, geometry, probability
theory and group theory. The aim of the present project is to study the effects
that curvature has on the isoperimetric filling problem. The investigation will
in particular lead to a deeper understanding of the geometry of non-positively
curved singular spaces. Such arise for example in the mathematical study of
billiard trajectories. The project proposes to use methods from the field of
geometric measure theory, dealing with the study of singular surfaces. This
theory was to a large extent inspired by Plauteau's problem, which asks for the
existence of a minimal surface (or a soap film) with prescribed boundary.
Higher-dimensional analogues of this question were the starting point in the
development of the theory of currents, which nowadays has many applications
going far beyond Plateau's problem.


