
* 1005769
* Quantum Field Theories on Curves & Surfaces & Applications
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 10/01/2011,09/20/2011
* Leon Takhtajan,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2015
* USD 161,001.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1005769, Principal Investigator: Leon A. Takhtajan

The main objective of the proposal is to develop methods of quantum field theory
on algebraic curves and algebraic surfaces, with new applications to geometric
and complex analysis. The goals of the complex-analytic part of the project are
the following: 1) rigorous definition of conformal invariant measures on the
space of closed curves on the plane by using Kaehler geometry of the universal
Teichmueller space; 2) study the curvature properties of a new Kaehler metric on
moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces with punctures (so-called Takhtajan-Zograf
metric); 3) establish relationship between classical solution of the Riemann-
Hilbert problem with unitary monodromy and the action functional of the Wess-
Zumino-Witten (WZW) theory; 3) develop non-perturbative methods for studying
partition function and correlation functions of quantum Liouville theory on
Riemann surfaces and corresponding Ward identities; 4) use a complex-geometric
approach to the relation between partition function of four-dimensional gauge
theories and conformal blocks of quantum Liouville theory, recently discovered
by physicists. Understanding the geometric nature of the latter objects is the
major open problem in conformal field theory. Another goal is to elucidate the
role of Bott-Chern secondary characteristic forms for holomorphic Hermitian
vector bundles, with application to complex geometry. The immediate goal of the
algebraic side is to introduce a symplectic structure on the suitably defined
algebraic de Rham cohomology to study the eigenvalues of correspondences on
curves in characteristic 0 and characteristic p cases. Long term goals of the
algebraic side are the following: 1) to use a representation of the WZW model as
a theory of free fields to define non-abelian quantum field theories on
algebraic curves in characteristic zero, with application to reciprocity laws;
2) to develop "algebraic harmonic analysis" on adeles when the corresponding
residue class field is not a finite field. This will advance our understanding
of "differential and integral calculus" on algebraic curves and its
applications, possibly with analogs for the fields of algebraic numbers.

The last thirty five years have been characterized by remarkable interaction
between mathematics and physics, which lead to fundamental discoveries in
various mathematics disciplines, bringing together the areas that were thought
to be apart. In many cases a successful application of methods of quantum fields
and strings consists of "probing" mathematical objects with physical theories
and translating the physics "output" back into the realm of mathematics. When
probing mathematical objects by quantum field theory, the mathematical output is
encoded in partition function and various correlation functions of quantum
fields, defined by Feynman path integral, usually given in terms of perturbation
expansion, and expressed through the critical value of the classical action and
so-called "quantum corrections." Symmetries of the theory manifest themselves in
Ward identities - fundamental relations between partition function and
correlation functions, and in many cases they give new and unexpected
mathematical results. Proper understanding and exploitation of these symmetries
is at the heart of today's applications of quantum physics to different
mathematical disciplines. Realization of the main goals of the proposal will
significantly contribute to the fundamental interface between mathematics and
physics. This applies to the complex-analytic part, as well as to the algebraic
part; the fundamental properties of the latter are discrete, and to study them
at microscopic scale one uses quantum theory. In particular, many classical
mathematical results related to the fields of algebraic functions and algebraic
numbers, known as reciprocity laws, can be interpreted as conservation laws
(like conservation of energy) in quantum theory. The main goal of the algebraic
part of the project is to develop this analogy further by formulating
"differential and integral calculus", and to develop an approach based on the
algebraic version of the Green's function, which is a fundamental object of
classical analysis and mathematical physics, and is extensively used in quantum
field theory.
