
* 1005365
* Symplectic homology and Stein manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2010,08/20/2010
* Mark McLean,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2013
* USD 130,104.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1005365 Principal Investigator: Mark McLean

The subject area of this project is the symplectic geometry of Stein manifolds.
A Stein manifold is a properly embedded complex submanifold of complex affine
space. This has a symplectic form induced from the standard one in affine space.
If we take a large sphere and intersect it with this Stein manifold then we get
another manifold called a Stein fillable contact manifold. Important progress in
studying Stein manifolds symplectically was achieved by Eliashberg and Gromov.
The primary aim of this project is to find exotic Stein structures and Stein
fillable contact structures. The PI intends to prove that there are uncountably
many symplectically different Stein structures diffeomorphic to an even
dimensional manifold admitting a proper and bounded from below Morse function
with only finitely many critical points of index at most half its dimension. The
PI also intends to prove that there are infinitely many Stein fillable contact
structures on each odd dimensional sphere of dimension 5 and higher, and more
generally on Stein fillable contact manifolds obtained from affine varieties.
The PI will use an invariant of Stein manifolds called symplectic homology to
distinguish these. The PI also aims to show that there is no algorithm to tell
you whether one Stein manifold diffeomorphic to affine space is symplectomorphic
to another one diffeomorphic to affine space of complex dimension greater than
6. The PI also aims prove a similar undecidability result for contact structures
on all odd dimensional spheres of dimension greater than 13. The PI will use an
invariant called the growth rate of symplectic homology to achieve this. The PI
will use growth rates to show that certain cotangent bundles have many Reeb
orbits (even degenerate ones). This generalizes the Gromoll-Meyer theorem. The
PI will show that the cotangent bundle of a rationally hyperbolic manifold is
not symplectomorphic to a smooth affine variety using growth rates.

If we have some classical system such as a pendulum then at any point in time it
has a particular position and momentum. If this system has many moving parts
such as a double pendulum or a collection free particles then it has many
positions and momenta. The set of all such positions and momenta can be encoded
in an object called a symplectic manifold. For example the symplectic manifold
associated to a pendulum turns out to be a cylinder. Symplectic manifolds are
important in many areas of physics such as quantum mechanics and String theory.
The PI will study a large class of symplectic manifolds obtained from objects
called Stein manifolds. The PI will construct a large list of Stein manifolds
called exotic Stein manifolds which look very similar to the symplectic manifold
coming from a set of free particles but are actually different if we look at the
motion of their respective classical systems. The PI intends to show that there
is no computer algorithm telling you if two given exotic Stein manifolds come
from the same classical system. This result is useful because it tells us that
certain classical systems are very hard to study in general.
