
* 1005829
* School and conference in Poisson Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2010,05/18/2010
* Alan Weinstein,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2012
* USD 16,200.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1005829 Principal Investigator: Alan D. Weinstein

This grant supports travel to Brazil for US participants (primarily graduate
students and postdocs) at the conference "Poisson 2010," to be held in IMPA in
Rio de Janeiro, July 26-30, preceded by a preparatory school of three days in
length. With roots in classical mechanics about 200 years ago and work of Sophus
Lie about a century ago, the subject of Poisson geometry crystallized through
work of Lichnerowicz and Kirillov in the 1970's. Its influence now extends to a
wide variety of areas, including symplectic geometry and topology, deformation
theory, representation theory, algebraic geometry, integrable hamiltonian
systems, and field theory. In recent years, Poisson geometry has found new
applications in string topology, the geometric Langlands program, and the
geometry of complex surfaces. Developments in these and other timely subjets
will be addressed in the school and conference.

The meeting, whose full title is "Poisson Geometry in Mathematics and Physics,"
is the seventh in a biannual series which brings together mathematicians and
mathematical physicists with common interests in Poisson geometry and its
applications. This geometry provides a very important bridge between mathematics
and physics and between classical and quantum physics. Speakers at the school
and conference have been chosen not only for the importance of their results but
also for their ability to communicate them to a broad audience of mathematicians
and physicists. Proceedings will be published in a manner which makes them
accessible at low (or no) cost to a wide readership, in order to stimulate
further study and research in the rapidly growing area of Poisson geometry.
Detailed information about the conference, and about others in the biannual
series, may be found at poissongeometry.org.
