
* 1006046
* Supersymmetric Gauge Theory, Donaldson-Thomas Invariants and Hyperkahler Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2010,05/24/2010
* Andrew Neitzke,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2014
* USD 152,192.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1006046 Principal Investigator: Andrew Neitzke This research is based
on current developments at the interface between physics and geometry. In recent
work with Davide Gaiotto and Greg Moore, the principal investigator has used
techniques of supersymmetric gauge theory to attack the problem of counting
stable geometric objects in Calabi-Yau threefolds. As an application they showed
that the desired counts, known as "generalized Donaldson-Thomas invariants," are
actually imprinted into hyperkahler metrics on certain auxiliary moduli spaces.
This connection illuminates previously mysterious aspects of the counting
problem; in particular it gives a new geometric understanding of the "wall-
crossing formula" which governs how these invariants jump, i.e. how the relevant
geometric objects can split and join. At the same time, it gives a totally new
way of looking at the hyperkahler metrics in question. The proposed research
builds on this recent work in various directions. Much of the program is part of
a continuing collaboration between the PI, Davide Gaiotto and Greg Moore. First,
they will apply their new construction to get more explicit information than was
previously available about complete hyperkahler metrics, with the ultimate goal
being a new description of the Ricci-flat metric on a K3 surface. Second, they
will explore extensions of their construction to encompass metrics on moduli
spaces of Higgs bundles associated to groups other than SU(2). Third, they will
use the gauge theory perspective to study wall-crossing properties of
conjectural new invariants which extend Donaldson-Thomas. In collaboration with
Sergio Cecotti and Cumrun Vafa, the PI will also look for new restrictions on
the Donaldson-Thomas invariants coming from their gauge-theoretic
interpretation.

The crowning achievement of fundamental physics over the last century was the
development of "quantum field theory", the toolkit which physicists use to
describe the behavior of subatomic particles. Many of the methods of quantum
field theory look radically different from the usual methods of mathematicians.
Nevertheless it has been gradually appreciated that many of these ideas do have
applications to problems of "pure" mathematics: for example, questions about
geometry can sometimes be rephrased as questions about subatomic physics! In
particular, recently it was discovered (by the PI together with collaborators
Greg Moore and Davide Gaiotto) that by studying the behavior of certain four-
dimensional and three-dimensional quantum systems at very low energies, one can
get detailed information about the geometry of certain spaces ("hyperkahler
spaces") which have been intensely studied by mathematicians in recent years.
This appears to be the beginning of a much richer story: by using deeper
properties of the quantum systems, the PI aims to get deeper information about
the corresponding geometry. There are numerous applications to related areas of
mathematics, including the "geometric Langlands program" which aims to create a
bridge between geometry and number theory.
