
* 1007227
* HARMONICITY AND RIGIDITY OF DISCRETE AND ARITHMETIC GROUPS
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2010,06/20/2012
* Yehuda Shalom,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2014
* USD 360,000.00

The principal aim of the proposed activity is to enhance research in the
rigidity theory of discrete groups, with particular emphasis on the important
class of arithmetic groups. Substantial parts of the research aim to sharpen,
recast and unify diverse results in the theory of arithmetic groups into one
novel setting, through a concrete general conjecture, with particular emphasis
on the 30-year old Margulis-Zimmer conjecture (concerning the structure of
commensurated subgroups), as a special case. A key notion in the proposed work
is that of harmonicity, which emerges as central ingredient in relation to this
conjecture, as well as in a different suggested direction of rigidity pertaining
to Lipschitz harmonic functions on groups (motivated by their use in recent
joint work of the PI with Terry Tao).

The theory of so-called arithmetic groups is one of the deepest, most beautiful,
fruitful, and long studied ones in modern mathematics. It involves most fields
of pure mathematics, from the algebraic side of representation, number, and
K-theory, through geometry in its various forms, to the analytic side of ergodic
theory and dynamics. The proposed work aims to address some fundamental issues
and suggest a recast of parts of the theory, thereby shedding new light and
enhancing new developments in the field. Of particular emphasis is a 30-year old
conjecture due to Gregory Margulis and Robert Zimmer. Its resolution is expected
to involve new dynamical ideas, which are strongly related to harmonicity
(roughly speaking, a state which is stable under averaging). Novel
investigations and applications of harmonicity are expected to bring progress in
other directions of the proposed work.
