
* 1007149
* Periodic orbits of Hamiltonian systems and symplectic topology of coisotropic submanifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2010,06/18/2010
* Viktor Ginzburg,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2014
* USD 203,643.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1007149 Principal Investigator: Viktor Ginzburg

The present proposal focuses on several projects closely related to the PI's
previous work. The first group of problems addressed concerns generalizations of
the Conley conjecture. Thisconjecture asserts the existence of infinitely many
periodic points of a Hamiltonian diffeomorphism of a symplectically aspherical,
closed manifold. The Conley conjecture has been established by Hingston (for
tori), the PI and eventually generalized to all symplectic manifolds with zero
Chern class. However, many aspects of the problem require further investigation.
The PI outlines an approach to the proof of the Conley conjecture for manifolds
with large minimal Chern class and to some classes of symplectomorphisms and
Hamiltonian diffeomorphisms with "too many" fixed points. A refinement of the
almost existence theorem for periodic orbits of Hamiltonian systems and an
investigation of periodic orbits of twisted geodesic flows, closely related to
the Conley conjecture, are also considered in the proposal. The second part of
the proposal focuses on symplectic topological properties of coisotropic
submanifolds. These properties generalize the Lagrangian intersection property
and the Liouville and Maslov class rigidity to a certain class of coisotropic
submanifolds, the so-called stable submanifolds. Moreover, a general picture has
emerged, enabling one to treat such facts as non-existence of exact Lagrangian
embeddings and the existence of closed characteristics on a contact type
hypersurface as particular cases of one phenomenon. The main goal of the program
started by the PI and continued in the proposal is to further analyze this
picture and to extend coisotropic rigidity results to a broader class of
submanifolds.

Hamiltonian dynamical systems describe many classes of physical processes in
which dissipative forces can be neglected. For example, planetary motion in
celestial mechanics and some electro- or magneto-dynamical processes can be, and
usually are, treated as Hamiltonian dynamical systems. One of the classical
subjects lying at the very core of modern theory of Hamiltonian dynamical
systems and symplectic geometry is the study of periodic orbits (i.e., cyclic
motions). Periodic orbits are ubiquitous: a vast majority of Hamiltonian systems
have periodic orbits and the number of distinct periodic orbits is infinite for
a broad class of systems. The analysis of this phenomenon, building on the PI's
recent work, is among the main objectives of the proposed research. For
instance, the PI proposes to show that Hamiltonian systems of a certain type
have infinitely many periodic orbits. The class of dynamical systems in question
includes those describing the motion of a charge in a magnetic field and the
proposed research has potential applications to physics and mathematical aspects
of mechanics.
