
* 1007114
* Canonical metrics on four dimensional varieties
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 07/15/2010,07/10/2010
* Ioana Suvaina,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2014
* USD 126,207.00

The two main themes of the research proposed focus on the study of the moduli
spaces of Einstein metrics and constant scalar curvature Kahler metrics at a
point on the boundary of the classifying space. The first part of the proposal
is a natural development of the PI's previous work, and plans to generalize
aspects of Seiberg-Witten Theory, estimates on Riemannian curvatures, and
obstructions to the existence of Einstein metrics on 4-orbifolds. Further
implications of obstructions to the existence of Einstein metrics on smooth
manifolds are expected. The other part the proposal addresses the study of
Kahler structures. The project proposed on the classification of Ricci flat
asymptotically locally euclidean Kahler manifolds (non-hyperkahler) establishes
a starting point in the study of the compactification of the moduli space of
constant scalar curvature Kahler manifolds. The specific tools used come from
twistor spaces, geometric analysis, algebraic geometric stability, and Seiberg-
Witten theory.

In spite of the tremendous developments over the last twenty years, there is
still a lot that eludes us about the geometry of manifolds in low dimensions.
The proposed research aims to develop interactions between different geometric
structures such as Riemannian geometry, differential topology and Kahler
geometry on four dimensional spaces. The PI plans to approach classification
problems of special geometries (ALE Ricci flat Kahler), and also to understand
existence and non-existence of Einstein or constant scalar curvature Kahler
geometric structures on 4-manifolds, or 4-manifolds with singularities. These
topics are of great importance not only in differential and algebraic geometry,
but also in mathematical physics (string theory).
