
* 1007053
* GEOMETRY AND TOPOLOGY OF THE MODULI SPACES OF RIEMANN SURFACES AND CALABI-YAU MANIFOLDS
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2010,07/18/2012
* Kefeng Liu,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2013
* USD 324,000.00

Moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces and Calabi-Yau manifolds have played
fundamental roles in many subjects of mathematics from geometry, topology,
algebraic geometry, to number theory. They are also important objects in string
theory. The principal investigator proposes to have an intensive study by
combining differential geometric methods with other newly developed techniques
to solve several fundamental problems about the geometry and topology of moduli
spaces of Riemann surfaces and Calabi-Yau manifolds. Differential geometric
methods combined with algebraic geometry and combinatorial methods have been
very successful in proving various important conjectures such as the Marino-Vafa
conjecture, the Faber intersection number conjecture and the Labastilda-Marino-
Ooguri-Vafa conjecture in our previous work. Based on these and other geometric
results, the PI will further understand and solve several important problems
including finding the explicit tautological ring structure of the moduli spaces
of Riemann surfaces, proving the general string duality conjecture and solving
the general Torelli problem for projective manifolds and clarifying its relation
to mirror symmetry. Calabi-Yau manifolds are very important in string theory,
the most promising theory to unify the four fundamental forces in the Nature.
They are the shapes that satisfy the requirement of space for the six hidden
spatial dimensions of string theory, which must be contained in a space smaller
than our currently observable lengths. Riemann surfaces are called world-sheet
in string theory which are the most basic objects in conformal field theory. The
recent development of string duality in string theory has motivated many
exciting new mathematical results. Many fundamental computations in string
theory and quantum field theory are often reduced to certain integrals on moduli
spaces of Riemann surfaces and Calabi-Yau manifolds. By comparing the
mathematical descriptions of different string theories, one often reveals quite
deep and unexpected mathematical conjectures, many of which are related to
moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces and Calabi-Yau manifolds. The mathematical
proofs of these conjectures often help verify the physical theories which cannot
be achieved today through traditional experiments. Our project will lead to very
strong impacts on several major fields of mathematics and theoretical physics.
This program will not only help verify certain important physical theories in
string theory, but also produce beautiful and fundamental results in
mathematics. In carrying out the project we will also train several young
students and post-doctors to conduct research in these subjects through
collaboration and lectures.
