
* 1063676
* Geometry, Analysis, and Surfaces: An International Workshop in Autrans, France
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 03/01/2011,10/19/2010
* Richard Wentworth,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 02/29/2012
* USD 38,400.00

This proposal will support participants from the US to a workshop in Autrans,
France, during the period March 20-25, 2011. The workshop is part of an ongoing
effort to advance the understanding of representation varieties from the
analytic, topological and dynamical viewpoints, and to probe more deeply their
relationship to other branches of mathematics and mathematical physics. The
central themes of the conference are moduli of representations and higher
Teichmueller theory, but other topics include problems in quantization,
probability, hyperbolic geometry, and geometric analysis.

This meeting will bring together leading researchers from around the world. The
workshop will provide a combination of introductory talks on important subjects
related to the main themes, as well as more specialized research talks on the
latest developments. Graduate students and postdocs especially will benefit from
the introductory lecture series and the opportunity to interact with
mathematicians in the field. The subject area of the conference, the geometry
and topology of moduli spaces, is an extremely active field that continues to
play a central role in current mathematics research. It has also attracted many
new Ph.D. students and postdoctoral researchers. The workshop is an opportunity
for this diverse group of mathematicians working in related fields to interact,
share ideas, begin new collaborations, and advance the field.
