
* 1066222
* Quantization of Singular Spaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 04/15/2011,04/11/2011
* Markus Pflaum,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2014
* USD 28,980.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1066222 Principal Investigator: Markus J. Pflaum

The award serves to support participants from the U.S. at the conference and
school "Quantization of Singular Spaces" in December 2010 at the Center for
Quantum Geometry of Moduli Spaces in Aarhus, Denmark.

The supported conference will be aimed at recent approaches to quantization of
singular spaces. The goal of the conference is to encourage cross-fertilization
among various approaches, to bring seemingly independent lines of research
together, and to consider where the field can go in the future. It is expected
to give a strong impetus to innovative work in the field. In addition, the
workshop is aimed at training young researchers in the field by internationally
renowned experts. A mathematically rigorous theory of singular quantization
would have considerable repercussions. For example, in mathematical physics a
better understanding of the nonperturbative structure of gauge theories would
come within reach, which would be essential preparation for the construction of
quantized Yang--Mills theories and grand unified theories. In mathematics, new
index theorems for singular spaces would emerge, among other.

Support for the conference will ensure that experts from the U.S. working in the
field of quantization theory will be able to significantly contribute to the
conference and will profit from the exchange of cutting-edge research. Moreover,
support for the school and conference will enable U.S.-based young researchers
to participate in the special training which will be offered through three
minicourses on foundational material and recent achievements in the field during
a school preceeding the conference. The conference and school in Denmark will
also strengthen US-Scandinavian research connections and will lead to new
scientific collaborations.

Conference webpage:

http://qgm.au.dk/events/dec-2010-conference-quantization-of-singular-spaces/
