
* 1103612
* RUI: Geometric Tomography
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/15/2011,08/09/2011
* Richard Gardner,WA,Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2016
* USD 160,178.00

Geometric tomography uses data concerning sections by planes and projections on
planes of geometric objects to obtain information about these objects. The
latter include general compact sets, but often they are convex bodies,
polytopes, star-shaped bodies, or finite sets. One advantage of this setting is
that it becomes more probable that inverse problems have a unique solution.
Generally, the a priori knowledge that the unknown object is of uniform density
can be exploited to retrieve more information than would otherwise be possible.
This can lead to algorithms that are more effective when few measurements are
available, and less sensitive to measurement errors or noise. Geometric
tomography has links to functional analysis, convex geometry, Minkowski
geometry, and combinatorics. The project will continue the development of
geometric tomography. New directions include fundamental new classification
theorems for binary operations between, and symmetrization operations on,
compact convex sets or star bodies; development of new tools for dealing with
intersections of convex bodies, including an attack on a conjectured stronger
form of the Brunn-Minkowski inequality; formulating and proving restricted
Brunn-Minkowski inequalities, where the sets involved are contained in some
fixed region of Euclidean space or the unit sphere; new algorithms for
reconstruction from noisy data, in particular, from section functions, with
proof of convergence for origin-symmetric convex bodies; progress towards a
solution of Hammer's X-ray problem in higher dimensions and a conjecture on
spherical X-rays of convex bodies; extension of previous results on convex and
star bodies to log concave and radial measures; various other projects, for
example renewed attacks on the discrete Aleksandrov projection problem and new
inequalities of the Loomis-Whitney type or their reverses. Also included is a
program designed to stimulate undergraduate research.

CAT scanners are machines that save lives daily. They take X-rays in a number of
different directions, and synthesize the information to create an image of a
two-dimensional section of part of the body. The mathematics behind this process
is called computerized tomography. It is very successful, but not perfect; the
reconstructed image is only approximate, and to get a better picture with the
same procedure one has to take more X-rays, causing greater expense and
likelihood of side effects. In geometric tomography, only homogeneous objects
are allowed - the density of the object is the same everywhere inside it. An
example from medicine would be a bone or a kidney. One can use this extra
information to find better reconstruction procedures. The scope of geometric
tomography is actually much wider. Any measurement involving sections of a
homogeneous object by lines or planes or its shadows on lines or planes can be
considered. Because of this, it has many links to other areas, both in
mathematics (there is a large overlap with convex geometry, the geometry of
shapes without holes or dents) and outside. For example, a new technique called
local stereology depends on measurements of planar sections of biological
tissue; each section passes through a fixed point, usually the nucleus of a
cell, and the measurements can be made optically rather than physically. This
project continues the development of several aspects of the mathematics of
geometric tomography. Also included is a program designed to stimulate
undergraduate research.
