
* 1104592
* Partial regularity and rigidity problems associated to geometric elliptic systems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2011,12/04/2014
* Fernando Marques,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2016
* USD 161,912.00

The principal investigator proposes to apply techniques and methods in partial
differential systems to study regularity and rigidity problems in differential
geometry. The first proposed problem is on the rigidity of certain
asymptotically flat manifolds. This project is a continuation of the
investigator's earlier work on asymptotic decay of metrics where she applied an
analysis method in elliptic systems. The elliptic systems therein are of
reaction-diffusion type, which appears often in biology and chemistry. The
rigidity problem can be viewed as an extremal case of the asymptotic decay
problem of metrics. The second proposed project is on partial regularity of
geometric elliptic systems under L^2 norm bound of curvatures. Such problem
arises naturally in the study of moduli spaces. The notion of moduli spaces is a
modern advance in describing the topological and analytical structure of
Riemannian metrics. The investigator proposes to study the regularity theory by
a similar analysis approach previously used in harmonic maps and Yang-Mills
equations.

The proposed research contains an interdisciplinary study among differential
geometry and applied mathematics through partial differential equations. On the
geometrical side, both problems are within a larger program in understanding the
structure of Riemannian metrics on the whole. In order to describe the
structure, it is essential to develop a tool, partial regularity, to measure the
roughness of the space. From analytical point of view, the problems turn out to
be characterized by a (static) reaction-diffusion system, a typical type of
systems in some areas of sciences. In the literature of partial regularity in
geometry, there were few connections known in this direction ( harmonic maps and
Yang-Mills equations are among the few). The investigator plans to devote
herself in this direction and disseminate the knowledge she obtained through the
proposed activity among both differential geometers and applied mathematicians.
