
* 1104470
* Symplectic Geometry and Dynamics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2011,05/23/2011
* Helmut Hofer,NJ,Institute For Advanced Study
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2015
* USD 210,100.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1104470 Principal Investigator: Helmut Hofer

The first subproject will be concerned with the completion of symplectic field
theory (SFT). This is currently the most general and most comprehensive theory
of symplectic invariants. There are three ingredients to this project, namely
the polyfold Fredholm theory, the scale-smooth analysis and the formulation of
SFT as an algebraic presentation of the solution count of a polyfold Fredholm
problem with operations. The second subproject, a by-product of the polyfold
Fredholm theory, attempts to construct a homology theory based on equivalence
classes of Fredholm problems. The resulting advantage would be that
transversality issues in studying nonlinear partial differential equations would
actually not occur explicitly. They would be hidden in the (one-time) proof that
the new homology theory of a space would be naturally isomorphic to the rational
singular homology. A third subproject is concerned with finite energy
foliations, either in the context of area-preserving disk-maps or the restricted
planar three-body problem. Finite energy foliations were introduced by the PI
and his collaborators and are an important tool in the study of the dynamics of
low-dimensional Hamiltonian systems. The restricted circular planar three-body
problem is not only interesting from a purely academic viewpoint, but is also
used in the orbit design for scientific space missions. In certain regimes of
the Jacobi energy, finite energy foliations allow to reduce the dynamics of the
restricted three-body problem to that of the dynamics of an area-preserving
disk-map. Then again the same theory facilitates the understanding of the long-
term behavior of iterated area-preserving disk maps. The project will study the
relationship between the theory of finite energy foliations, a symplectic
construction, and core dynamical systems notions like entropy.

It is a surprising fact that many physical systems evolving in time, allow a
description as a Hamiltonian system. Systems of this kind describe the flow of
an incompressible ideal fluid, the movement of a satellite under the
gravitational forces of celestial bodies, or the movement of charged particles
in a magnetic field. Hamiltonian systems are a very particular class of
dynamical systems, which can be studied not only by the methods from dynamical
systems theory, but also by a more exotic kind of geometry called symplectic
geometry. This is a geometry based on the notion of area, in contrast to usual
geometries, which have length and distance as their fundamental notions. Recent
advances in this field already found some practical uses. For example, this
novel point of view has been used in accelerator physics in algorithms
controlling and insuring stability of a beam of particles and called symplectic
tracking. It is the explicit purpose of this research to integrate the
approaches to Hamiltonian systems coming from these two different perspectives.
This should result in new methods, which should make it possible to attack
problems, which so far seemed unreachable. For example it seems long term be
feasible to use the new methods to develop algorithms, which would find fuel-
efficient orbits for scientific space missions. Current technology can verify
the properties of proposed orbits extremely fast. However, currently there is no
good method for finding such orbits. It rather compares to finding a needle in a
haystack, using very large amounts of computing time.
