
* 1104779
* Homological Mirror Symmetry for Calabi-Yau Hypersurfaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2011,05/10/2011
* Eric Zaslow,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2015
* USD 247,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1104779 Principal Investigator: Eric Zaslow

Mirror symmetry in string theory has, quite famously, linked disparate fields of
mathematics. The central theorem in the subject is Kontsevich's homological
mirror symmetry (HMS) conjecture. The principal investigator proposes to prove
this conjecture using his recent work with collaborators. Connections between
mathematical physics and topology, representation theory, and combinatorics have
been revealed through the PI's research with Nadler and with Fang, Liu and
Treumann. What emerges is a language for studying mirror symmetry and other
advances in mathematical physics from a simple, geometric viewpoint which easily
lends itself to computation. This perspective renders some formidable hurdles of
HMS rather tractable. The PI will, with collaborators and graduate students, aim
to prove HMS in several stages. First, by defining a category, the Constructible
Plumbing Model (CPM), which models the Fukaya category of a Calabi-Yau manifold
at its large radius limit by defining a formal Lagrangian skeleton and gluing
together categories of constructible sheaves made from pieces of the skeleton.
Second, by proving that CPM is equivalent to the category of perfect complexes
on the mirror Calabi-Yau at its large complex limit point. After these steps, a
deformation-of-categories argument can be made to establish a mirror map and
prove HMS.

The aim of string theory is to merge the two pillars of modern physics:
Einstein's theory of gravity and the quantum theory of particles. Models of the
universe from string theory rely on a class of geometric spaces called Calabi-
Yau manifolds. Calculations in these models are quite formidable, but are often
made tractable through the phenomenon of mirror symmetry. The idea of mirror
symmetry is that one theory can look totally different from another theory, but
the two lead to the same predictions. Hard calculations using one Calabi-Yau
manifold can become easy calculations in the completely different "mirror"
Calabi-Yau manifold. But to be truly useful, one must have complete confidence
in the equivalence, namely that the calculations in the mirror theory can be
trusted. This requires a rigorous mathematical formulation of the model, a
rigorous statement of how to apply the equivalence, and a rigorous proof that
the equivalence is, in fact, true. The statements in mirror symmetry have been
made rigorous by Fields Medal laureate Maxim Kontsevich. What is still lacking
is a general proof of Kontsevich's conjecture. The principal investigator
proposes to prove this conjecture in several steps, using a simple geometric
model which easily lends itself to calculations. The model can also serve as a
framework for exploring other predications and phenomena of modern theoretical
physics.
