
* 1105586
* Complex Analysis and Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2011,05/20/2015
* Daniel Burns,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2016
* USD 308,291.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1105586 Principal Investigator: Daniel M. Burns

Some of the themes emphasized in these research projects are modern aspects of
the Bohr-Sommerfeld theory from the early days of quantum mechanics in the
1920s, value distribution theory and Ahlfors currents, and Grauert tubes. In
physics the Bohr-Sommerfeld theory was created as a method for quantizing an
integrable classical mechanical system. The principal investigator interprets
the Bohr-Sommerfeld conditions for quantization as a geometric property, name a
triviality condition on the holonomy of a certain flat bundle. Ongoing work
seeks to understand the connections between singularities of Hamiltonians and
singularities of underlying complex spaces, and the geometry of the Bohr-
Sommerfeld construction seems to be a central focus of the story.

Value distribution theory is a framework for attempting to count solutions to an
equation in complex variables. The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra tells us that
a polynomial equation of degree n in one variable has exactly n solutions over
the complex numbers, if you count repeated roots with care. More complicated
equations in a single complex variable can have infinitely many solutions, but
these are spread around the complex plane and the number of solutions contained
in a ball of radius R about the origin can only grow at a limited rate as R
becomes large -- a situation greatly clarified by ideas introduced by the
Finnish mathematician Rolf Nevanlinna in the 1920s, at about the same time that
the Bohr-Sommerfeld theory was developed in physics. One of the projects
supported by this award is a project that applies modern geometric tools to
study the distribution of solutions to equations in several variables.
