
* 1157517
* 37th, 38th, and 39th Arkansas Spring Lecture Series in the Mathematical Sciences
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 03/01/2012,05/17/2012
* Phillip Harrington,AR,University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 02/29/2016
* USD 89,999.00

The 37th, 38th, and 39th Arkansas Spring Lecture Series in the Mathematical
Sciences (SLS) will take place in 2012, 2013, and 2014 at the University of
Arkansas, in Fayetteville, AR. Each SLS will consist of five lectures by the
principal speaker, ten 45-minute talks by invited speakers chosen by the
principal speaker, and several twenty-minute contributed talks by graduate
students and recent Ph.D.'s. The topic in 2012 will be "Higher Codimensional
Elliptic Boundary Value Problems." The conference will take place April 12-14,
2012. The principal speaker will be Professor Rafe Mazzeo from Stanford
University. Professor Mazzeo will focus on the geometric microlocal method,
stemming from the work of Melrose and his school. That encompasses a wide
variety of problems, and includes detailed analyses of operators on spaces with
conic points and edges, as well as somewhat less detailed results on general
stratified spaces. Beyond these general analytic approaches, talks will look at
applying these tools to specific geometric problems, involving both linear and
nonlinear operators. The topic in 2013 will be "Extension and Interpolation."
The conference will take place April 4-6, 2013. The principal speaker will be
Professor Charles Fefferman of Princeton University. Professor Fefferman's talks
will address the following questions: suppose we are given a function f defined
on a finite subset of Euclidean space, consisting of N data points. How can we
compute an m-times differentiable function F on all of Euclidean space that
agrees (exactly or approximately) with f at the data points, and has the least
possible norm for the first m derivatives? How many computer operations does it
take? What if we are allowed to discard a few of the data points? Which points
should be discarded to achieve the best improvement in the interpolation? The
topic in 2014 will be ''Multi-parameter Geometry and Analysis.'' The conference
will take place April 10-12, 2014. The principal speaker will be Professor
Alexander Nagel of the University of Wisconsin. Many results in complex and
harmonic analysis in which one establishes the boundedness of some linear or
sub-linear operator can be formulated in terms of geometry and analysis on
spaces of 'homogeneous type'. This concept provides a general abstract setting
for the concepts underlying classical Calderon-Zygmund theory of maximal
functions and singular and fractional integrals. In an important sense, a theory
which uses spaces of homogeneous type as a paradigm is a one-parameter theory.
Professor Nagel's lectures will focus on some preliminary observations and
results in complex and harmonic analysis which fall outside this standard one
parameter theory.

Mathematics conferences are vital to the development of the field. They provide
unique opportunity for scientists from different subfields to meet so as to (a)
summarize the most recent progress in these fields, and their interactions, (b)
present new directions of research with sufficient detail to formulate and
develop a list of open problems, and (c) provide an opportunity to foster new
collaborations and exchange ideas toward the solution of important open
questions. In the tradition of the Arkansas Spring Lectures Series, these
meetings will provide unique opportunities for young researchers and graduate
students to interact with prominent experts in their research areas. Public
talks by Professor Lorenzo Sadun in 2012, by Professor Arlie Petters in 2013,
and by Professor Colin Adams in 2014 will address audiences of the public at
large. Other events include an informal lunch discussion where issues related to
being women in mathematics are discussed (hosted by Arkansas Women in Statistics
and Mathematics) and a reception for Arkansas graduate students and external
graduate students to meet and compare their careers.
