
* 1201089
* Some problems in algebraic geometry and string theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 05/15/2012,05/07/2014
* Sheldon Katz,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 04/30/2016
* USD 354,910.00

Problems to be investigated in the proposed research include the determination
and properties of correlation functions and quantum sheaf cohomology arising
from string theories and gauge theories associated to a smooth projective
variety and a vector bundle satisfying the anomaly cancellation conditions.
Particular attention will be paid to toric complete intersections and the
mathematical formulation of the nonlinear sigma model version of quantum sheaf
cohomology. A related problem is the determination of the quantum product in the
ordinary quantum cohomology of a toric variety. Another theme is the study of
algebro-geometric invariants related to topological string amplitudes: Gromov-
Witten, Gopakumar-Vafa, and stable pair invariants, including motivic stable
pair invariants. These techniques will be applied to put the definition of
Gopakumar-Vafa invariants from string theory on a more firm mathematical
foundation. Techniques will be developed for the computation of stable pair
invariants in the non-toric setting, and will be applied to verify predictions
of mirror symmetry. Problems in the area of F-theory and gauge/gravity duality
in string theory will be investigated as well.

The research funded by this grant has two modes: bringing current developments
in algebraic geometry to bear on fundamental problems of particle physics as
modeled by string theory, and bringing physical ideas and intuition to bear on
current problems in geometry. The questions to be investigated are of pressing
current interest in mathematics and physics. The mathematical techniques under
development could make it possible to exactly compute the predicted masses of
particles in increasingly realistic string models, and better understand how the
observed forces and interactions in nature can arise from grand unified theories
which include quantum gravity. Ideas of string theory provide key insight which
are expected to directly lead to the solution of several unsolved problems in
three-dimensional algebraic geometry. Graduate students will be trained in
geometry and physics, and their interaction.

This award is jointly funded by the Algebra and Number Theory and the Geometric
Analysis programs.
