
* 1201569
* Geometric Flows and Four-dimensional Geometry
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/15/2011,06/18/2013
* Jeffrey Streets,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2014
* USD 163,263.00

The projects in this proposal aim to deepen the understanding of certain natural
geometric evolution equations generalizing the Ricci flow, with a focus on
understanding aspects of four dimensional geometry. One example is the gradient
flow of the square norm of the curvature tensor, a natural fourth-order
parabolic equation whose critical points unify various important classes of
metrics on four-manifolds. Another important example is a generalization of
Kahler Ricci flow to non-Kahler complex manifolds introduced in prior work of
the PI and G. Tian. By utilizing methods from the well-developed theory of Ricci
flow as well as techniques from complex geometry, the PI proposes to refine his
existing work to understand the singularity formation of these flows. Aside from
the intrinsic value of understanding physically natural equations, one possible
direct application is to understand the topology of complex surfaces.

The method of geometric flows is a relatively new technique for understanding
the structure of geometric objects. Ultimately, by understanding these equations
one can gain a deep understanding of topological structures. Furthermore, these
equations typically have a physical motivation, and hence by understanding them
we gain insight into natural physical processes. Even beyond these theoretical
uses geometric flows have recently seen industrial application. The proposed
research will thus add to our overall understanding in these important areas.
