
* 1205016
* GEOMETRY AND DYNAMICS ON MODULI SPACE
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2012,04/21/2014
* Howard Masur,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2017
* USD 234,370.00

The principal investigator (PI) will work on problems in the geometry and
dynamics of Teichmuller space, moduli space of Riemann surfaces, directional
flows on polygons and translation surfaces, and the mapping class group. These
problems involve a fairly wide spectrum of mathematics including complex
analysis, dynamical systems, and geometry. The objective of the first part of
the project is to study the Weil-Petersson flow on moduli space and the geometry
of its geodesics. This metric is fundamental in studying properties of moduli
space. There are many important connections between the Weil-Petersson metric
and the hyperbolic geometry and dynamics of surfaces. In the second part the
goal is to study properties of Teichmuller geodesics and their relation to flows
on surfaces, and in the third part rigidity questions about Teichmuller space
with the Teichmuller metric. The last part of the project concerns the action of
the mapping class group on Teichmuller space and on its boundary at infinity. If
the goals of the project are met, it would add to our understanding of these
subjects.

A major role of mathematics is to provide a framework or language to discuss
processes of science. The framework developed in this project centers on the
concept of shape. In mathematics, Teichmuller theory and moduli space theory is
the study of the shapes that a surface can assume. Geodesics in a space
represent an efficient way of moving or evolving in the space and the study of
geodesics is central to geometry. Both Weil-Petersson geodesics and Teichmuller
geodesics describe natural and very different ways in which the shapes of
surfaces evolve efficiently over time. This project concerns the study of this
evolution under these two different processes.
