
* 1205922
* Higher-order Phenomena in Knot Theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2012,08/03/2012
* Peter Horn,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Noel Brady
* 10/31/2012
* USD 132,000.00

The principal investigator will study knots up to isotopy and up to concordance
using a combination of techniques from the categories of topological and smooth
manifolds, including von Neumann rho-invariants and Heegaard Floer homology. The
primary goal of this project is to determine structure in the group of smooth
concordance classes of topologically slice knots. Using grid diagrams, the
principal investigator will work to find a refinement of knot Floer homology
which hopefully reflects the non-commutative structure of the fundamental group
of the knot exterior. From this refinement, the principal investigator hopes to
garner further concordance invariants and apply them to study topologically
slice knots. This refinement of knot Floer homology is expected to capture some
of the information in the higher-order Alexander modules. The final goal of the
project is to develop computational techniques for these modules.

The principal investigator hopes to shed light on the structure of knotted
curves in space. Knots appear many places in nature. For example, the strands of
DNA in cells are knotted, and these knots can affect the replication process.
Many of the existing algebraic tools used to study knots are commutative. The
principal investigator will develop new non-commutative algebraic tools to study
knots and will develop techniques for making computations. By using more
general, non-commutative algebraic techniques, the principal investigator hopes
to reveal more structure in the set of knots in space.
