
* 1207917
* Convexity and Applications
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2012,08/29/2012
* Elisabeth Werner,OH,Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2015
* USD 161,001.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1207917, Principal Investigator: Elisabeth M. Werner

These research projects are in asymptotic geometric analysis and affine convex
geometry. A main emphasis of her research is on affine invariant and high
dimensional objects and phenomena and on links with other areas of mathematics
and mathematical sciences (probability, statistics, optimization, information
theory and quantum information theory). Much of the research in convex geometry
in recent years has been directed to the study of affine and high dimensional
aspects of convex bodies. The PI and her collaborators carried out a systematic
study of some of the most important affine invariant functionals on convex
bodies, the p-affine surface areas. They obtained extensions of those invariants
to all convex bodies and for all p and established their corresponding affine
isoperimetric inequalities (which are stronger than their Euclidean
counterparts). There are numerous applications of these works. We only mention
the PI's work, with Reisner and Schuett, on Mahler's conjecture. While not
providing the solution (yet), their result is the strongest indication to date
that the minimum is indeed attained for polytopes. Very recent developments open
totally new directions. For one, the PI found new affine invariants and proved
that those and the p-affine surface areas are certain entropies from information
theory. In another direction, the PI, Artstein, Klartag and Schuett showed that
affine isoperimetric inequality for log concave functions corresponds to a
reverse log Sobolev inequality for entropy. These directions will be explored
further. Contributions are also her work linking quantum information theory and
high dimensional convex geometry, culminating in Aubrun's, Szarek's and her
analysis of the "Additivity conjecture for Quantum channels" via asymptotic
geometric analysis. The PI will continue to exploit the unique perspective given
by asymptotic geometric analysis for problems in quantum information theory.

A mathematical description of a scientific or engineering question often
requires lots of independent numbers, leading to a geometric space of high
dimension. For example, if you want to specify the location of one gas molecule
in a room, then you need to report the front/back, side-to-side, and up/down
locations of the molecule, using three numbers. The direction and speed of the
molecule's motion takes another three numbers, and so to describe enough of the
molecule's current state to allow us to predict its future motion from position
and velocity we would need six separate numbers in all. If you want to track 100
distinct molecules of the air in the room then you will need 600 independent
numerical coordinates to collect all of the relevant measurements. As these
dimensions increase, the difficulty of sampling and computation go up rapidly, a
phenomenon scientists and mathematicians sometimes call "the curse of
dimensionality." However, there are also patterns that emerge as dimension
increases which are not visible in low dimensions. We can exploit those patters,
thus taking advantage of the "curse of dimensionality" to make it the "blessing
of dimensionality". To study such high dimensional phenomena, is one purpose of
this grant.
