
* 1207680
* Symplectic topology of Hamiltonian systems with infinitely many periodic orbits
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2012,07/12/2012
* Basak Gurel,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 01/31/2014
* USD 146,520.00

The primary goal of the proposed research is to investigate the phenomenon of
existence of infinitely many periodic orbits for a variety of Hamiltonian
dynamical systems and to understand the nature of the systems admitting finitely
many periodic orbits. The proposal comprises several interconnected projects
addressing these questions for certain classes of Hamiltonian diffeomorphisms
and also for specific Hamiltonian systems such as magnetic flows. The PI will
tackle these problems by employing methods from symplectic topology including
Floer and quantum homological techniques, holomorphic curves, spectral
invariants, Ljusternik-Schnirelman theory, as well as methods from differential
geometry such as h-principles. The techniques utilized by the PI also have
applications beyond the question of existence of infinitely many periodic
orbits. In particular, the projects concerning the Poincar√© recurrence, the Reeb
flows and the coisotropic symplectic topology draw heavily on her recent works
concerning periodic orbits. These projects have applications to measure-
preserving and classical dynamical systems, and to some embedding problems in
symplectic topology.

Hamiltonian systems constitute a broad class of physical systems where
dissipative forces can be disregarded. For example, the planetary motion in
celestial mechanics, the flow of an incompressible ideal fluid, and the motion
of a charged particle in a magnetic field are usually treated as Hamiltonian
systems. One general, but not universal, feature of such systems is that they
tend to have numerous periodic orbits. Corresponding to the cyclic motion, this
is the simplest dynamical phenomenon after equilibrium, and an investigation of
periodic orbits of a system is crucial in understanding its global behavior. To
give but a few applications, the knowledge of periodic orbits is crucial in
astronomy, fluid dynamics (e.g., statistics of turbulent flow) or can be used to
understand stability of solutions for large times. In all but the simplest
cases, establishing existence of periodic orbits often requires advanced and
powerful mathematical tools. For a broad class of Hamiltonian systems, the
number of periodic orbits is known to be infinite and this is thought to be the
case for many, but not all, Hamiltonian systems. The proposal focuses on the
problem of existence of infinitely many periodic orbits for Hamiltonian
dynamical systems in a variety of settings and on applications of the techniques
used by the PI to attack this problem to some other related questions. The
projects in the last part of the proposal concern a certain class of spaces
which arise, for instance, in the study of Hamiltonian systems with symmetries.
The proposed work is related to and has potential applications in mathematical
physics, and geometric and quantum mechanics.
