
* 1212475
* Conferences and School in Poisson Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2012,05/31/2012
* Ping Xu,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2015
* USD 33,000.00

This grant supports travel for US participants (primarily graduate students and
postdocs) to attend the conference Poisson 2012, to be held in Utrecht
University, the Netherlands, July 30-Aug. 3, 2012, and the "Gone fishing:
Workshop in Poisson geometry II", to be held at University of California, Los
Angeles, November 17-18, 2012. There will also be a "school" during the week
preceding Poisson 2012 (July 23-27, 2012) to prepare such participants for the
conference. The aim of both meetings is to bring together mathematicians and
mathematical physicists who work in diverse areas, with common interests in
Poisson geometry. With roots in classical mechanics about 200 years ago and the
work of Sophus Lie about a century ago, the subject of Poisson geometry was
crystallized through work of Kirillov and Lichnerowicz in the 1970's and has
been particularly driven by the program of "deformation quantization", in which
Poisson structures appear as the first deviation from commutativity in families
of associative algebras. On the geometric side, there have been recent advances
in the classification of Poisson structures, both up to (local) isomorphism, and
up to the coarser relation of Morita equivalence. Poisson geometry provides a
very important bridge between mathematics and physics and between classical and
quantum physics. Although Poisson geometry has a core of internal results, it is
an interdisciplinary subject. Subjects where Poisson geometry plays an essential
role include string theory, symplectic geometry and topology, deformation
theory, representation theory, algebraic geometry, integrable Hamiltonian
systems, and field theory.

Poisson 2012, whose full title is "Poisson Geometry in Mathematics and Physics,"
is the eighth in a biannual series which brings together mathematicians and
mathematical physicists with common interests in Poisson geometry and its
applications. Speakers at Poisson 2012 have been chosen not only for the
importance of their results but also for their ability to communicate them to a
broad audience of mathematicians and physicists. The conference will be preceded
by a short school designed to prepare the audience for the more specialized
talks to come. Conference proceedings will be published in a manner which makes
them accessible at low (or no) cost to a wide readership, in order to stimulate
further study and research in the rapidly growing area of Poisson geometry. The
``Gone fishing" workshop aims to bring together US based leading experts and
young researchers in subjects related to Poisson geometry to encourage more
interaction and cross fertilization between different fields. It provides an
excellent opportunity for US based young scientists to exchange ideas and
promote possible collaborations.

Detailed information about Poisson 2012 may be found at
http://www.projects.science.uu.nl/poisson2012/Home.php and the ``Gone fishing
workshops" at http://www.math.wustl.edu/~xtang/gone-fishing.htm Information is
also available at http://poissongeometry.org/
