
* 1265187
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Analysis of the Einstein Constraint Equations
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2013,04/12/2013
* Rafe Mazzeo,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2018
* USD 188,375.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1265187, 1262982, 1263431, 1263544

PI: Rafe R. Mazzeo, Stanford University PI: Michael J. Holst, University of
California - San Diego PI: James A. Isenberg, University of Oregon PI: David
Maxell, University of Alaska

The goal of this project is to understand the extent to which one can
parametrize and construct initial data sets for the Einstein evolution
equations. We plan to capitalize on the recent progress using the conformal
method to obtain new existence results in the nonconstant mean curvature (non-
CMC) setting, to understand the limits of these methods, and then to develop
alternate techniques toward these same goals, including degree theory, a priori
estimates, and gluing methods. The Lichnerowicz equation, central to the
conformal method, is a semilinear elliptic equation. Due to the mixed sign of
its nonlinear exponents, it is of a type not yet fully understood. The full
Lichnerowicz-Choquet-Bruhat-York set of equations is a more difficult coupled
system which incorporates features presenting new analytic subtleties. The
ultimate aim is to provide a complete parametrization of initial data sets,
particularly in the non-CMC setting, not only on compact backgrounds but also
for manifolds with asymptotically Euclidean, hyperbolic or cylindrical ends, all
of which are highly relevant for physical applications. In exploring new
methods, we plan to use new and advanced analytical tools, as well as
increasingly accurate and flexible numerical simulation techniques. Technical
advances made in the course of this project should have a substantial
application to many other equations of this general type which play important
roles in other parts of pure and applied mathematics and mathematical physics.

Einstein's gravitational field theory is a remarkably accurate mathematical
model of gravitational physics, which does an excellent job of predicting and
modeling gravitational phenomena at both the astrophysical and cosmological
scales. It is consistent with every known gravitational observation and
experiment. From the point of view of underlying mathematics, Einstein's theory
involves two very distinct types of equations. The study of dynamics of
gravitational fields involves the analysis of the Einstein equations as a
nonlinear system of time-dependent evolution partial differential equations
(PDE), while the study of initial data sets representing gravitational states
involves Riemannian geometry and the study of the Einstein constraint equations
as a nonlinear system of time-independent PDE.The last decade has witnessed
remarkable progress in under- standing both equations. This project focuses on
developing a more complete understanding of the constraint equations. The study
of the Einstein equations presents a very important point of contact between
mathematics and physics, one which has motivated many advances in differential
geometry and PDE on the one side, and which also has provided a compelling and
accurate model of the physical world, both on the astrophysical and on the
cosmological scales. This project has the potential for settling significant
open questions in this area.
