
* 1305697
* String-Math 2013
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 05/15/2013,05/10/2013
* John Morgan,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2014
* USD 59,722.00

The Simons Center for Geometry and Physics, Stony Brook, USA is hosting a
String-Math 2013 conference in June 17-21, 2013.
(http://scgp.stonybrook.edu/events/event-pages/string-math-2013) This is a third
annual meeting of String-Math series of conferences. The main goal of the
conference is to bring together mathematicians and physicists who work on ideas
related to string theory. String theory, as well as quantum field theory, has
contributed a series of profound ideas which gave rise to entirely new
mathematical fields and revitalized older ones. For mathematics, string theory
has been a source of many significant inspirations, ranging from Seiberg-Witten
theory in four-manifolds, to enumerative geometry and Gromov-Witten theory in
algebraic geometry, to work on the Jones polynomial in knot theory, to advances
in symplectic topology, to recent progress in the geometric Langlands program
and the development of derived algebraic geometry and n-category theory. In the
other direction, mathematics has provided physicists with powerful tools,
ranging from powerful differential geometric techniques for solving or analyzing
key partial differential equations, to toric geometry, to K-theory and derived
categories in D-branes, to the analysis of Calabi-Yau manifolds and string
compactifications, to the use of modular forms and other arithmetic techniques.
The depth, power and novelty of the results obtained in both fields thanks to
their interaction is truly mind boggling. String-Math is the annual conference
that was founded to reflect the most significant progress at the interface of
string theory and mathematics.

String theory is the attempt to build a mathematical model which describes all
four fundamental forces and all forms of matter. It assumes that the fundamental
objects of the theory are one-dimensional objects - "strings" with elementary
particles (i.e., electrons and quarks) being oscillations of fundamental
strings. In particular, string theory aims to reconcile gravity, i.e., general
relativity, with quantum mechanics which is the formalism in which the other
three forces are described. String theory is very mathematical in nature and its
development was based on advances in modern mathematics and inspired many recent
developments in mathematics. The main goal of the String-Math conference is to
bring together mathematicians and physicists who work on ideas related to string
theory. By now there is a large and rapidly growing number of both
mathematicians and physicists working at the string-theoretic interface between
the two academic fields. The influence flows in both directions, with
mathematical techniques and ideas contributing crucially to major advances in
string theory. Following the success of first two meetings of String-Math series
the conference String-Math 2013 is expected to have a major impact on the field
and to serve as a record of the state of the art in string-related mathematics.
