
* 1307953
* Dynamical Properties of Spaces of Minimal Surfaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/15/2013,09/08/2013
* Jacob Bernstein,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2016
* USD 155,835.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1307953, Principal Investigator: Jacob Bernstein

The project will study properties of classical minimal surfaces - that is,
surfaces in Euclidean three-space which are critical points for area. The focus
will be on understanding global properties of interesting classes of minimal
surfaces, e.g., compactness properties. This will be done by studying the
geometric structure of elements of the class. This approach is motivated by far-
reaching work of Colding and Minicozzi who characterized the structure of
embedded minimal disks. Their work has been the basis for much recent progress
in the field. The PI will attack these questions primarily by using methods
originating in the theory of integrable systems - especially the geometric
theory of the Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) equation. Specifically, the PI will
develop preliminary work which suggests that many spaces of minimal surfaces
possess dynamics which are modeled on the KdV equation. The connection between
minimal surfaces and the KdV equation is best understood using language and
ideas coming from projective geometry. As such, one over-arching goal of the
project is to formalize these observations in the language of projective
geometry and to understand the interaction between the dynamics and the geometry
of the minimal surfaces. A near-term goal is to apply the techniques developed
to spaces of free-boundary minimal surfaces. These are particularly amenable to
the methods and so act as good model spaces. Motivated by work of Meeks, Perez
and Ros on properly embedded minimal surfaces of genus-zero, a longer-term goal
is to blend this perspective with more established methods in order to answer
questions about embedded minimal surfaces of finite genus. Chief among these is
the question, raised by Colding and Minicozzi, whether a embedded minimal
surface of finite genus which is complete is necessarily properly embedded.

A minimal surface mathematically models the shape of a soap film spanning a
fixed wire frame. This is because, roughly speaking, the "energy" of such a film
is given by its surface area and so stable configurations are those with least
area - i.e., minimal surfaces. As such, the theory of minimal surfaces directly
connects to problems arising in physics, chemistry, biology and materials
science. More broadly, minimal surfaces are an important model for many
geometric variational problems - that is problems where one seeks to find and
study the properties of geometric objects which are optimal in some sense. In
addition to being a fundamental principle in the physical sciences, such
variational problems arise in diverse areas of pure and applied mathematics. A
specific goal of the project is to understand the relationship between minimal
surfaces and the KdV equation - an equation important in fluid dynamics. In
contrast to minimal surfaces, which are static, the KdV equation models a
dynamic physical phenomena, namely the motion of certain one-dimensional water
waves. The KdV equation possesses many remarkable mathematical properties and is
important in other areas of physics, notably in string theory. The relationship
between the KdV equation and the minimal surface equation is poorly understood
and any insight the project may shed on this connection should have broad
importance both in mathematics and in physics.
