
* 1308244
* Nonlinear Analysis on Sympletic, Complex Manifolds, General Relativity, and Graphs
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2013,06/29/2015
* Shing-Tung Yau,MA,Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2017
* USD 484,602.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1308244, Principal Investigator: Shing-Tung Yau

There are several directions that we shall carry out in this proposal. 1.
Symplectic geometry and periods of algebraic manifolds: We shall study
extensively the new cohomological invariants for symplectic geometry introduced
by Tseng and myself, which may be considered as generalization of Bott-Chern
cohomology. We shall also study the mirror counterpart of this cohomology and
interpret the role of the supersymmetric equations in II A and II B theories in
this new cohomology. Many examples will be calculated to support our theory. For
deeper understanding of the theory of mirror symmetry, we shall also calculate
periods of algebraic manifolds which are not toric. Power method of D-modules
will be used. 2. Gromov-Witten invariants and Calabi-Yau manifolds with elliptic
vibrations: We shall extend my previous work with Yamaguchi to study the ring of
higher loop amplitude in string theory. We shall give more refined structure to
this ring and try to construct analogous properties of it that are close to
classical automorphic form theory. We also like to understand in a deeper manner
the singular structure of the degeneration of elliptic fiber structure of
Calabi-Yau manifolds. They have interesting physical meaning. 3. SYZ
construction of mirror manifolds: We like to study the affine structure that
appears in this construction. Interesting equations will be solved. 4.
Construction of balanced metric through understanding of twistor construction:
Nonkahler geometry is playing an increasingly important role in string theory.
We shall explore such balanced metrics. 5. Quasilocal mass in general
relativity: Mu-Tao Wang, Po-Ning Chen, and I will continue to study the
important quasilocal mass that Wang and I introduced. We hope to seek the
important property of this mass and hopefully use it to study dynamics of
Einstein equation. 6. Invariants of graph theory: We are developing intrinsic
cohomology theory to directed graphs. We believe that we can construct rich
invariant based on our construction.

Overall, we are applying geometric methods to solve important questions in new
fronts of geometry that are closely related to physics, such as string theory
and general relativity. The works on graph theory pioneer a new direction to
understand complex networks which have fundamental importance in computer
science and other areas of mathematics.
