
* 1309360
* Applications of the Convergence of Riemannian Manifolds to General Relativity
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2013,09/11/2013
* Christina Sormani,NY,Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2018
* USD 116,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1309360, Principal Investigator: Christina A. Sormani

The PI will apply Intrinsic Flat convergence between Riemannian manifolds to
better understand how close space-like manifolds studied in Mathematical General
Relativity approximate the standard well known models. The Intrinsic Flat
distance, first introduced by the PI with Stefan Wenger using methods of
Ambrosio-Kirchheim, is particularly well-suited to some questions arising in
General Relativity because increasingly thin gravity wells disappear under this
convergence. In joint work with Dan Lee, the PI has shown that spherically
symmetric Riemannian manifolds with increasingly small ADM mass converge to
Euclidean space in the pointed intrinsic flat sense, and here proposes to
generalize this result. In addition, the PI proposes to develop two new notions
of convergence: the first will allow mathematicians to study Lorentzian
manifolds directly, and the second will prevent regions from disappearing due to
orientation and cancellation. Both notions are specifically adapted to questions
arising in General Relativity.

Einstein's Theory of General Relativity describes how space is curved by
gravity. Even within our own solar system, when computing the trajectories of
spacecraft heading to Mars, engineers must take into account the curvature
caused by the mass of the planets and the sun. Each planet forms a gravity well.
If the mass of a planet is small, one would like to know in what sense the space
around it is almost flat. In fact, the space around a planet of arbitrarily
small mass could be very highly curved (and have a very deep but thin gravity
well). In joint work with Dr. Stefan Wenger, the PI has developed a new means of
measuring the closeness between curved spaces and, in joint work with Dr. Dan
Lee, she has estimated how close the space around a single perfectly spherical
planet is to Euclidean space. In this project, she will develop tools allowing
one to better understand the space around groups of planets which are not
perfect spheres: like the ones in our own solar system.
