
* 1309298
* The B-model topological recursion, holonomic systems, and the integrability
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/15/2013,06/21/2017
* Motohico Mulase,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2018
* USD 138,683.00

The proposed project is aimed at discovering a mathematical relation between the
"classical" topological invariants and the "quantum" ones of a given space, such
as a knot complement, in terms of the analysis on Riemann surfaces. Within the
last two years, many new insights have been established around the idea of
mirror symmetry and "quantization" of topological invariants for a large class
of geometric spaces. The central driving force of the recent development is the
discovery, due mainly to physicists Eynard, Orantin, Marino, and others, of a
recursive formula for quantum invariants in terms of integral transforms over
Riemann surfaces. For example, this recursion formula computes both open and
closed Gromov-Witten invariants for all genera of an arbitrary toric Calabi-Yau
three-fold. Here what we call the classical invariants of the Calabi-Yau space
determine a Riemann surface as its mirror dual. Then the Eynard-Orantin
recursion formula computes the quantum invariants, i.e., the higher-genus
Gromov-Witten invariants, of the original Calabi-Yau space. The mathematical
structure of this miraculous procedure is best understood by the simplest
example of the theory discovered by the PI, in collaboration with Dumitrescu and
others. This example is based on the quest of mirror symmetric dual of the
Catalan numbers, which has led the authors to an unexpectedly rich theory. The
application of the mirror symmetry, and then of the quantization process of
Eynard-Orantin, to the Catalan numbers, we obtain: (1) the virtual Poincare
polynomials of the moduli spaces of smooth pointed curves; and (2) the
intersection numbers of the tautological classes of the moduli spaces of stable
pointed curves. For this particular example, and later for many other examples,
the PI and his collaborators Bouchard, Shadrin, Sulkowski, and others, have
discovered that the partition function (a special choice of the generating
function of quantum invariants) satisfies the "quantum curve" equation, which is
a Schrodinger equation. The idea of quantum curves is due to physicists
Aganagic, Dijkgraaf, Klemm, Marino, Vafa, and others. For all examples that
admit the quantum curve, it has also been verified that the partition function
is a Baker-Akhiezer function of an integrable system of the KdV/KP type. Very
surprisingly, a torsion condition of a Steinberg symbol in the second K-group in
algebraic K-theory holds for all these examples. Establishing a mathematical
understanding of the relation between this higher algebraic K-theory condition
and the quantizability of a Riemann surface (in particular a knot A-polynomial),
and the existence of a Baker-Akhiezer function behind the scene, in the context
of quantum topological invariants, is the goal of the proposed project.

Pure mathematical research is often inspired by radical ideas from theoretical
physics. The mirror symmetry is an example of such ideas: there are two very
different mathematical ways of describing the physical universe. Since the
universe is unique, we must conclude that these two mathematical theories are
equivalent. The "mirror symmetry" refers to the relation of these two theories.
Further extending the idea of mirror symmetry more mathematically, one arrives
at a naive, but also quite radical, question: what is the mirror symmetric
partner of Catalan numbers? If we consider Catalan numbers as a "classical"
object, then what are the "quantum" generalization of them? The PI and his
collaborators have discovered an affirmative answer to these questions. To their
surprise, the answer turns out to provide the simplest mathematical example of a
powerful speculative theory due to theoretical physicists. The physics theory
predicts a concrete and universal formula to calculate an infinite series of
characteristic numbers (called invariants) of the possible universe. This is a
rather involved theory, and mathematical proofs of the formulas are also
complicated. Our simplest example illustrates what is happening in an elementary
language, and helps understanding the general theory. Building on the concrete
mathematical foundation the PI and his collaborators have established, the PI
proposes to study newly proposed conjectures on classical and quantum knot
invariants by physicists. The quantum generalization of Catalan numbers count
certain topological graphs. It is interesting to note that these numbers also
appear in biology as the free energy of complex molecules such as DNA, RNA, and
proteins. For example, the quantum generalized Catalan numbers count the
"secondary" structures of an RNA. The primary structure is the linear sequence
of nucleotides. The secondary structure refers to the complication of its
position due to knotted, tangled, and bridged, structures. Being a result of
quantization, the generating function of these quantized Catalan numbers
satisfies a Schrodinger equation. This also provides a simple example of another
set of radical physics predictions related to quantization of surfaces. These
predictions include new conjectures in knot theory. The proposed research
project is aimed at establishing mathematically rigorous results, verifying
speculative predictions from theoretical physics. The work is expected to have
impact on several areas of pure mathematics. It is also expected to have an
application in the study of secondary structures of complex molecules in
biology. Through the construction and analysis of simple examples of the
mysterious and miraculous theories with quite involved nature, the PI has been
able to attract undergraduate students participating in these research topics.
The proposed project contains an REU component to engage undergraduate students
in the exciting research frontier.
