
* 1352353
* CAREER: Nonlinear PDE Models in Mathematical Physics and Experiment
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2014,04/20/2019
* Jeremy Marzuola,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 440,000.00

Abstract

Understanding interesting physical phenomena often requires classifying
potentially physical observable solutions as attractive critical points (or
semi-stable long-lived orbits) of infinite dimensional dynamical systems through
partial differential equation theory and numerical experiments, which provide a
rich set of problems that can be accessible at all levels of research and
training. Such solutions and their stability can be studied on long time scales
in relation to small scale models for light in optical media in nonlinear
Schrodinger and Dirac models, surface waves on a surface tension scale in the
gravity-capillary equations, or molecular dynamics in terms of both large scale
nonlinear diffusions of crystals through thermodynamic fluctuations as well as
Lagrangian mechanics for smaller systems of electrons trapped in various nuclear
potentials. They can also be studied in macroscopic systems such as interaction
of surface waves and internal waves in coupled fluids models, vortex formation
in fluid flow around biological objects in the Navier-Stokes equations with
boundary, and dark matter formation in models from general relativity using
Einstein-Scalar Field equations and their reductions as Schr√∂dinger-Poisson
models. In applications that include large systems, complicated nonlinearities,
and/or interesting geometric settings, the analysis and numerics can become
increasingly difficult. The quest to understand complexity in partial
differential equation models has led to the development of dramatically new
analytic and computational techniques to explore questions of symmetry, phase
transitions, uniqueness for the attractive states, as well as generalizations of
Fourier transform methods using scattering theory, spectral theory and
microlocal analysis to understand their stability. These techniques can be
applied for instance on spaces with curvature, boundary, metric singularities or
other difficult features such as noise in a sample or trapping due to external
potential wells.

This proposal will involve research in partial differential equations directly
related to optics and electronic structure with relevant boundary conditions and
potentials, as well as other equations from fluid dynamics, general relativity
and thermodynamic fluctuations on crystal surfaces. The PI will also work with
postdoctoral fellows, graduate students and undergraduates on integrated
research into models, computation and experiment, especially though
collaboration with members of the UNC Fluids Lab and International Mathematics
Climate Network. An important aspect of that training will be to develop
graduate courses and undergraduate courses in dynamics and computation to
prepare trainees for a variety of careers in science. From a human resources
standpoint, models like those in this proposal provide a large pool of problems
that give a strong background in computation and geometry, as well as some
applied statistics, which can be used for training purposes in work with
researchers of all levels, from undergraduate to postdoctoral, then applied in
many scientific fields. In addition, the PI will continue to support the
mathematics department role in the University of North Carolina Science Expo to
work towards broader outreach goals of making mathematical sciences more
accessible to the public.
