
* 1356117
* 30th International Colloquium on Group Theoretical Methods in Physics, July 14-18, 2014
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 04/01/2014,04/03/2014
* Willard Miller,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 03/31/2015
* USD 20,000.00

This project provides partial funding for US participants in the 30th
International Colloquium on Group Theoretical Methods in Physics (ICGTMP) which
takes place at Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium on July 14-18,2014. The
conference series is a very important meeting point for scientists working at
modeling physical phenomena through mathematical and numerical methods based on
geometry and symmetry and is the oldest and largest among the conference series
devoted to geometry and physics. It has been further broadened and diversified
due to the successful applications of geometric and algebraic methods in life
and materials sciences. The meeting brings together about 250 international top
researchers, often from different backgrounds but with group theoretical or
algebraic methods as common ground. Among the topics to be addressed are: groups
and representations, quantum mechanics, quantum computation and information
theory, symmetries in biosciences, wavelets, geometric mechanics, string theory,
quantum gravity, exactly solvable systems, many-body systems and random matrix
theory.

The 2014 ICGTMP is the major meeting devoted to this interdisciplinary field,
the prime venue for senior researchers to keep up with the latest exciting
developments and to present their work to a highly interested audience, and for
newcomers to the area to make valuable contacts and learn about the most
promising areas for future research. This is one of the very few forums for
mathematicians, theoretical physicists, experimental physicists, engineers and
biologists to interact on symmetry-related problems of mutual interest. Symmetry
is arguably the most important concept that guides science in its exploration of
nature. Mathematics enables one to exploit the symmetries inherent in modern
physical theories. Physics draws heavily on symmetry ideas to provide structure
in these theories, including such newer fields as quantum information theory and
quantum computation. Engineering areas such as tomography and signal processing,
including wavelets, radar and sonar are intimately bound up with symmetry
analysis.
