
* 1405965
* Poisson 2014: Summer School and Conference on Poisson Geometry in Mathematics and Physics, July 28-August 8, 2014
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2014,05/30/2014
* Rui Loja Fernandes,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2015
* USD 30,000.00

The Poisson 2014 Conference on Poisson Geometry in Mathematics and Physics will
be held at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, August 4-8, 2014. The
conference will be proceed by a Summer School aimed at young researchers
(graduate students and post-docs), from July 28 to August 1, 2014. The Poisson
2014 is the ninth in a series of biennial meeting, bringing together
mathematicians and mathematical physicists with common interests in Poisson
geometry and its applications. Speakers at Poisson 2014 have been chosen not
only for the importance of their results but also for their ability to
communicate them to a broad audience of mathematicians and physicists. There is
a strong representation of women and minorities among the speakers. The
conference will be preceded by a one week school which has a strong training
component, including both introductory and advanced level courses. Participation
of young researchers and those from underrepresented groups is actively
encouraged. Conference proceedings will be published in a manner which makes
them accessible at low (or no) cost to a wide readership, in order to stimulate
further study and research in the rapidly growing area of Poisson geometry.

Poisson Geometry lies at the intersection of Mathematical Physics and Geometry.
It originates in the mathematical formulation of classical mechanics as the
semiclassical limit of quantum mechanics. Poisson structures can be traced back
to the 19th century classics by Poisson, Hamilton, Jacobi and Lie. Poisson
Geometry as an independent field started around 1980 with the foundational works
of Lichnerowicz and Weinstein. The field developed rapidly, stimulated by the
connections with a large number of areas in mathematics and mathematical
physics, including differential geometry and Lie theory, quantization,
noncommutative geometry, representation theory and quantum groups, geometric
mechanics and integrable systems. A number of major developments took place in
the last 15 years; some of the highlights are Kontsevich's formality theorem,
the study of Poisson sigma models and the relationship to the "integrability
problem" for Lie algebroids, the relation with the moduli space of flat
connections and various moment map theories, singular reduction, (generalized)
complex geometry, cluster algebras, etc.

Detailed information about Poisson 2014 may be found at

http://www.math.illinois.edu/Poisson2014/
