
* 1405936
* Kahler-Einstein metrics on Fano manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2014,07/10/2014
* Chi Li,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Shuguang Wang
* 04/30/2016
* USD 136,512.00

Einstein manifolds are geometric objects important in both mathematics and
physics. In physics, they are used to describe the space-time in Einstein's
theory of general relativity. In mathematics, they are basic building blocks of
more complicated geometries. The study of Einstein manifolds is thus a basic
problem in geometry. One effective way to construct Einstein manifolds is to
require that the underlying manifold has a complex algebraic structure. In other
words, the points of such a manifold are complex-valued solutions of polynomial
equations. Einstein metrics on such algebraic manifolds are called Kaehler-
Einstein metrics. In the late 70s, Aubin and Yau constructed Kaehler-Einstein
metrics with negative Ricci curvatures. Yau also constructed Kaehler-Einstein
metrics with zero Ricci curvatures, which are now called Calabi-Yau metrics and
play important roles in the string theory of physics. On the other hand, only
recently has people pinned down a sufficient and necessary condition, called
K-stability, for the existence of Kaehler-Einstein metrics with positive Ricci
curvatures for a class of algebraic manifolds called Fano manifolds. This result
depends on the work of many people, most importantly by Tian and Donaldson.
After these discoveries, we want to further our understandings of such Kaehler-
Einstein metrics and the obstructions to their existence. These problems are the
main concerns of the proposal. The study of these Kaehler-Einstein metrics will
greatly improve our understanding of Einstein manifolds important in both
physics and mathematics.

In this proposal, the PI will study the following closely related problems.
1.Various continuity methods of partial differential equations are used to solve
the Kaehler-Einstein equation. The recent breakthroughs give qualitative
pictures of blow up behaviors and convergences of these continuity methods.
However, deeper quantitative understandings of the blow up behaviors or
singularity forming phenomena are needed. The PI has studied in detail such
quantitative properties for toric Fano manifolds. The PI will study the
singularities forming processes for a broader class of Fano manifolds. The PI
will also study the classification of the singularities formed in low dimensions
by combining the methods from Riemannian geometry and algebraic geometry. 2.The
PI will study concrete constructions of Kaehler-Einstein metrics and related
canonical metrics. On the one hand, the PI likes to extend the construction of
toric Kaehler-Einstein metrics to other Kaehler-Einstein metrics with large
symmetries, for example, on spherical varieties. On the other hand, the PI will
study the classification of Sasaki-Einstein metrics with large symmetries in low
dimensions based on his calculations of important examples. Related methods will
also be applied to construct Kaehler-Ricci solitons and extremal Kaehler
metrics. 3.The PI will study the deformations of canonical Kaehler metrics
including Kaehler-Einstein metrics and Kaehler-Ricci solitons, and to understand
the moduli spaces of these canonical Kaehler metrics. He will also study the
singularities on the boundaries of these moduli spaces. 4.The PI and his
collaborator will study the K-stability using algebraic geometry based on their
previous work on K-stability. They will use tools from minimal model program to
test K-stability. This will allow us to get Kaehler-Einstein metrics using
algebro-geometric methods.
