
* 1405348
* Geometry and Complexity Theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Special Projects - CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/26/2015
* Joseph Landsberg,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 218,782.00

Complexity theory addresses both practical and theoretical questions. Practical
issues include developing new, efficient algorithms for computations that need
to be done frequently (such as multiplying matrices), as well as determining
whether more efficient algorithms than the ones already known may exist. The
theoretical aspects include questions almost philosophical in nature, such as:
Is there really a difference between intuition and systematic problem solving?
(This question was asked by Godel and contributed to the development of the
famous P versus NP conjecture.) The project will use modern mathematical tools
to address these questions, more specifically, algebraic geometry and
representation theory. Although the research for this project is driven by
questions from computer science, these questions are of interest to mathematics
in their own right and have the potential to guide future mathematical research
in the way physics has done in recent years.

This project focuses on two central questions in complexity theory: the
complexity of matrix multiplication and the Geometric Complexity Theory approach
to Valiant's conjectures. Regarding matrix multiplication, linear algebra is
central to all applications of mathematics, and matrix multiplication is the
essential operation of linear algebra. In 1969 Strassen discovered a new
algorithm to multiply matrices significantly faster than the standard algorithm.
This and subsequent work has led to the astounding conjecture that
asymptotically, it is essentially almost as easy to multiply matrices as it is
to add them. It is a central question to determine just how efficiently one can
multiply matrices, both practically and asymptotically. This project will prove
bounds for how efficiently matrices can be multiplied. Regarding Geometric
Complexity Theory, a central question in theoretical computer science is whether
brute force calculations can be avoided in problems such as the traveling
salesman problem. This is the essence of the P versus NP conjecture. The
Geometric Complexity Theory (GCT) program addresses such questions using
geometric methods. GCT touches on central questions in algebraic geometry,
differential geometry, representation theory and combinatorics. The goals of
this project are (i) to better establish the mathematical foundations of GCT by
solving open problems in combinatorics and classical algebraic geometry and (ii)
to solve complexity problems considered more tractable, such as determining
whether or not the determinant polynomial admits a small formula.
