
* 1406322
* Symplectic Cohomology, log Calabi-Yau Varieties, and equivariant Lagrangian Submanifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2014,09/04/2014
* James Pascaleff,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ricardo Castano-Bernard
* 02/28/2015
* USD 95,734.00

This project studies connections between different areas of geometry that are
inspired by ideas from theoretical physics. An important idea in theoretical
physics is the notion of a duality between physical theories. A consequence of
such a duality is a deep connection between the mathematical models that
describe those theories. These connections allow us to look at a mathematical
question in one model from another perspective, and thus derive new results. For
this project, the mathematical models come from algebraic geometry (the geometry
of sets defined by polynomial equations) and representation theory (the study of
symmetry) on the one hand, and symplectic geometry (the geometry of the phase
spaces of classical mechanics) on the other. The duality relating them is known
as homological mirror symmetry. The focus of this project is to mine this
connection for new insights into structures arising on each side of the duality.
One part of the project studies how symmetries arise in symplectic geometry, and
how this new perspective can give insights into representation theory. Another
part studies the relationship between dynamics in symplectic geometry and one of
the most basic objects in algebraic geometry, namely functions. The project also
supports the training of graduate and early-career mathematicians in this
rapidly-developing area of research. More broadly, this project fits into the
ongoing interaction between mathematics and physics that has, over the
centuries, led to theoretical advances that have enabled the transformative
technologies of our time.

The organizing principle for this project is homological mirror symmetry for
log Calabi-Yau varieties (varieties arising as the complement of an
anticanonical divisor in a compactification). We consider such varieties both
for the algebraic and the symplectic sides of the correspondence. On the
symplectic side, the main structure we consider is symplectic cohomology, an
algebraic structure that is built out of periodic orbits of certain Hamiltonian
flows on a symplectic manifold (hence the connection to dynamics). The heart of
the project is to relate this structure to functions and vector fields on the
mirror algebraic variety. The connection to representation theory appears by
considering the flag variety of a semisimple algebraic group G on the algebraic
side. These are not log Calabi-Yau, but they contain open subsets which are, and
part of the project is to understand better how to pass between the two
situations (this involves considering a potential function on the symplectic
side). The symmetries of the flag variety, namely the group G and its Lie
algebra, should appear in the symplectic side as well. The natural home for the
Lie algebra is symplectic cohomology, and the group action itself is manifested
in the action of this Lie algebra on the Floer cohomology of equivariant
Lagrangian submanifolds, which are the counterpart of equivariant vector bundles
in algebraic geometry. Ultimately, one expects to obtain representations of G in
the Lagrangian Floer cohomology groups. The pay-off for this effort is that
these Floer cohomology groups come with a distinguished basis, and this project
seeks to understand how that basis is related to the various known canonical
bases in representation theory of Lusztig, Mirkovic-Vilonen, and others. In
approaching these problems, the project uses ideas from the Strominger-Yau-
Zaslow approach to mirror symmetry, as developed by Gross-Siebert and Gross-
Hacking-Keel, as well as techniques developed by the PI in previous work on the
case of log Calabi-Yau surfaces (complex dimension two).
