
* 1406407
* Differentiable structures on metric measure spaces, einstein spaces, quantitative behavior of singular sets
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2014,04/01/2016
* Jeff Cheeger,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2018
* USD 440,681.00

The project is part of an ongoing program involving the study of situations that
are in some way singular i.e. the objects may have discontinuities, may not be
everywhere smooth, may have subsets on which they become infinite, etc. One
theme involves putting constraints on the size or nature of the singularities
which can arise in the solutions to certain nonlinear partial differential
equations (PDEs) which are of importance in mathematics and physics. The
principle investigator and collaborators have introduced methodology which, for
a significant class of such PDEs, provides better control on the singularities
than was previously available. Another theme is to study spaces which can be
quite wild (e.g. they can have fractional dimensions) but are nonetheless well
enough behaved so that one can employ the methods of calculus, if
differentiation is understood in a sufficiently generalized sense. Apart from
their intrinsic interest, these methods have had a surprising application to a
basic problem in theoretical computer science, the sparsest cut problem with
general demands.

The project focuses on three main areas: 1) The analytical and geometric
structure of metric measure spaces with Lipschitz differentiable structure. 2)
Degeneration of Einstein metrics. 3) Quantitative behavior of singular sets.
Regarding 1), a basic question is to study the extent to which Lipschitz
differentiability spaces are more general than spaces for which the measure
satisfies a doubling condition and a Poincar\'e inequality holds in the sense of
Heinonen-Koskela. Recent work with Bate characterizing Lipschitz
differentiability spaces in terms of Alberti representations should play an
important role. Regarding 2), a challenging question is whether for noncollapsed
Gromov-Hausdorff limits of Einstein spaces with bounded Einstein constant, the
singular set has Hausdorff codimension 4 (as conjectured by M. Anderson).
Regarding 3), a goal is to extend to new cases, the techniques developed by the
principle investigator, with A. Naber (and partly with R. Haslhofer), for
studying the quantitative behavior of singular sets of certain elliptic and
parabolic PDEs.
