
* 1406056
* Gauge theory and Mirror Symmetry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2014,07/01/2016
* Constantin Teleman,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2018
* USD 375,096.00

This research project concerns the study of examples of topological gauge
theories in low dimensions. Gauge theory, in special cases, is believed to
underline the mathematical description of the universe; for example, the
standard model for particle physics is a gauge theory in 4 dimensions. Much
mathematical research into quantum physics over the last half-century has
focussed on the analysis required to make accurate experimental predictions, but
what was missed until the last decade or two was that topological (distance-
independent) features of the theory are governed by an underlying algebra, which
has some novel and unexplored features. The PI will study fundamental questions
pertaining to this algebra in low dimension.

The main project aims at a rigid description of topological gauge theory (the
so-called A-model) by the tested technique of mirror symmetry, which converts
"soft" topological questions, defined up to coherent systems of homotopies, into
rigid questions of analytic or algebraic geometry. The PI has a proposal for the
mirror of pure gauge theory in 3 dimensions, which controls the gauging and
2-dimensional gauge theories such as arise from symplectic manifolds with
Hamiltonian group actions. Another component of the research involves gauge
theory in 3 dimensions, specifically Chern-Simons theory, which seems to lie
half-way between the soft A- and the rigid B-model. Finally, a small project
involving representation theory (geometric Langlands duality for algebraic
curves) will be undertaken: the construction of a generic Langlands kernel for
simply laced groups, which relies on cohomological and algebro-geometric
techniques, but the subject is informed and inspired by electric-magnetic
duality for gauge theory in 4 dimensions.
