
* 1406252
* Algebraic and analytic integral geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/15/2014,06/13/2014
* Joseph H. Fu,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2018
* USD 169,955.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1406252, Principal Investigator: Joseph H. G. Fu

The subject of integral geometry grows out of the need to calculate the
statistics of random shapes or objects. The basic idea is to begin by isolating
certain fundamental quantitative geometric measurements that are finitely
additive, in the sense that if an object is formed by amalgamating two smaller
objects then the quantity associated to the total is equal to the sum of the
quantities associated to the constituents, minus the quantity associated to
their overlap. Such quantities, called valuations, include the volume and the
surface area of a three-dimensional object, or the area and the perimeter of a
two-dimensional figure. The statistics of how a given valuation varies over
families of intersecting objects turns out to be governed by a rich system of
algebraic rules, which constitute the focus of this project. Integral geometry
should thus be viewed as a fundamentally important aspect of geometry as a
whole, with many possible applications to the sciences.

The methods involved belong both to algebra and analysis. The objectives are to
understand the algebraic questions arising from the interactions of valuations,
and also the analytic problems surrounding the regularity properties necessary
for their definition. In the analytic direction our main aim is to refine recent
results of Pokorny and Rataj on the regularity of sets definable by differences
of convex functions. On the algebraic side, the past decade has seen a great
deal of progress, largely catalyzed by the fundamental new algebraic structures
on valuations introduced by S. Alesker in the early years of the century. From
this perspective the classical integral geometry of Blaschke, Santalo, Chern, et
al., dealing with the real space forms under the actions of their full isometry
groups, appears as the trivial ground case of a much richer theory. The first
nontrivial case is that of Hermitian integral geometry, i.e. the integral
geometry of the complex space forms. Our recent results reveal that the algebra
associated with this family of spaces is extremely rich, characterized by many
mysterious and unexplained phenomena. One of our primary goals is to exploit our
new-found ability to make computations in these cases with some degree of ease
to explore how valuations behave in Riemannian manifolds without such extensive
symmetries.
