
* 1507316
* Algebra of the infrared, Fukaya-Seidel categories and wall-crossing formulas
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2015,08/03/2015
* Yan Soibelman,KS,Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

The last 40 years have been seeing an extremely fruitful interaction between
mathematics and quantum physics. One of the main parts in this progress has been
played by the String Theory, with its main idea of interpreting elementary
particles as small circles (called strings) rather than point-like objects. On
the mathematical side it has led to appearance not only of new problems in
classical areas, but also a fast development of completely new areas. Even the
terminology reflects that: Mathematicians speak about "quantum groups", "mirror
symmetry", "instantons", "branes" - all those terms are borrowed from physics.
In the opposite direction, many mathematical concepts (some of them were
considered esoteric at the time) now become powerful tools for a working
physicist. String theorists speak about "derived categories of branes", "motivic
invariants" - the terminology borrowed from mathematics. There is no doubt that
the above-mentioned interaction will affect not only some fields in mathematics
and physics but will influence the way of thinking about the real world. Current
project fits nicely in the above paradigm. It is highly motivated by the recent
important developments in the 2-dimensional supersymmetric massive theories, but
its scope is purely mathematical, and its applications are important for quantum
physics. The project connects new and active area of research in theoretical
physics with deep mathematical questions in homological algebra, toric geometry,
Floer theory and Topological Field Theory.

In more technical terms, the project is devoted to the new approach to the
concept of Fukaya-Seidel category, which is the mathematical counterpart of the
so-called Landau-Ginzburg model in physics. Main motivation for the ideas
developed in the project was the work of physicists D. Gaiotto, G. Moore, E.
Witten on 2-dimensional supersymmetric gauge theories. By replacing the language
of plane webs proposed by physicists by the dual language of polygons, the PI
connects their formalism with the geometry of secondary polytopes of the polygon
of critical values of the Landau-Ginzburg potential. The categorical structure
which appears in the work of physicists is then explained in the language of
factorization sheaves on the secondary polytope. It opens the door to
generalizations to the case of higher-dimensional Topological Field Theories. A
conjectural new description of the Fukaya-Seidel category will be investigated
by the PI. It generalizes the earlier ideas of Haydys as well as the more recent
proposal of Gaitto, Moore and Witten. It expresses the Fukaya-Seidel category as
a deformation of the category which has combinatorial nature. The deformation is
given by some Maurer-Cartan element, which is defined in terms of solutions to
the Witten (or zeta-instanton) equation. A conjectural relation of the
degenerations of the moduli space of solutions to Witten equation with faces of
the secondary polytope will also be studied. The relation of webs with Gromov-
Hausdorff limit of the solutions is stressed. Several applications of the
proposed formalism will be studied, such as: a) wall-crossing formulas of
Cecotti-Vafa and Kontsevich-Soibelman; b) complexified and holomorphic Chern-
Simons theory; c) Morse theory of functions which are Morse but not Morse-Smale.
According to earlier work of Kapranov and Saito that story is intrinsically
connected to Steinberg relations in the algebraic K-theory and Stasheff
polytopes; d) relation to the theory of spectral networks of Gaiotto, Moore and
Neitzke.
