
* 1509505
* Partial differential equations for manifolds with boundary
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2015,05/19/2020
* Alice Chang,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2020
* USD 419,999.00

This project will study geometrically-defined linear operators that enjoy
certain invariance properties when the underlying geometric structure undergoes
changes that distort the lengths of curves but not the angles between them. The
spaces under investigation, called manifolds with boundaries, serve often as
background spaces with special structures (e.g., conformal geometry, Cauchy-
Riemann geometry). The aforementioned linear operators prescribe the change in
the shape of space, change quantified in terms of certain curvature measurement
by means of a differential equation that is typically nonlinear. A long-term
goal of this study is to find conditions under which these curvature equations
are solvable and to study the quality of the solution. Successful results in the
proposed project will enrich the subject of conformal geometry by providing a
large new family of examples of special Einstein spaces that are of interest to
a wide audience of mathematicians, as well as to mathematical physicists. In
addition to contributing directly to the field of conformal geometry, this
project will help train a number of graduate students and postdocs, who will
have the dual role of researchers and educators of the next generation of
mathematicians. The extensive lecture course conducted by the principal
investigators contributes to the mathematical education of scientists in several
geographic areas.

A basic tool for this project is a version of a well-known inequality, the
Sobolev inequality, that controls the size of a function in terms of a
measurement of its variation. Indeed, it is often the case that a sharp version
of such an inequality is what is needed. The principal investigators intend to
find such sharp inequalities for certain spaces by making use of traditional
methods from the calculus of variations. A secondary objective of the project is
to improve upon previous work of the principal investigators in order to obtain
bounds for a family of conformally compact Einstein spaces, bounds that might
eventually allow one to construct of a large family of such spaces, as predicted
by physicists. A third objective is to broaden the conditions under which one
can assert the validity of a strong maximum principle for fourth-order partial
differential equations, a technical device that only became available because of
prior work by the prinicipal investigators. Such a maximum principle will allow
for a number of applications not only to geometric questions but also to general
analytic questions about elasticity and the bending of plates.
