
* 1510594
* Spaces with Negative and Nonpositive Curvature
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2015,08/25/2015
* Pedro Ontaneda,NY,SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 309,429.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1510594, Principal Investigator: Pedro Ontaneda

This project will study the construction of negatively curved and nonpositively
curved metrics on geometric spaces. In elementary school we learn that the sum
of the interior angles of a triangle on the plane is 180 degrees. This fact
characterizes Euclidean geometry, which is the model space of zero curvature.
Similarly, negatively curved geometries are characterized by the fact that the
sum of the interior angles of (small non-degenerate) triangles is always less
than 180 degrees. Non-positively curved geometries are defined in the same way:
the sums mentioned above are less than or equal to 180 degrees. In this project
we will try to construct more of these geometries on spaces, either on singular
spaces or non-singular spaces (non-singular spaces are called manifolds).

Recent work has found smoothings of some of the singular metrics on hyperbolized
cube manifolds produced by the methods of Charney and Davis to obtain Riemannian
metrics with curvatures close to -1. These constructions have needed relatively
large pieces for the Charney-Davis hyperbolization construction and a new
project seeks to eliminate this requirement. Several projects concern the space
of all negatively curved metrics on a space, addressing the generalizations to
this context of the classical moduli and Teichmueller spaces. One line of
investigation continues the study of the potentially nontrivial homotopy type of
the nonclassical counterparts to Teichmueller space, while another studies
topological invariance: If M and N are smooth manifolds which are homeomorphic
but not diffeomorphic, and if M supports a negatively curved Riemannian metric,
must N also carry such a metric?
