
* 1518657
* Cycles and the Cohomology of Locally Symmetric Spaces
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/15/2015,06/13/2017
* John Millson,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2019
* USD 180,284.00

This research project is concerned with proving "Hodge type theorems for
arithmetic manifolds." The Hodge conjecture is one of the most important
unsolved problems in mathematics -- it is one of the seven Millenium Problems of
the Clay Mathematical Institute, which offers a one million dollar prize for the
solution of each of these problems. The Hodge conjecture has been verified only
in special cases. The PI and collaborators proved the Hodge conjecture for a
fundamental new infinite class of examples. This work led to the formulation and
proof of a new refined version of the Hodge conjecture in further special cases
for a large and important family of spaces. It is clear that still more general
Hodge conjectures should hold for most of the cases that occur in the area
common to geometry and group theory. It is the goal of this project to formulate
and prove such refined versions of the Hodge conjecture.

The investigator will continue work on the relation between cycles in arithmetic
quotients of the symmetric spaces associated to the orthogonal groups and
unitary groups and cohomology classes on these spaces constructed using the Weil
representation. The investigator and collaborators have studied the use of a
stabilized trace formula to prove that in low degrees the Poincare duals of a
special class of totally-geodesic submanifolds of codimension k called "special
cycles" together with the Euler/Chern class) span a canonical summand of the
k-th cohomology of the above spaces called the special (refined) Hodge summand.
In the unitary case, for complex hyperbolic space, they obtained proofs of the
Hodge and Tate conjectures for the standard arithmetic quotients of the complex
unit ball in degrees away from the middle dimensions. The goal of the this
project is to formulate and prove refined versions of the Hodge conjecture for
all locally symmetric spaces (not necessarily Hermitian symmetric) associated to
unitary groups, orthogonal groups, and possibly symplectic groups.
