
* 1547145
* RTG: Enhancing American Research Leadership in Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 03/01/2016,03/11/2020
* John Morgan,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/28/2023
* USD 2,370,329.00

Mathematical innovations often arise from the interplay between ideas from
physics and from traditional mathematics. However, it has become increasingly
difficult for researchers in one field to understand the ideas and advances in
the other. The purpose of this program is to train young mathematicians
collaboratively at a traditional mathematics department and at a research center
devoted to the interactions between mathematics and theoretical physics. The
goal is produce mathematicians of the next generation who will have both the
tools to succeed in their chosen fields and the facility necessary to bridge the
gap between areas.

This project will establish a Research Training Group in geometry as a
collaborative effort between the Stony Brook Mathematics Department and the
Simons Center for Geometry and Physics. It unites a long commitment to training
young mathematicians at a traditional mathematics department with the
exceptional scientific opportunities presented by a major international research
center located next door. The overall aim of the program is to train a group of
young mathematicians who will combine expertise in a specific geometric field
with a serious appreciation of the other subfields of geometry and of the
connections between geometry and mathematical physics. The RTG will have three
main components. It will fund nine Postdoctoral Fellows who will be full
participating members of both the mathematics department and the Simons Center.
Besides engaging in a full range of traditional mathematical activities, the
Fellows will participate in joint seminars bringing together postdocs in
mathematics and theoretical physics. The program will also provide partial
support to a cadre of graduate trainees in mathematics, who will have an
affiliation in the Simons Center and will participate fully in activities in the
Center. Finally, the program will put in place a number of new activities
designed to enrich the experiences of Stony Brook mathematics undergraduates,
including those interested in teaching careers, and to introduce them to the
scientific focus of the Simons Center.
