
* 1551696
* Conference in Mathematical General Relativity; January 5 - 9, 2016; Sanya, Hainan, China.
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 12/01/2015,10/29/2015
* Lydia Bieri,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2016
* USD 25,000.00

The conference "Mathematical General Relativity", January 5 - 9, 2016, will be
held at the Tsinghua Sanya International Mathematics Forum in Sanya, Hainan,
China. This award provides travel support for US PhD students, postdocs and
scientists to participate in the conference, which is sponsored by the Tsinghua
Sanya International Mathematics Forum. In particular, this award enables
students and early career researchers, who do not have other financial
resources, to join the conference and to interact with international leading
experts in the field. Mathematical general relativity (GR) studies the laws of
the universe encoded in the Einstein equations linking the curvature of
spacetime to its matter content by means of mainly geometric analysis. It
thereby generates further important research results in geometric analysis as
well as it answers burning physical questions about the universe. The nature of
these problems require a deep understanding of the underlying geometry and the
analysis of nonlinear partial differential equations.

This conference will bring together leading international researchers working in
different areas of mathematical general relativity to discuss their results, to
initiate new collaborations and to investigate new directions of research in
this field. In recent years, monumental breakthroughs in mathematical GR and
geometric analysis have occurred. Among them we find the results showing that
through the focusing of gravitational waves a closed trapped surface and
subsequently a black hole will form. Moreover, initial data engineering has made
huge progress through gluing techniques. Geometric flows and energy methods have
proven to be essential in solving important problems in all areas of
mathematical GR. New insights on the nature of gravitational waves, which are
believed to be detected in the near future, have been obtained by geometric-
analytic as well as numerical methods. Similar geometric-analytic techniques
were used to gain new insights in other mathematical fields. A major goal of
this conference is to facilitate interactions between different groups working
in GR, including geometric analysts, physicists, astrophysicists and numerical
relativists. The topics that will be discussed at this event range from
gravitational waves to stability and formation of black holes, to strong cosmic
censorship, to concepts of energy and quasilocal mass and related phenomena. In
all these areas geometric analysis has played key roles in advancing exciting
research in both mathematical and physical directions. A crucial point of the
conference is to forge professional links between experts and graduate students
as well as early career researchers, in particular to expose students and early
career researchers to new developments in these areas.

Conference website: http://ymsc.tsinghua.edu.cn/sanya/2016/CGR2016/home.aspx
