
* 1600658
* Nonlinear Geometric Partial Differential Equations: Entire Solutions and Regularity
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2016,06/04/2020
* Panagiota Daskalopoulos,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 298,865.00

Some of the most important problems in mathematics and physics are related to
the understanding of singularities. Singularities can range anywhere from black
holes in astrophysics to turbulence in fluid mechanics to the accumulation of
cancer cells in biomedical research. Such physical phenomena are often described
by differential equations that involve time and space. Studying the qualitative
behavior of the solutions of these equations frequently deepens one's
understanding of the related physical problems. To study a singularity of a
solution one uses a so-called blow-up procedure that allows one to focus
attention near the singularity and to exploit the scaling properties that the
differential equation enjoys. Because of the change in the scaling of space and
time, this process leads to a new solution that is defined for all space and
time, in other words to a "global solution." The classification of global
solutions, when possible, sheds new insight into the singularity and thus into
the underlying physical phenomenon. This project addresses the questions of
existence, uniqueness, and qualitative behavior of global solutions to nonlinear
geometric elliptic and parabolic partial differential equations. Emphasis is
given to the classification of ancient solutions, the construction of new
ancient solutions from the gluing of solitons, and the study of fully nonlinear
extrinsic geometric flows in the complete noncompact case. The interplay between
analytical and geometric techniques will be a crucial factor in carrying out the
research. The project links a wide range of active fields of mathematics,
including nonlinear partial differential equations, differential geometry, and
classical analysis. The principal investigator also intends to seek applications
of the mathematical results to other disciplines such as quantum field theory
and image processing. Results will be disseminated to the research community at
various meetings and by publication of research articles. Special emphasis will
be given to the training of Ph.D. students.
