
* 1609812
* Integrability and Geometry. Participation at XXXV Workshop on Geometric Methods in Physics and its summer school in Poland
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 05/01/2016,02/04/2016
* Ekaterina Shemyakova,NY,SUNY College at New Paltz
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2017
* USD 47,030.00

The XXXV Workshop on Geometric Methods in Physics will take place in Bialowieza,
Poland, from June 26 to July 2, 2016, and will be followed by the School on
Geometry and Physics, from July 4 to July 9, 2016. The goal of this project is
to increase the attendance of US-based researchers, particularly early-career
faculty, postdocs, graduate students, and those without other forms of support.
The series of Workshops on Geometric Methods in Physics, which has been
organized by the Department of Mathematical Physics of the University of
Bialystok, Poland, was created with the mission of bringing together an
international community that works on a broad spectrum of problems inspired by
physics; areas of special emphasis include harmonic analysis, infinite-
dimensional groups, integrable systems, Lie groupoids and Lie algebroids,
mathematical aspects of field theory, noncommutative geometry, operator
algebras, quantization, symplectic and Poisson geometry. The series has achieved
international reputation and was featured in the Newsletters of the European
Mathematical society. In 2012, a summer school was added, to follow the workshop
and offer nonexperts an in-depth training on selected themes of the meeting, to
further promote active research and collaboration. In this 35st edition, there
will be a special session on integrable systems.

The workshop is expected to promote intense activity and new collaborations in
areas of theoretical mathematics that are instrumental to solve problems in
physics, and reciprocally have been enriched by them, ranging from algebraic
geometry to representations of infinite-dimensional Lie groups to symplectic,
Poisson and noncommutative geometry. The special session will focus on the
geometric, algebraic and analytic features of completely integrable systems.
Plenary speakers in the special session on Integrable systems and Geometry will
include E. Previato, C. Roger, L. Takhtajan, and V. Zakharov, representing very
different facets of the subject. Discussion on open problems is also planned.
The 2016 WGMP will be the occasion for a diverse community of experts and rising
experts to come together with significant potential for advancement.

Details of speakers and participants, logistic and scientific information can be
found on the conference website: http://wgmp.uwb.edu.pl
