
* 1610452
* Hamiltonian Dynamics and Pseudoholomorphic Curves
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2016,05/10/2016
* Joel Fish,MA,University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2020
* USD 117,217.00

An example of a system studied in classical mechanics is the motion of a small
satellite under the gravitational influence of planets. Historically, symplectic
geometry grew out of studying situations such as this, in which the collection
of all possible positions and momenta of the system (phase space) was seen to
have the structure of a special space known as a symplectic manifold. Physical
laws, like conservation of energy, then gave rise to models of the systems as
dynamical systems on submanifolds of phase space corresponding to different
energy levels. Modern symplectic methods have established deep connections
between global properties of symplectic manifolds and the associated dynamics on
a special class of energy levels, namely contact-type hypersurfaces, but have
thus far proved to be of rather limited use for a general energy level. This
project aims to rectify this deficiency and use global symplectic techniques to
study dynamics on arbitrary energy levels by analyzing a generalized class of
curves, known as feral pseudoholomorphic curves.

This project concerns research at the interface of geometric analysis,
symplectic topology, and dynamical systems. The key idea is the use of a certain
newly defined class of infinite Hofer-energy pseudoholomorphic curves, namely
feral curves, to study Hamiltonian flows on prescribed energy surfaces in
symplectic manifolds of arbitrary dimension and certain volume-preserving flows
on three-manifolds in general. More specifically, the aim is to study these
curves and their properties and to use them to establish non-minimality of a
wide range of volume preserving flows in dimension three. A further aim is to
study the generic asymptotic limit of such feral curves and to determine whether
or not symplectic field theory admits an extension to symplectic manifolds with
generic smooth boundary. Successful completion of this research has the
potential to solve the volume-preserving Gottschalk conjecture, broadly extend
symplectic field theory, and possibly yield key new insights on low dimensional
differential topology.
