
* 1610645
* Shanks Workshop on Geometric Analysis
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 03/01/2016,01/07/2016
* Marcelo Disconzi,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/28/2017
* USD 12,000.00

The Shanks Workshop on Geometric Analysis will take place in Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, TN, from March 11-12, 2016. The workshop intends to bring
together some leading researches in the area of geometric analysis, a field of
research motivated by questions in both pure mathematics and the applied
sciences. Geometric analysis is an area that requires tools from different
mathematical fields, hence the importance of bringing together researchers with
different backgrounds and similar research interests. One of the difficulties
faced by researchers in the field is that many problems require a wide variety
of geometric and analytic techniques. This often prevents researches working on
similar problems from communicating with each other. This workshop will help
overcoming such barriers, assuring that the vast amount of techniques available
in the field are shared among its members, and giving incentives to researches
to pursue future collaborations. It will also be an opportunity for graduate
students to interact with leading researchers and be exposed to cutting-edge
developments in the field.

The workshop will focus on problems that require a genuine interplay between
methods from modern Riemannian geometry, partial differential equations, and, to
a lesser extent, algebraic geometry and topology. It will involve topics such as
recent developments in connection with the Yamabe problem and the Yamabe
invariant of manifolds, extensions of classical results to manifolds with
boundary, mathematical general relativity, recent developments in Kahler
geometry, among others.

For more details, see the webpage: https://my.vanderbilt.edu/shanksgeomanalysis/
