
* 1611939
* Complex Geometric and Lie Theoretic Aspects of Hodge Theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2016,04/15/2021
* Colleen Robles,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2022
* USD 181,612.00

Algebraic geometry is the study of solutions of polynomial equations. This is a
central area of mathematics with a vast range of applications, a small sampling
of which includes physics, cryptography, and computational complexity (the
design of faster, more efficient computational algorithms). A powerful tool in
the subject is Hodge theory, which associates a linear algebraic structure to a
set of solutions of a system of polynomial equations. The advantage of this
association is that the Hodge structure is often more amenable to computation
and analysis than the original set of solutions, while at the same time
retaining enough information to yield deep insights into the set of solutions
(and the questions that one would like to answer about them). The principal
objective of this research project is to develop Hodge theory so that it can be
applied to a greater range of problems in algebraic geometry.

The project will address a collection of problems in complex geometry and Lie
theory that are motivated by Hodge theory. In practice this means that many of
the questions concern (generalized) flag manifolds and flag domains, a canonical
system of geometric partial differential equations on these spaces (whose
integrals are called horizontal submanifolds), and locally homogeneous spaces.
In Hodge theory, flag domains arise as period domains, the classifying spaces
for polarized Hodge structures; flag manifolds as compact duals of period
domains; the canonical system of geometric PDE as the infinitesimal period
relation, Griffiths' system of differential equations constraining variations of
Hodge structure. The work will include: (1) a generalization of the Satake-
Baily-Borel compactification and Borel's extension theorem for locally Hermitian
symmetric spaces to a class of locally homogeneous spaces of Hodge theoretic
interest; (2) investigation of a conjectural mixed Hodge structure on the
characteristic cohomology of the infinitesimal period relation; and (3)
initiation of a program to study the extent to which a variation of Hodge
structure is determined by its characteristic varieties.
