
* 1636665
* Symplectic Field Theory VIII: Symplectic Homology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/2016,05/27/2016
* Michael Hutchings,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2017
* USD 22,338.00

This award provides partial travel support for US based participants of the
workshop on Symplectic Homology to be held on August 8 - 12, 2016, at the
Humboldt University, Berlin. Symplectic geometry is the fundamental geometry
underlying classical mechanics and dynamics. The set of possible states of a
macroscopic physical system is described by a symplectic manifold, and the
geometry of this symplectic manifold is essential for understanding how the
physical system evolves over time. Symplectic field theory (SFT), initiated in
2000 by Eliashberg-Givental-Hofer, is a major program for understanding
symplectic geometry by counting pseudoholomorphic curves (a kind of area-
minimizing surfaces) in symplectic manifolds, and performing these counts by
cutting symplectic manifolds into simpler pieces. Since 2005, a series of
workshops on particular aspects of SFT has been held at various locations in
Germany, and these workshops have played a key role in the development of the
subject. Each such workshop consists of a week of mini-courses, research
lectures, and discussions, preceded by a weekend of introductory courses
reviewing necessary background material. In August 2016, the eighth SFT workshop
will be held in Berlin, and this grant will provide travel support to enable
junior US-based participants to participate in the workshop.

The specific topic of the workshop is symplectic homology. In the past decade,
symplectic homology has emerged as a central tool in symplectic and contact
geometry and topology, with a number of spectacular applications. The uses of
symplectic homology include distinguishing exotic Stein structures and contact
structures, detecting Reeb orbits of vector fields, and obstructing Lagrangian
cobordisms. In addition, a closely related invariant, the wrapped Fukaya
category, plays an essential role in recent developments in mirror symmetry.
This workshop will bring together the major recent advances in the structure and
applications of symplectic homology, in an in-depth and coordinated manner, in
order to form this vital subject into a coherent whole and make it accessible to
a wider audience. The centerpiece of the workshop will consist of mini-courses
by Tobias Ekholm on the Legendrian surgery formula and its applications,
Alexandru Oancea on the symplectic Eilenberg-Steenrod axioms, and Mark McLean on
wrapped Floer cohomology and affine varieties. In addition there will be five
research lectures and a weekend precourse with six background talks. Sending US
participants to this workshop will enable US mathematicians to keep up with the
latest developments in symplectic geometry and contribute to the future of the
subject. More details about the workshop can be found at
https://www.mathematik.hu-berlin.de/~wendl/SFT8/.
