
* 1643047
* Generalized Geometry Workshop
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2016,07/12/2016
* Ralph Gomez,PA,Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2017
* USD 17,860.00

This award provides support for the Generalized Geometry Workshop to be held at
Swarthmore College on September 17-18, 2016. The goal is to bring together
experts from mathematics and physics to consolidate the current development of
the theory and extend its potential for applications to questions of importance
in applied fields, as well as to train undergraduate and graduate students to
work in this relatively young area with a wealth of accessible open problems. In
the 20th century, the evolution of notions of geometric structures, such as
Riemannian structures, complex structures, symplectic structures, and contact
structures, has had an important impact both in the development of mathematics
and in applications to many other areas of study. Generalized geometry is both
an extension of these structures and a framework for analyzing the relationships
between them. Although the concept is only about fifteen years old, it has made
significant contributions both to understanding how various geometric structures
on a space interact and has seen applications in string theory and supergravity.

Generalized geometry is a contemporary approach to the study of differentiable
manifolds in which the group of diffeomorphisms is extended to include
additional symmetries known as B-field transforms. This enlarged symmetry group,
which arises naturally from the point of view of loop spaces, has been studied
extensively by geometers and string theorists and continues to provide an
invaluable bridge connecting the two fields. In addition, since each classical
geometry can be realized as a generalized geometry, it provides a framework for
studying relationships between various types of classical geometric structures
that can occur on a manifold and has been a source of surprising results in this
regard. So this topic has intrinsic interest from a differential geometric point
of view as well as with respect to possible physical applications. There has
been a wealth of results produced in the first decade of activity in generalized
geometry that has attracted much interest from mathematicians and theoretical
physicists. So far, it has been primarily focused on even-dimensional manifolds,
partly because of the special role played by generalized complex structures in
string theory. However, recent work suggests that generalized geometry of odd-
dimensional manifolds might be just as mathematically rich and physically useful
as its even-dimensional counterpart. While significant steps toward a better
understanding of odd-dimensional analogues of generalized complex structures
(also known as generalized contact structures) have been made, the subject
presents specific challenges and it is still in its infancy. To address these
issues, this workshop has the following scientific goals: 1) Consolidate the
progress made in odd-dimensional generalized geometry in the last two to three
years by providing an accessible survey of the most recent developments, with
particular emphasis on generalized contact geometry. 2) Bring together experts
working in generalized complex geometry and generalized contact geometry with
the aim of developing a unified understanding of generalized geometry. 3) Bring
together physicists and mathematicians working in generalized geometry to better
understand the role of odd-dimensional generalized geometry in string theory and
identify open problems of interest for both communities. 4) Advertise
generalized geometry, with particular emphasis on odd-dimensional aspects, to
graduate students and advanced undergraduate students. Besides the obvious
benefits of attracting new generations to the field, it offers excellent
opportunities for involvement of students in research at an earlier stage. The
very nature of this subject often requires deconstruction and critical
rethinking of classical notions, and thereby makes it an invaluable training
ground for any student interested in differential geometry. The website for the
workshop is: https://sites.google.com/a/vcu.edu/ggw/
