
* 1654034
* CAREER: Aspects of Riemannian Geometry and Manifolds with Density
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 06/01/2017,08/26/2021
* William Wylie,NY,Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2023
* USD 472,542.00

Riemannian geometry investigates the generalization of familiar geometric
notions such as length, angle, and volume to more abstract, often high-
dimensional, spaces called manifolds. Manifolds and their geometric properties
are not only central to various branches of mathematics but also are ubiquitous
as mathematical models in the sciences. Perhaps the greatest example of this is
in general relativity, where one of Einstein's great breakthroughs was the
discovery that gravity is modeled by the mathematical notion of curvature. This
research project focuses on curvature of Riemannian manifolds. Specific emphasis
will be placed on manifolds with density, which can be envisioned as Riemannian
manifolds composed of a material with variable, as opposed to uniform, density.
Despite the appearance of manifolds with density in various areas of mathematics
and applications, including proof of the Poincare conjecture, they are not yet
well understood. This project addresses this gap by helping to develop a
geometric theory of manifolds with density. The project also uses geometry as a
theme for a coherent program of educational activities that include: (1)
professional development workshops in teaching and learning for in-service
secondary education teachers, which will help support teachers in transition to
recently developed K-12 standards; (2) innovation in introductory differential
geometry curricula at the undergraduate and graduate level that, by emphasizing
applications, will also foster new interaction between mathematics and science
researchers; and (3) training of mathematics graduate students in best
strategies for engaging students in introductory calculus courses. Ricci
curvature for manifolds with density has been an active area of recent research.
This includes Ricci solitons, which are both fixed points of the Ricci flow and
examples of spaces with constant weighted Ricci curvature, and the study of
weighted Ricci curvature bounds. The investigator will continue study of the
classification of shrinking Ricci solitons in dimension four and higher. In
addition to playing a key role in development of monotonic functionals for the
Ricci flow, weighted Ricci curvature bounds also appear in the theory of optimal
transport, isoperimetric inequalities, and general relativity and cosmology.
Despite the vast amount of research in Ricci curvature of manifolds with
density, there was no corresponding theory of weighted sectional curvature until
recently; another goal of this project is to further develop the theory of
weighted sectional curvature bounds, including investigating applications and
connections to other areas of mathematics. Recent collaborative work of the
investigator also introduces a new geometric approach to manifolds with density
that places a certain torsion free affine connection as the fundamental object
of study. This approach not only provides new insight into the weighted Ricci
and sectional curvatures but also suggests new natural structures that promise
novel results, such as a weighted holonomy group, which will be investigated.
