
* 1708798
* Mass, Geometric Inequalities, and Partial Differential Equations in General Relativity
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2017,06/29/2017
* Marcus Khuri,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2020
* USD 174,000.00

The goal of this project is to study several important related conjectures in
general relativity. This geometric theory of gravity is fundamental to our
understanding of the large-scale structure of the universe, and has many
practical applications such as to the fine tuning of global positioning system
(GPS) technology. The PI will seek to establish families of geometric
inequalities relating mass, charge, angular momentum, and horizon area, which
probe the grand weak cosmic censorship conjecture. This conjecture asserts that
whenever singularities arise in spacetime (which is a generic phenomenon) they
must always be shrouded inside a black hole event horizon; this is intimately
tied to whether general relativity is a proper deterministic theory. Special
black hole solutions with symmetry (referred to as stationary axisymmetric and
electro-vacuum) play a large role in our understanding of the theory, and this
project seeks to classify them in higher dimensions relevant to string theory.
In particular, the PI aims to prove existence and uniqueness for such black
holes with exotic (lens space) topologies in five spacetime dimensions.
Furthermore, new criteria for gravitational collapse and black hole formation
will be studied, namely those due to concentration of angular momentum and/or
charge. The PI will also examine proposed definitions of quasi-local mass in
order to determine whether they are mathematically and physically viable.

Based on earlier work with Bray, the PI has recently completed a systematic
approach to treating the full family of Penrose-type inequalities by reducing
each to a canonical system of elliptic partial differential equations (PDEs).
Thus, the entire range of these geometric inequalities is within reach. A
natural by-product, associated with the study of a certain subclass of these
inequalities, concerns a general procedure for constructing singular harmonic
maps having 2-dimensional hyperbolic space target, which naturally arise from
the stationary axisymmetric vacuum Einstein equations in four dimensions.
Together with G. Weinstein, who initiated the study of such harmonic maps with
prescribed singularities, we have begun development of the tools necessary to
substantially generalize the 4-dimensional results to allow for exotic
topologies in higher dimensions as well as a wide range of symmetric space
targets.  Moreover, in joint work with M. Anderson, the PI has established what
may be considered as the first step of Bartnik's minimal mass extension
conjecture, and our methods indicate what should be a successful approach to the
remaining parts. The trapped surface/hoop conjecture, dealing with the
conditions under which black holes may form, is highly sought after but not well
understood. However, the PI's work on Penrose-type inequalities suggests new
black hole formation criteria as well as certain isoperimetric-type inequalities
for relativistic bodies.
