
* 1708104
* New Structures in Enumerative Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2017,07/06/2017
* Mark Shoemaker,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2021
* USD 145,001.00

In the last few decades, a deep and surprising interplay between the
mathematical field of algebraic geometry and the physics of string theory has
been discovered. Physical predictions have led to the construction of new
numerical invariants which provide novel insights into the geometry of different
spaces. These invariants, which were initially difficult to rigorously define
and calculate, can now be accessed using methods from algebraic geometry and
also symplectic geometry (the study of spaces similar to phase spaces that arise
in classical mechanics). Motivated by conjectures and intuition from
mathematical physics, the principal investigator (PI) plans to study new classes
of enumerative invariants, their general structure, and relations between
different enumerative theories.  This project, while developing new tools and
methods in algebraic geometry, has at its roots conjectures originating in
theoretical physics.  As such the project will help elucidate and verify
physical conjectures, thus furthering understanding in this field.    The goal
of enumerative geometry broadly is to study a space by counting subspaces of a
certain type. Gromov-Witten theory, for instance, defines invariants of a smooth
complex algebraic variety X which give approximate counts of the number of
complex curves in X. Another theory, Fan-Jarvis-Ruan-Witten (FJRW) theory, is
defined similarly, but gives invariants of a singularity rather than a smooth
variety. Predictions by Witten and other physicists studying mirror symmetry
indicate that these invariants have a rich structure and are often related to
each other in surprising ways.  The recent introduction of the concept of so-
called Gauged Linear Sigma Models (GLSMs), which simultaneously generalize
Gromov-Witten theory, FJRW theory and many others, has the potential to
transform the current understanding of enumerative geometry. While giving a
unified framework for many different theories, defining enumerative invariants
for GLSMs may provide new methods for computing Gromov-Witten invariants--a
longstanding goal in both physics and mathematics--and will clarify certain
mysterious correspondences between different theories such as the crepant
transformation conjecture and the Landau-Ginzberg/Calabi-Yau correspondence.
 The PI will give a general algebro-geometric construction of enumerative
invariants associated to GLSMs, and use this new construction to realize those
applications described above. The PI will also develop new computational
techniques in Gromov-Witten theory, explore the recursive structure of these
invariants (as predicted by the Witten-Kontsevich Theorem and the Virasoro
Conjecture), and prove new correspondences related to mirror symmetry.
