
* 1709791
* Topology and Dynamics of Geometric Structures
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2017,05/13/2021
* William Goldman,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2023
* USD 432,914.00

This project concerns the classification of geometric structures on manifolds. A
"geometric structure" means a set of coordinate systems where the coordinates
live in a space with a "classical geometry:" examples include Euclidean
geometry, non-Euclidean geometry, projective geometry, affine geometry or
conformal geometry. Since the mid 19th century, considerations of symmetry
emphasize the viewpoint that a classical geometry is just the study of
properties which are unchanged under the transitive action of a Lie group.
Closely related is the importance of symmetry in modern physics, and many of
objects in this investigation have physical motivations. Classification of
geometric structures on a fixed topology means putting the more rigid geometric
measurements on a loosely organized collection of points, which is the topology.
A simple example is the fact that the sphere cannot support Euclidean geometry.
This is just the mathematical abstraction of the fact that there is no
metrically accurate world atlas. At least one page of the world atlas will
distort distance. On the other hand the torus (the surface of a doughnut, bagel
or inner tube) does admit Euclidean structures. In fact the different ways of
putting Euclidean geometry on a torus has a rich geometry of its own. Technology
plays a key tool both in this investigation and its dissemination to the public.
Many mathematicians are involved in this project, including colleagues,
postdocs, graduate students, undergraduate students and even high school
students. The objects of study are often two- and three-dimensional and can be
visualized with the use of computers. All the software developed in the project
is publicly available and invites further education and experimentation in this
research project.

While the traditional methods of classification of geometric structures involve
a quotient space, frequently the moduli spaces are pathological. Simple examples
lead to quotients of nice spaces by chaotic group actions. The PI adopts the
viewpoint that classification of geometric structures is really a dynamical
system. Many well known interesting dynamical systems arise from this context.
In particular the extension of the Teichmuller geodesic flow to the universal
character variety over the Riemann moduli space has rich dynamics, impacting
low-dimensional geometry, topology and mathematical physics. The PI will study
this dynamical system as the fusion of the well-developed subject of Teichmuller
dynamics and his previous work on mapping class group dynamics on character
varieties and moduli spaces of geometric structures.
