
* 1737006
* Variational and Parabolic Phenomena in Differential Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Davi Maximo,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2019
* USD 104,681.00

Differential Geometry studies shapes of spaces through distances and angles.
Mathematically the concept of curvature plays the central role. Partial
differential equations (PDEs) arise naturally from many fundamental questions in
Differential Geometry, notably in understanding a geometric space in terms of
its curvature or finding an optimal geometric structure on a given space. The PI
will focus on two important examples: minimal submanifolds and geometric flows.
Minimal submanifolds are subspaces that locally minimize area (or volume). They
have been studied since the work of Euler and Lagrange, yielding many
applications to geometry and other related fields such as low-dimensional
topology and general relativity. Moreover, they are important models for many
interesting non-linear phenomena in nature and a variety of ideas developed in
their study have turned out to be key in the calculus of variations, geometric
PDEs, and mathematical physics. A geometric flow, on the other hand, is a
process of deforming a given geometry through a parabolic system of PDEs coming
from curvature. A prominent example is the flow by the Ricci curvature, or Ricci
flow, which has had seminal consequences to the geometrization of three-
dimensional spaces by the work of Hamilton and Perelman.

One of the tenets of this research project is that the existence of minimal
submanifolds of certain topological and Morse index type can impose restrictions
on the curvature of the ambient manifold, and vice-versa. The PI will
investigate several questions relating the Morse index and the topology of
minimal submanifolds in presence of positive curvature. Another aspect is the
singularity formation phenomena in geometric flows, with a focus on the profiles
of singularities and their rigidity and stability properties.
