
* 1745583
* RTG: Research Training in Geometry and Topology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 07/01/2018,07/05/2022
* John Etnyre,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,130,359.00

This project is designed to provide fertile ground for training undergraduate
and graduate students as well as postdoctoral fellows through the Georgia Tech
Geometry and Topology (GTGT) group, resulting in an increase in the number of
U.S. citizens pursuing advanced research in geometry and topology. The project
includes activities to stimulate interdisciplinary collaborations among
mathematicians and engineers. The GTGT group's proximity to numerous
institutions serving underrepresented groups in mathematics will be leveraged to
increase the number of minorities and women studying mathematics. The project
intends to develop students and postdoctoral fellows who become well-rounded
scholars, accomplished teachers, and valuable members of the mathematical
community. The GTGT group will provide comprehensive training to graduate
students and postdocs through fellowships, expanded courses and seminars, and
dedicated professional development activity. The GTGT group also will engage
undergraduate students in REU projects, a directed reading program, and topics
classes as well as in seminars about applying to graduate school. Each summer
there will also be twelve summer REUs funded by the grant to provide a research
capstone to the other undergraduate activities associated with the grant. The
GTGT group will run a research conference each fall, allowing students and
postdocs opportunities to interact with top researchers from around the country
and to gain experience with organizing national activities. They will
additionally run a biennial professional development workshop, undergraduate
workshop, and summer school. It is expected that there will be significant
interaction between trainees at all levels and that all parts of the project
will work together to reinforce each other.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
