
* 1760527
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Geometric and Topological Methods for Analyzing Shapes
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2018,07/13/2018
* Feng Luo,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2023
* USD 264,278.00

As we interact with our environment we constantly assess, measure, and compare
the objects within it. Our perception of such objects, either with our eyes, or
through the results of scanners, is determined by their shapes, which are
themselves characterized by the geometry of their surfaces. We are currently
experiencing an explosion of discrete geometric data on shapes of objects
obtained from scanners, cameras, imaging systems, sensors, satellites, and even
cell phones. There is an urgent need for this geometric data to be processed
automatically, for shape matching, shape comparison, and shape recognition. This
need arises in areas such as facial recognition, identifying and classifying
fossilized bones, distinguishing fractures in bones, diagnosing tumors and
anomalies in organs, and measuring changes over time in brain images. Creating a
mathematical theory and developing algorithms to recognize and to align such
geometric shapes are therefore major research challenges that have far-reaching
implications. Deep mathematical theories in geometry and analysis that were
developed over the past centuries are now finding applications in this field of
shape matching. This project explores fundamental issues in this exciting area,
which is on the cusp of seeing major advances. It does so by using the theory of
conformal, harmonic, and isometric mappings to align surfaces. While these
theories have been extensively studied in a mathematical context, their
adaptation to computational algorithms is still under development. This project
develops a cohesive and comprehensive theoretical framework for this emerging
discipline along with concrete connections to scientific applications. It plans
to implement and make publicly available a collection of software that will
offer new tools and will open new lines of inquiry to scientists in biology,
medicine, anthropology and other fields where the analysis of shape plays a
central role.

The surfaces in our three-dimensional world can be described mathematically as
two-dimensional Riemannian manifolds. Study of the geometric structures on such
surfaces is a central topic in mathematical areas such as topology and
differential geometry. It leads to classical theories of conformal geometry,
moduli spaces, harmonic and conformal maps, and Riemann surfaces. These fields
are now being applied to study surfaces of bones, brain cortices, proteins and
other bio-molecules. When viewing an object with a laser, or radar, or CAT scan,
we obtain a discrete representation of such a surface. Classical theories are
inadequate for processing this real world data. This project will develop
discrete counterparts of conformal and harmonic maps of surfaces, explore their
existence, uniqueness, and diffeomorphism properties, and establish the
convergence of the discrete theory to the classical smooth theory. It will also
create and implement algorithms that incorporate this theory to create usable
software for scientists and other practitioners. In this way, this project will
bridge the gap between the mathematical theories of geometry and topology and
the application of such ideas to algorithmic analysis of shape data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
