
* 1763220
* ICM Satellite Meeting: A Pan-Hemispheric Celebration of Mathematics
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, Combinatorics
* 04/01/2018,01/24/2018
* Robert Cantrell,FL,University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 03/31/2019
* USD 35,000.00

This NSF award provides partial travel support to participants of a conference
titled "A Pan-Hemispheric Celebration of Mathematics," to be held on the Coral
Gables, Florida campus of the University of Miami from July 26-29, 2018. This
conference is the only officially sanctioned satellite meeting in North America
associated with the 2018 International Congress of Mathematicians (ICM), which
will take place in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil from August 1-9, 2018. Holding a
satellite meeting in Miami provides a unique opportunity to advance the 2018 ICM
theme of pan-hemispheric cooperation in mathematics and its applications via a
highly visible event at a major US research university, thereby enriching
mathematical and scientific dialogue between mathematical scientists based in
the United States and their counterparts in its Latin American neighbors.
Customarily, ICM satellite meetings center on a narrowly focused topic within a
particular mathematical sub-discipline and are held in the host country or
surrounding region. "A Pan-Hemispheric Celebration of Mathematics" will be
broader in scope than most ICM satellite meetings and will highlight four
important areas at the forefront of current mathematics: algebraic geometry and
topology; combinatorics; differential geometry and geometric analysis; and
mathematical biology. The meeting will feature a vibrant mix of pure and applied
perspectives with strong interdisciplinary connections, particularly to physics,
biology and computer science.

The meeting will be organized around extended plenary lectures in each of the
focal areas, given by leading experts in the field. These plenary lectures will
be supplemented by parallel invited special sessions, with the event structured
so as to offer participants a dual opportunity to learn broadly about important
developments at the frontier of four important areas and to delve more deeply
into one of them. Funding from NSF will be used to attract a diverse range of
non-speaker participants, with a goal of advancing pan-hemispheric dialogue. The
conference is part of ongoing efforts in this direction and draws its organizing
committee from faculty at the University of Miami, the Centro de Investigacion y
de Estudios Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional (Cinvestav) in Mexico
and the Instituto de Matemática Pura e Aplicada (IMPA) in Brazil. Details about
the meeting can be found at www.math.miami.edu/icm.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
