
* 1810969
* RUI:Curve Counting Theories and Their Correspondences
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2018,08/05/2020
* Emily Clader,CA,San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2022
* USD 189,002.00

Enumerative geometry is a classical project, encompassing questions that date
back to antiquity (how many conics, for example, pass through five given points
in the plane?) as well as subjects of contemporary research. Despite their long
history, many of these questions remained inaccessible until a series of
breakthroughs in the late twentieth century that culminated in the development
of Gromov-Witten theory. The key new ideas were that problems of enumerative
geometry are best interpreted in terms of intersection theory on a moduli space,
and that insights from the physics of string theory reveal elegant patterns in
families of enumerations that were previously unobserved by the mathematics
community. The PI's research program involves developing the intersection theory
of a particularly fundamental moduli space - the Deligne-Mumford moduli space of
curves - as well as producing rigorous mathematical frameworks for some of the
correspondences between theories that physicists have predicted.

A major part of this research program is devoted to studying the Chow ring of
the moduli space of curves. Although a full picture of the Chow ring of this
space currently seems out of reach, there is a subring known as the
"tautological ring" that contains nearly every geometrically-interesting class
yet that admits an explicit, finite set of additive generators. The PI has been
an active contributor to the study of the relations among these generators, in
joint work with Felix Janda (University of Michigan), Sam Grushevsky (Stony
Brook University), and Dmitry Zakharov (Central Michigan University). In
forthcoming work, she plans to develop tautological intersection theory both
computationally (producing algorithms for calculating certain desirable
expressions for tautological classes in terms of the generators) and
theoretically (seeking new tautological expressions for classes such as the
hyperelliptic locus). Much of this work will be carried out in collaboration
with student researchers. A second central component of the PI's research is the
mathematical proof and extension of equivalences proposed by physics. For
example, in joint work with Felix Janda and Yongbin Ruan (University of
Michigan), she has proven a wall-crossing formula relating Gromov-Witten theory
to the theory of quasimaps, a relationship that is closely related to the famous
physical phenomenon known as mirror symmetry. In future work, she will extend
this wall-crossing formula to new cases and use it to attack another physical
conjecture: the Landau-Ginzburg/Calabi-Yau correspondence. She will also work,
in collaboration with Alexandr Buryak (University of Leeds) and Ran Tessler (ETH
Zurich), toward the theoretical development of a version of r-spin theory for
curves with boundary, with an ultimate goal of generalizing Witten's r-spin
conjecture to that setting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
