
* 1811156
* Facets of the Topology and Geometry of 3-Manifolds
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 05/15/2018,06/06/2022
* Nathan Dunfield,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2023
* USD 367,065.00

Topology is the study of objects up to elastic stretching, and geometry the
study of rigid bodies. The goal of this project is to understand certain
fundamental problems in these areas by combining surprising relationships
between them with deep connections to other areas of mathematics and computer
science. Both topology and geometry are becoming more important to applications
such as data mining, and this National Science Foundation funded project
includes collaboration with computer scientists as well as developing software
for exploring aspects of these problems which will be freely available to other
researchers via the web.

This project focuses on four topics concerning the topology and geometry of
three-dimensional manifolds. The first topic is effective Mostow rigidity and
torsion growth, in particular understanding how topological and geometric
invariants behave under towers of finite covers and other geometric limits. The
second topic is to elucidate the relationships between Heegaard Floer homology,
group orderability, and taut foliations for three-manifolds. The third topic is
the construction of a Casson-Lin-Herald invariant for some noncompact Lie
groups. The fourth topic is developing new computational methods for exploring a
variety of questions about three-manifolds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
