
* 1856193
* Temple University Graduate Student Conference in Algebra, Geometry, and Topology
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 05/01/2019,06/27/2022
* Matthew Stover,PA,Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2023
* USD 115,481.00

This National Science Foundation award provides support for the next three
events in a conference series at Temple University that brings together around
one hundred graduate students at all levels from a variety of backgrounds and
universities, along with four distinguished plenary speakers that work at the
interface of algebra, geometry, and topology. The 2019 conference will occur on
June 1-2. The next two will be held on similar dates in 2020 and 2021. The
conference provides an opportunity for a large number of young mathematicians
with similar research interests to come together and develop mathematical
relationships. The conference strongly supports interactions between graduate
students and plenary speakers in formal and informal settings. This gives
graduate students the chance to make connections with mathematicians outside of
their respective universities and fields of study. Both speakers and
participants are selected with attention to recruitment from under-represented
groups in the field.

These conferences include a wide range of topics coming from Geometric Topology,
Geometric Group Theory, Representation Theory, Homotopy Theory and
Noncommutative Algebra. Talks given by distinguished plenary speakers provide
insights into how different parts of algebra, geometry, and topology are
connected, present open research questions of interest, and describe recent
techniques used in groundbreaking work in these fields. Moreover, the organizing
committee is driven by the participation of Temple graduate students with
faculty support and guidance, providing the students with several professional
development opportunities. The conference website is at
https://math.temple.edu/events/conferences/gscagt/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
