
* 1900702
* Nonlinear Geometric Flows: Ancient Solutions, Non-Compact Surfaces, and Regularity
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2019,08/19/2021
* Panagiota Daskalopoulos,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2024
* USD 438,936.00

Some of the most important problems in mathematics and physics are related to
the understanding of singularities. These are anomalies in the behavior of a
physical quantity where the mathematical expressions that are used to measure
such quantities break down. It may be related to the understanding of black
holes or turbulence to the accumulation of cancer cells. These physical
phenomena are often described via a differential equation which involves time
and space. Studying the qualitative behavior of the solutions of such equations
often results in a better understanding of the related physical problem. To
capture a singularity one uses a blow up procedure which allows one to focus
near the potential singularity and use the scaling properties of the
differential equation involved. Because of the change in the scaling of space
and time, the new solution after the blow up is defined for all space and time
-- in other words it is a "global solution". The classification of such
solutions, when possible, sheds new insight into the singularity analysis and
the related physical problem.

This project addresses the questions of existence, uniqueness and qualitative
behavior of global solutions to nonlinear geometric elliptic and parabolic
partial differential equations. Emphasis is given to the classification of
ancient solutions and the study of singularities. The interplay between
analytical and geometric techniques will be crucial for the resolution of the
proposed research activities. The project links a wide range of active fields of
mathematics, in particular nonlinear partial differential equations, geometry
and classical analysis. The PI intends to study the applications of the
mathematical problems to other disciplines such as quantum field theory and
image processing. Results will be disseminated to the research community at
various meetings and by publication of research articles. Special emphasis will
be given to the training of PhD students and the encouragement of minorities and
women to pursue a successful career in mathematics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
