
* 1906267
* The Complex and Conformal Geometry of 4-Manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2019,06/21/2019
* Claude LeBrun,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2023
* USD 389,998.00

In the general theory of relativity, Einstein's equations govern the
gravitational field by constraining the geometry of a 4-dimensional space-time.
These equations are the prototype for an important family of geometric partial
differential equations that will be investigated under this grant, in the
"Riemannian" setting where there is no difference between space and time. A
principal objective of the funded research will be to determine precisely which
4-dimensional spaces carry solutions of these equations. Progress in this area
could have significant repercussions outside of pure mathematics, especially
because many of the geometrical questions to be investigated are intrinsically
linked to problems in classical and quantum gravity, as well to other areas of
theoretical physics. Graduate students will be trained through participation in
the research activities.

More specifically, this project focuses on a family of related problems in
4-dimensional global Riemannian geometry, using techniques of complex,
conformal, Riemannian, Kaehler, and symplectic geometry. Topics to be
investigated include Einstein metrics, the Einstein-Maxwell equations, ALE
manifolds, scalar-flat Kaehler metrics, Bach-flat 4-manifolds, Poincare-Einstein
metrics, and various twistor constructions. The main goal is to discover and
elucidate fundamental links between curvature and topology, especially in
dimension four. One focus is the construction of canonical metrics on compact
manifolds, primarily by means of Kaehler and conformal methods. Another focus is
on understanding the relevant moduli spaces of solutions, along with associated
bubbling phenomena.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
