
* 1906202
* RUI: Configuration Spaces of Rigid Origami
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2019,06/29/2021
* Thomas Hull,MA,Western New England University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2023
* USD 220,042.00

Origami, the art of paper folding, has been practiced for centuries. The
mathematics behind origami, however, is not yet fully understood. In particular,
some origami models can be folded and unfolded in such a way that we could make
the crease lines be hinges and the paper between them stiff like sheet metal.
Such models are called rigidly flexible origami and have applications that span
the physical and biological sciences, ranging from unfolding solar sails to
collapsible heart stents. This project will add mathematical tools that allow
industrial applications to employ cutting-edge research, from large-scale
architectural structures to nano-scale robotics driven by origami mechanics. The
tools from this project will help design self-foldable structures. Currently
self-folding designs in engineering, architecture, and the biological sciences
involve building physical models in a trial-and-error approach, wasting time and
resources. The self-folding research provided by this project will allow
designers to avoid pitfalls and tighten the design-to-realization process
significantly. In addition to the research component, the PI shall organize a
diverse range of educational activities including in-service teacher training
and education, undergraduate mentoring and preparation for graduate school;
high-school and undergraduate classes on the mathematics of folding; for the
public, general-audience articles, lectures, and exhibitions. This will increase
interest in STEM fields through the fun, hands-on nature of origami while
simultaneously disseminating project results.

The methods of this project involve a blend of practical experimentation with
theory. Programmed self-foldability of structures will be achieved by trimming
away undesired paths from the configuration space of all possible rigid
foldings. One approach is to transform a given rigid folding of a crease pattern
into a kinematically equivalent rigid folding with fewer degrees of freedom. The
PI has proposed such a transform and will develop others. Key to all of this,
however, is gaining a better understanding of rigid origami configuration
spaces, which are algebraically complicated and not well understood. The project
seeks to understand, and exploit, local-to-global behavior that is present in
many known examples of rigid origami. In these examples approximating the
configuration space near the origin (the unfolded state) leads to exact
equations for the global configuration space. Formulating rigid origami
configuration spaces in this way will add insight into the general field of
flexible polyhedral surfaces, as well as provide the data needed to prove the
feasibility of origami crease pattern transforms and design reliably self-
foldable origami mechanisms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
