
* 1944952
* CAREER: Differential Equations, Algebraic Geometry, and String Theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2020,08/30/2022
* Tristan Collins,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2025
* USD 255,936.00

The structure of the universe is encoded by mathematics. For example, the large
scale behavior of the universe is determined by Einstein's theory of general
relativity, while the small scale behavior is dictated by quantum mechanics. A
prominent goal of theoretical physics has been to find a mathematical
description of the universe which unites these large and small scale
descriptions. This work has led to the discovery of string theory, and a vast
array of beautiful and intricate mathematical structures and equations. The
equations of string theory are difficult and complicated, and are expected to
connect radically different branches of mathematics and physics. Understanding
these equations, and the structure they contain, is the primary goal of these
education and research projects. This research agenda aims to understand
mathematical descriptions of physical phenomena in string theories ranging from
particle formation and decay to the emergence of gravity in "holographic" string
theories. The education plans aim to provide opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students to engage in learning and research projects related to the
research program. Planned activities include sponsored research projects for
undergraduates, a bi-annual weekend conference for graduate students, and a two
week summer program, including a week long summer school and graduate students
and advanced undergraduates vertically integrated with existing summer research
programs.

These projects aim to investigate several problems in geometry which are
inspired by string theory, and which involve techniques from differential
equations, differential geometry, and algebraic geometry. The first project
involves studying two equations arising in mirror symmetry: the deformed
Hermitian-Yang-Mills equation, and the special Lagrangian equation. The goal is
to develop a theory that relates the study of these equations to structures in
algebraic geometry, using an infinite dimensional version of classical geometric
invariant theory. These equations present exciting new mathematical challenges
ranging from the analysis of fully nonlinear systems to understanding the
algebraic structure encoded in certain singular geometric objects, in analogy
with connections between multiplier ideals and singular, positively curved
metric on holomorphic line bundles. As a result, this project will involve
developing new ideas in partial differential equations, as well as differential
and algebraic geometry. These ideas are to be tested in a variety of simplified
models, which will lead to the resolution of several open problems in Kahler
geometry. Another line of work will study the phenomenon of emergent gravity in
string theory, and in particular the AdS/CFT conjecture, and connection with
combinatorial facets of AdS/CFT.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
