
* 1953179
* The 2020 Graduate Student Topology and Geometry Conference
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 04/01/2020,03/17/2020
* Dylan Thurston,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2023
* USD 42,000.00

The 2020 Graduate Student Topology and Geometry Conference will be held on April
11-12, 2020 at Indiana University Bloomington. This conference will advance
knowledge by exposing graduate students to a variety of research topics,
stimulating new collaborations and connections between fields in geometry and
topology. Furthermore, it will provide an inclusive space for graduate students
to present their work, learn about the current research being done in related
fields, and network with their peers and faculty members in an environment that
fosters these interactions. Specifically, new graduate students will get a first
taste of the nature of research, as well as an overview of a variety of topics
that might not be covered at their home institutions. More advanced graduate
students will present ongoing research, which will open doors towards progress
on unsolved problems, foster bridges between different areas and potentially
initiate new collaborations among young mathematicians. Additionally, faculty
speakers will inform the participants of the current state of progress in their
fields. Furthermore, the conference will offer a safe and inclusive space for
graduate students of all levels, representing and encouraging under-represented
minorities in these fields and welcoming everyone regardless of race, gender, or
sexual orientation.

The conference will involve about 200 graduate students of all levels from all
over the country. The conference will consist of: 28 graduate students giving 30
minute talks on expository and original research topics in geometry/topology; 20
graduate students giving 5 minute lightning talks on original research topics in
geometry/topology; 3 plenary speakers who are all prominent in their respective
fields and excellent expositors: Ciprian Manolescu (Stanford) in geometric
topology, Sarah Koch (University of Michigan) in geometry, and Brooke Shipley
(University of Illinois at Chicago) in algebraic topology; 6 young faculty
speakers: Lisa Piccirillo (Brandeis University), Bahar Acu (Northwestern
University), Viveka Erlandsson (University of Bristol), Dami Lee (University of
Washington), Sarah Yeakel (University of Maryland), Inna Zakharevich (Cornell
University). The talks in this conference will cover various active fields in
topology and geometry and will be aimed at graduate students from a variety of
fields. The conference is structured on three main areas of research: geometric
topology, geometry, and algebraic topology. This structure is reflected on the
choice of faculty speakers. Their research areas include low-dimensional
topology, symplectic topology, contact topology, Bers-Teichmuller theory,
rational maps, mapping class groups, minimal surfaces, complex dynamics,
hyperbolic geometry, curve counting, chromatic homotopy theory, equivariant
homotopy theory, fixed point theory, category theory, topological modular forms,
and algebraic K-theory. The graduate student talks will cover further active
areas of geometry and topology. A myriad of new developments and specializations
have emerged within the past few decades. The conference will provide graduate
students the opportunity to learn about the frontiers of current research and
corresponding open problems that are not represented by faculty interests at
their home institutions. More details are available at
https://gstgc20.sitehost.iu.edu/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
