
* 2000628
* Conference: Integrable systems in geometry and mathematical physics; July 13-17, 2020; Trieste, Italy
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 03/01/2020,12/20/2019
* Vladimir Dragovic,TX,University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 02/28/2023
* USD 25,000.00

The Conference Integrable Systems in Geometry and Mathematical Physics will be
organized at SISSA, Trieste, Italy, July 13-17, 2020. It is a satellite event to
the 8th European Congress of Mathematics: https://www.8ecm.si/program/satellite-
events. The venue of the conference, SISSA is one of the leading European
research universities, situated in Trieste, which is one of the most important
scientific hubs in Italy. The meeting will focus on the most recent developments
at the crossroads of geometry and dynamical systems, with a special focus on
integrable systems and applications to mathematical physics. The notion of
integrable system in classical mechanics dates back to Joseph Liouville
(1809-1882) and has an illustrious and long history. The modern resurgence of
activity was initiated by the analysis of soliton solutions of nonlinear wave
equations like the Korteweg deVries and Kadomtsev-Petviashvili equations. The
conference aims to bring together both leading mathematicians that have
contributed and are contributing to the success and dissemination of methods and
ideas originating from integrable systems in all areas of mathematics and
physics and also junior researchers and graduate students who should take over
the lead in this fascinating field in the near future.

The renewed interest in integrable systems brought along the invention and
development of far reaching solution techniques, including the inverse
scattering method and the Sato-Segal-Wilson theory of infinite Grassmannians.
The notion of integrable systems has since expanded considerably and often
refers to a wide range of techniques. The development of techniques and new
classes of integrable models has both cross-fertilized and received input from
distant areas of mathematics and physics. There will be two types of
presentations: (i) 25-30 plenary talks by leading specialists in the fields of
geometry, dynamics, and integrability. (ii) Poster session mostly for young
researchers working in the fields, with 10 minutes introductory oral
presentation for each of them. The scientific background of the conference is
based on relationships between several popular areas of research. Thus, it has a
potential to attract young mathematicians, minorities and women to participate
in exciting cross-disciplinary research and look for new applications of their
research in other fields of science. The results of this event will be
disseminated by the participants from around the world.
https://indico.sissa.it/event/41/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
