
* 2005431
* Differential Geometry and Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2020,08/04/2022
* Richard Schoen,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2023
* USD 484,336.00

Many physical phenomena are modeled by equations that are essentially geometric
in nature. A prime example is the theory of General Relativity, which was
invented to make gravity compatible with Special Relativity. The Einstein
equations are a system of evolution equations that describe the spacetime
geometry and curvature, which arise in specific situations. Like many other
geometric/physical equations the Einstein equations are nonlinear and thus can
produce solutions that develop very high curvature regions and lead to
mathematical singularities, which are expected to be black holes. Singularities
also arise in surfaces that minimize volume, so called minimal surfaces. Such
minimizing surfaces in a curved spacetime are intimately connected with the
geometric structure of the spacetime, and their existence and properties reflect
properties of the spacetime such as the energy distribution of the gravitational
field, and the prediction of gravitational collapse to a black hole. A major
goal of this project is to better understand the stability properties of such
singularities, especially those that can arise in volume minimizing surfaces in
spacetime. When we study curved geometries, there are naturally associated
numbers that are the fundamental frequencies with which such a geometry would
vibrate if it were thought of as an idealized drumhead. This sequence of numbers
is called the spectrum. A second goal of this project is to understand the
special geometries that have the largest fundamental frequencies per unit
volume. The project also includes significant training of PhD students and post-
doctoral fellows. The PI also plans to deliver outreach lectures in geometry.

The focus of this research is in the areas of differential geometry, general
relativity, and partial differential equations. In work that is motivated both
by differential geometry and general relativity the PI will study the
singularities, which may form in higher dimensional volume minimizing
hypersurfaces. This issue comes up in the study of manifolds of positive scalar
curvature and the related positive mass theorem of general relativity. He will
study the question of whether singularities can be perturbed away by a small
perturbation of the boundary or the ambient metric. He poses some explicit test
cases for this question. The second main theme is the study and comparison of
three quasi-local masses that have arisen in general relativity. These are the
Hawking, Bartnik, and Brown-York masses. Several questions are posed concerning
the relative sizes of these quantities. The connections between the Brown-York
mass and recent polyhedral comparison theorems will be investigated with a
suggestion for solidifying the connections between the two. The third main theme
of his research in geometry will be the study of spectral geometry and related
questions on minimal submanifolds. The PI has recently analyzed sharp bounds on
the high Steklov eigenvalues of the disk and will extend that study to the next
simplest cases of the annulus and the Mobius band. Finally he plans to
investigate the equivariant eigenvalue maximization problem for surfaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
