
* 2016403
* Large Scale Geometry of Scalar Curvature and Minimal Surfaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2019,04/09/2020
* Otis Chodosh,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 01/31/2022
* USD 79,523.00

Geometers seek to describe how an object bends and study objects that curve in a
specific way. This study of curvature is important in all domains of science and
engineering. For example, the theory of general relativity posits that gravity
curves space and time in a mathematically precise manner, while in materials
science, the meeting points between crystal structures are modeled by (a rather
different notion of) curvature. This project is concerned with the study of a
particular measure of bending called scalar curvature. Scalar curvature is one
of the simplest measures of bending, but due to this simplicity scalar curvature
can contain only a limited amount of information. Hence, we must study scalar
curvature through highly indirect means. One way to explore scalar curvature is
in relation to the isoperimetric problem: in a given space, how can we enclose
the largest amount of volume with the smallest perimeter? This is one of the
oldest mathematical questions, but its link to scalar curvature is only recently
beginning to be understood. The PI's project will continue the study of scalar
curvature as it affects the large-scale behavior of area and volume, with
particular emphasis on the relationship between such topics and problems related
to general relativity. In addition to this research, this project will also
support the PI's continued efforts to promote student learning and training
through seminar organization, conferences, and summer schools, as well as
expository articles and notes.

A major component of the research plan is the continued study of the link
between large-scale variational problems and scalar curvature, motivated by
geometric and physical considerations such as the Penrose inequality and static
uniqueness questions from general relativity. To this end, the PI plans to
continue his investigation of global uniqueness questions related to scalar
curvature and the isoperimetric problem. Recently, several such problems have
been understood in three dimensions, using a combination of powerful tools from
geometric analysis (many of which are limited to three dimensions). One portion
of the research will consist of investigating higher dimensional analogues of
these results, which will necessitate the development of a wide array of new
techniques. The ideas developed in these aforementioned global uniqueness works
have also led to other (a priori unrelated) topics that the PI will investigate.
For example, determining the validity of the Minkowski inequality for non-convex
surfaces (possibly with an additional bending term) is related to the uniqueness
question for large stable constant mean curvature surfaces in asymptotically
flat manifolds. Similarly, an invariant related to the least area in the
homology class of a torus for certain Riemannian three-manifolds with non-
negative scalar curvature is related to the rigidity of area-minimizing
cylinders in three-manifolds of non-negative scalar curvature. In a different
(but related) direction, this project will also include investigation of the
relationship between the geometry and topology of minimal surfaces, including
the study of surfaces with simple topology or small index.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
