
* 2045494
* CAREER: Eigenfunctions, Weyl Laws, and Random Waves
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2021,07/22/2022
* Yaiza Canzani,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 08/31/2026
* USD 96,017.00

A vast array of physical phenomena, ranging from the propagation of waves to the
location of quantum particles, is dictated by the behavior of some special
functions that solve what is known as the Helmholtz equation. The overarching
goal of this research program is to understand how properties of these functions
depend upon the underlying geometry of the space being studied. The project
includes two main educational efforts. The first is the creation of working
groups for incoming graduate students; its goal is to prepare the students to
develop a strong set of skills to apply for grants and to prepare them for
teaching. The second is the development of online materials for a course on
semiclassical analysis that will be available for students to use whenever the
in-person version of the course is not offered.

Understanding the behavior of Laplace eigenfunctions is of fundamental
importance in mathematical physics and has been studied since the 1700s. In
particular, the challenging study of concentration properties of high energy
eigenfunctions has been the subject of extensive work, and the tools developed
for studying Laplace eigenfunctions have had a profound impact on nearly every
area of spectral theory and geometric analysis. This project concerns a
framework developed by the investigator to extract information on the structure
of eigenfunctions from their concentration and propagation behavior in phase
space via the use of semiclassical analysis. The current research aims to adapt
and develop these methods to reach a deeper understanding of eigenfunction
behavior by studying their pointwise growth, L^p-norms, associated two-point
Weyl Laws, and applications to random waves.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
