
* 2103482
* Convexity and Applications
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2021,07/16/2021
* Elisabeth Werner,OH,Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2024
* USD 488,094.00

A major emphasis of this project is on high dimensional objects and phenomena.
These appear in areas as diverse as physics, biology and medicine, computer
science, optimization, economics, and material sciences. A mathematical
description of a scientific or engineering question often requires many
independent numbers, leading to a geometric space of high dimension. For
example, if you want to specify the location of one gas molecule in a room then
you need to report the front/back, side-to-side, and up/down locations of the
molecule, using three numbers. The direction and speed of the molecule's motion
takes another three numbers, and so to describe enough of the molecule's current
state to allow us to predict its future motion from position and velocity we
would need six separate numbers in all. If you want to track 100 distinct
molecules of the air in the room then you will need 600 independent numerical
coordinates to collect all of the relevant measurements. As these dimensions
increase the difficulty of sampling, and computation goes up rapidly, a
phenomenon scientists and mathematicians sometimes call "the curse of
dimensionality." However, there are also patterns that emerge as dimension
increases that are not visible in low dimensions. We can exploit those patterns
thus taking advantage of the "curse of dimensionality" to make it the "blessing
of dimensionality". It is one purpose of these projects to study such high
dimensional phenomena.

These projects are in asymptotic geometric analysis and affine convex geometry.
Of particular interest are the affine invariant functionals on convex bodies in
high dimensions. Among the most important such functionals are affine surface
area and p-affine surface area. Their corresponding affine isoperimetric
inequalities, established by the principal investigator and collaborators for
all p, are stronger than their Euclidean counterparts and related to the famous
Mahler conjecture which is still open in dimensions four and higher. p-affine
surface areas are directly related to entropies of cone measures of convex
bodies which establishes a link between convex geometry and information theory.
This link will be further explored, also in the context of log concave functions
which are a natural extension of convex bodies in the realm of functions.
Moreover, affine surface area appears naturally in questions on approximation of
convex bodies by polytopes, a further main topic of study. The goal is to
establish optimal dependence on all the relevant parameters involved in the
approximation, like e.g., dimension, the number of vertices of the approximating
polytopes. These issues will be considered in Euclidean, spherical and
hyperbolic space. This award includes support for a graduate student.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
