
* 2104411
* Pseudoholomorphic Invariants of Contact Manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2021,05/11/2021
* Joanna Nelson,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 258,127.00

Symplectic and contact structures first arose in the study of classical
mechanical systems, allowing one to describe the time evolution of complex
systems such as planetary motion. In mathematics, certain geometric shapes with
these additional structures are known as symplectic or contact manifolds.
Solutions of classical mechanical systems can be interpreted in terms of flow
lines of mathematical objects known as Hamiltonian or Reeb vector fields on a
symplectic or contact manifold, respectively. Understanding the evolution and
distinguishing transformations of these systems led to the development of global
invariants of symplectic and contact structures, which shed light on the
interconnectedness of dynamics, geometry, and topology. The PI plans to build on
her work in providing foundations and applications of contact invariants. The PI
will continue and expand her efforts to increase the access and success of
underrepresented students in pure and applied mathematics. With the Rice
Association for Women in Mathematics Chapter, she plans to organize a weekly
Math Night at Rice University. She also plans to conduct (jointly with two other
professors) two national studies to delineate forms of antiracism in academic
advising in STEM fields and to examine the effect of academic advisors'
practices on BIPOC (Black,Indigenous, and people of color) student psychological
experiences and outcomes, and construct a set of best practices and effective
behaviors in academic advising. To train future generations, the PI will co-
organize two international conferences with professional development programming
for junior mathematicians and will offer research opportunities for
undergraduates. She will continue to advise PhD students and mentor postdoctoral
researchers. The project concerns pseudoholomorphic curve based Floer theoretic
invariants of contact and symplectic manifolds. These pseudoholomorphic curves
are equivalence classes of solutions to a nonlinear Cauchy-Riemann equation
which interpolate between closed periodic orbits of either a Hamiltonian or Reeb
vector field. The PI will employ direct geometric methods to extend the
transversality theory for the associated moduli spaces of pseudoholomorphic
curves while isolating and accounting for ?errant? phenomena, primarily through
the use of obstruction bundle gluing methods. The primary goals of this project
are to provide foundations and refine structural aspects of nonequivariant, and
(circle) equivariant contact homology, including the development of product
structures and isomorphisms with symplectic homology. By exploring contributions
from obstruction bundle gluing, she also plans to provide foundations for
Legendrian contact homology in certain closed contact 3-manifolds. The secondary
goals of this project are to provide applications to dynamics, free loop spaces,
and symplectic embedding problems, in part through developing computational
methods for embedded contact homology of Seifert fiber spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
