
* 2105445
* Probing Near-Symplectic 4-Manifolds and Contact 3-Manifolds with Seiberg-Witten Theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/2021,07/07/2021
* Chris Gerig,MA,Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 09/30/2021
* USD 155,206.00

Gauge theory describes and exploits the symmetries of nature; among other things
it forms the foundation of classical electrodynamics and quantum physics.
Symplectic geometry describes the dynamics of nature; among other things it
forms the foundation of classical mechanics. Our universe seemingly has four
dimensions, three spatial and one time, and it has some curvature, but we do not
know exactly what the global picture is. Motions of particles in our universe
can be cyclical, but we do not always know how many such periodic trajectories
these particles can have. The goal of this project is to use both gauge theory
and symplectic geometry in tandem to detect the possible smooth shapes of our
universe and to probe the evolution of systems that can arise in said universe,
and to develop these mathematical tools further in order to be more efficient in
our calculations. Especially, the PI will check whether certain dynamical
systems have infinitely many periodic orbits, using the gauge-theoretic
?Seiberg-Witten monopoles? and the symplectic-style ?Reeb orbits?. The broader
impacts of this pursuit involve mentoring students and outreach.

The classification of smooth 4-manifolds and dynamics of Reeb vector fields on
3-manifolds have been long-sought out goals in the community, with much
progress. This project will be able to contribute with new and refined methods,
by extending and exploiting the relations between Seiberg-Witten solutions and
pseudoholomorphic curves and Reeb orbits. The Seiberg-Witten invariants of
4-manifolds may be recovered by suitable counts of said curves and orbits, using
2-forms that are symplectic almost everywhere. The PI intends to use this
transcription and these near-symplectic 2-forms to probe the structure of the SW
invariants, and to search for diffeomorphisms between two homeomorphic
symplectic 4-manifolds that are known to become diffeomorphic after a blow-up.
In 3 dimensions the PI intends to give quantitative refinements to the Weinstein
conjecture that asserts the existence of periodic Reeb orbits on every closed
contact 3-manifold, by re-analyzing and extending the proof of said conjecture
to the case of certain non-closed contact 3-manifolds using a newly developed
SW-Floer homology theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
