
* 2109583
* Conference on Special Metrics in Complex Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 01/15/2021,01/11/2021
* Ronan Conlon,TX,University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2022
* USD 21,465.00

The Conference on Special Metrics in Complex Geometry will be held at Florida
International University from January 7-10, 2021. Complex manifolds are higher-
dimensional surfaces that are defined using the complex numbers. Recently, there
has been significant progress in the study of "metrics" on complex manifolds,
objects that endow these spaces with a shape or more precisely, curvature. The
study of these metrics lies at the nexus of complex geometry and geometric
analysis. The aim of this conference is to gather together experts working in
these two fields to discuss these new and exciting developments. Even though
lately there have been many conferences in complex geometry, none have really
been organised to address these recent discoveries. This conference serves to
fulfill this necessity. In doing so, it will promote collaboration across many
areas of the aforementioned fields of complex geometry and geometric analysis.
The latest breakthroughs in these two fields will be presented to a new
generation of mathematicians, with a particular emphasis on women and those from
minority groups. The conference will provide a forum for senior mathematicians
to interact with graduate students through the organisation of an optional
poster presentation for graduate students which will take place in a non-
intimidating and relaxed environment. Ample opportunity will also be provided to
women speakers to present their research, with at least one talk per day
scheduled for a female speaker. Moreover, the conference will provide a platform
for postdocs and junior researchers to present their work. Participants will be
brought up-to-date with all of the current developments in the field and will be
presented with new avenues of research in the enticing environment that Miami
provides in the Winter. More specifically, the Conference on Special Metrics in
Complex Geometry will concentrate on the interplay between complex geometry and
geometric analysis, with an emphasis being given to equations arising in the
construction of hermitian and Kahler metrics with prescribed curvature
properties, for example, the complex Monge-Ampere equation in Kahler geometry.
These equations are among the most important appearing in geometric analysis and
understanding their structure and the techniques involved in their solution are
paramount for further progress in the field. Recent breakthroughs include, among
others, the independent construction of non-flat Ricci-flat Kahler metrics with
maximal volume growth on complex affine space of dimensions three and greater by
Li, Conlon-Rochon, and Szekelyhidi, the construction of new examples of gradient
expanding and steady Kahler-Ricci solitons by Conlon-Deruelle and Biquard-
Macbeth respectively, the solution by Chen-Cheng of a major conjecture of Tian
stating the equivalence between the existence of constant scalar curvature
Kahler metrics on a compact Kahler manifold and the properness of Mabuchi's
K-energy, and the recent families of Ricci-flat Kahler metrics exhibited by
Hein-Sun-Viaclovsky-Zhang on K3 surfaces which collapse to an interval with
Tian-Yau and Taub-NUT metrics occurring as bubbles. These topics will all form
part of the conversation at the conference in January 2021. More details will be
available at http://faculty.fiu.edu/~rconlon/conference.htm

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
