
* 2154127
* Conformal Geometry, Analysis, and Physics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2022,03/31/2022
* Gunther Uhlmann,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2023
* USD 45,000.00

This award provides support for the conference "Conformal Geometry, Analysis,
and Physics" to be held in Seattle from June 13-17, 2022. The field of conformal
geometry has had rich interactions with both geometric analysis and physics,
especially high-energy and condensed-matter physics, over the past three
decades. The benefits have been bidirectional in both cases: conformal geometry
has led to the development of new analytic tools infused by geometric
intuitions, which in turn lead to the solution of important geometric problems.
Similarly, physics is a source both of new problems and of important insights,
while conformal geometry provides crucial tools in the solution of physical
problems. This conference will bring together experts from all of these fields
to share and discuss their research and benefit from each other's perspectives
and tools. It is expected that the conference will stimulate further development
in all three fields and cooperation across many kinds of boundaries.
Facilitating entry of early-career researchers into dialog with all three areas
is a particular goal for this event. A poster session will be held for students.

Conformal geometry is the geometry of spaces where angles are defined, but not
lengths. It has had a long and, recently, fast-growing relevance in physics,
where it is a tool that provides new perspectives on many old phenomena.
Conversely, physics has been a rich source of insights and problems in conformal
geometry. For many years now, conformal geometry itself has provided some of the
most compelling problems in geometric analysis, while techniques from analysis,
scattering theory, and partial differential equations have enabled tremendous
progress in the field. The primary goal of the conference is to bring together
researchers from the three title areas whose work overlaps, in order to
disseminate progress, share interesting problems, build relationships, and
broaden perspectives. The conference will allow exposure to relevant state-of-
the-art techniques in conformal geometry, analysis, and physics to be shared
with other interested practitioners in each field. It will foster international
collaboration between the US and other countries, and also collaboration between
mathematicians and physicists. Junior participants will gain valuable insights,
and relationships with more senior practitioners that may shape both their
career and their mathematical (or physical) perspectives. Opportunity will be
given for them to present their own work, and collaboration opportunities will
exist between researchers at all levels. Most of the funding will be used to
support junior mathematicians. Substantial effort will be made in recruiting
women and members of other underrepresented groups in mathematics. The
conference website is at https://personal.utdallas.edu/~sxm190098/graham65/ .

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
