
* 2200723
* Differential Geometry and Geometric Analysis Conference
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 05/01/2022,04/27/2022
* Marco Radeschi,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2023
* USD 29,900.00

The conference "Differential Geometry and Geometric Analysis" will take place
from June 20-24, 2022 in Florence, Italy. Geometric analysis has been very
active in recent years, with numerous results resolving some old conjectures and
producing new examples. The event will bring together world experts to discuss
these recent developments and possible research directions motivated by the new
techniques that were discovered. This grant will allow the organizers to support
the travel and accommodation of graduate students and recent Ph.D. recipients
from the US. The conference is meant to bring American, German, and Italian
communities in differential geometry together and to promote international
collaborations. It will also give an opportunity for younger mathematicians to
interact with senior experts in the area in a relaxed environment.

The organizers of the conference selected several topics in differential
geometry that focus on the most recent developments. Among these are: ?
Manifolds with lower curvature bounds, including sectional and Ricci curvature ?
Metric spaces with synthetic notions of curvature below or above ? Geometric
flows, including Ricci flow and mean curvature flow ? Special geometries,
including Einstein metrics, soliton metrics, and metrics with special holonomy ?
Minimal hypersurfaces and solitons for the mean curvature flow All information
about the conference will be available on the conference website:
https://www.dma.unifi.it/~verdiani/dgga2022/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
