
* 2203607
* Differential Equations in Complex Riemannian Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2022,04/27/2022
* Jian Song,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2025
* USD 63,404.00

The research project focuses on several open questions in complex geometry and
geometric flows in relation to geometry and physics. The deep understanding of
these problems will help make fundamental progress in the study of analytic and
geometric singularities arising from differential equations in geometry and
physics. The project also aims to bring in research and teaching innovation in
mathematics from various disciplines and has an immediate beneficial effect on
undergraduate and graduate students at Rutgers as well as in the regional
mathematical community. The PI will continue to organize and participate in the
integrated research/education programs and activities that will promote the
education level of the nation.

The PI will investigate canonical metrics of Einstein type on Kahler varieties
with mild singularities. In particular, the PI will study the Riemannian
geometric properties of such singular metrics and analytic moduli problems for
Kahler-Einstein manifolds. The PI will continue to make progress in the analytic
minimal model program with Ricci flow by studying both finite-time and long-time
formation of singularities of the Kahler-Ricci flow on Kahler varieties. Such
singularity formation should be understood through global and local metric
uniformization equivalent to canonical geometric surgeries and birational
transformations. The PI also aims to extend his work on the Nakai-Moishezon
criterion for complex Hessian equations in both stable and unstable cases,
building connections between conditions of algebraic positivity and nonlinear
PDEs. The PI will employ theories and techniques from geometric L2-theory,
nonlinear PDEs, Cheeger-Colding theory and Perelman's work on Ricci flow. The
outcome of the research will develop new tools and give profound insights and
understanding of topological, geometric and algebraic structures of complex
spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
