
* 2203343
* Boundaries of Groups
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2022,08/03/2022
* Daniel Groves,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2025
* USD 378,000.00

A central theme in mathematics for centuries has been the interaction between
algebra and geometry. The usual direction is to study the set of symmetries of a
geometric object of interest. In geometric group theory, this becomes a two-way
street in that algebraic objects (such as groups) are considered as geometric
objects in their own right. Hyperbolic geometry is a subject going back to work
of Bolyai, Gauss and others in the 19th Century, but it also plays a central
role in modern geometry, due to the influence of Thurston and Gromov. This
project centers around a central question in geometric group theory, the Cannon
Conjecture, about the difference (in three dimensions) between classical
hyperbolic geometry and the coarse notion due to Gromov, in the presence of a
large group of symmetries. Broader impacts of this project include research
training opportunities for graduate students.

Over the last decade the principal investigator, along with Manning and others,
has developed many tools involving relatively hyperbolic Dehn filling, which
gives strong control on certain kinds of quotients of relatively hyperbolic
groups. This project leverages this work to study hyperbolic and relatively
hyperbolic groups whose boundary at infinity is a two-sphere. The Cannon
Conjecture predicts that such groups are virtually Kleinian groups. This project
proposes various approaches to this and related conjectures. With Haissinsky,
Manning, Osajda, Sisto and Walsh, the PI continues to develop a theory of
drilling hyperbolic groups with two-sphere boundary. The PI will investigate
possible quasi-isometries between hyperbolic and relatively hyperbolic groups
with 2-sphere boundaries. With Wilton, the PI will develop a notion of coarse
sectional curvature, with applications to coherence and local quasi-convexity of
certain hyperbolic groups. In a different but related direction, with Einstein
the PI will continue to study relatively geometric actions of relatively
hyperbolic groups on CAT(0) cube complexes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
