
* 2203555
* Geodesic Submanifolds, Rigidity, and Other New Phenomena in Rank 1
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2022,04/25/2022
* Matthew Stover,PA,Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2025
* USD 116,046.00

Lattices in Lie groups are a sweeping generalization of the integers inside the
real numbers. The deep connections between the integers and a broad range of
mathematical areas from geometry to number theory have direct analogues for
lattices in Lie groups, and the way in which lattices in Lie groups sit at the
interface of so many fields has made them of fundamental importance since the
late 19th century. The primary motivation for this project is to deepen our
understanding of these connections, in particular for hyperbolic manifolds and
their close relatives. Hyperbolic geometry is the "negatively curved"
counterpart to classical Euclidean geometry (zero curvature) and spherical
geometry (positive curvature), and hyperbolic manifolds are poorly understood
compared with their Euclidean and spherical counterparts. Relating hyperbolic
manifolds to discrete subgroups of Lie groups provides access to a wide spectrum
of mathematical tools, including algebra and dynamics, that have borne
significant recent fruit, including recent work of the PI with U. Bader, D.
Fisher, and N. Miller that gives a completely geometric characterization of
which hyperbolic manifolds that are "arithmetic" (a family of immense
significance, but one for which the definition is purely algebraic and not
obviously tied to the geometry of the manifold). The overarching goal of this
project is to use techniques from dynamics, geometry, algebraic geometry, and
number theory to further our understanding of hyperbolic manifolds and closely-
related generalizations called "locally symmetric spaces". The project provides
support for graduate students allowing them time for research, collaboration,
and travel to conferences. It will also support the PI's continued development
of Inquiry-Based Learning tools for undergraduate teaching and organizing events
like summer schools and conferences focused on graduate student professional
development

This project aims to understand the geometry and topology of locally symmetric
spaces, particularly real and complex hyperbolic manifolds, inspired by the
fundamental problems in low-dimensional topology and geometric group theory that
have dominated the fields since the pivotal work of Thurston and Gromov. On the
one hand, it is of significant interest to learn the extent to which the Gromov-
Thurston program pushes into this more general setting. More importantly, the
questions studied in dimensions 2 and 3 for the last forty years are closely
related to classical problems about discrete subgroups of Lie groups, and real
and complex hyperbolic lattices are precisely the cases where many of the basic
questions remain open, e.g., (non)triviality of Betti numbers and problems
related to (non)arithmeticity. Particular problems to be studied include
analogues of the Margulis superrigidity theorem in rank one, building on the
PI's recent breakthroughs with Bader-Fisher-Miller, and understanding complex
hyperbolic lattices using techniques from algebraic geometry and
continuing/generalizing the PI's work with D. Toledo on connections between
residual finiteness of central extensions of complex hyperbolic lattices and
constructions of interesting new smooth projective algebraic varieties admitting
metrics of negative curvature.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
