
* 2204182
* Geometric Analysis: Investigating the Einstein Equations and Other Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2022,04/29/2022
* Lydia Bieri,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2025
* USD 144,674.00

This project addresses several topics in mathematics, physics and their
interface, focusing on geometric analysis, the study of partial differential
equations (PDE) and general relativity (GR). It aims at enhancing our knowledge
in mathematics as well as in physics. The new insights and methods from this
project will also be important to solve other structurally similar PDE. These
PDE are at the heart of models in science and technology, from physics to
biology and chemistry to finance, economics or medicine and psychology.
Independent from their roots in various applications, these PDE and their
solutions frequently exhibit similar interesting structures that are
investigated by mathematical methods from geometric analysis. Consequently,
mathematical results in one direction may open doors to solving problems in
entirely different fields or applications. One main research direction of the
project concerns the Einstein equations from general relativity theory, which
are the laws of the universe, linking its physical content to geometry. This
theory is also crucial to make GPS work. Investigating these equations will
increase our understanding of the universe both in the large as well as in
smaller regions such as galaxies, binary neutron stars or binary black holes.
Beyond that, this project will not only answer open questions in physics, but
also create new ideas for physical models. When two massive objects like neutron
stars or black holes merge, then gravitational waves are produced and travel
from the source through the universe as ripples in spacetime. For the first
time, such waves were observed in 2015 by Advanced LIGO (aLIGO), marking the
beginning of a new era where information from distant regions of the universe is
decoded directly from the universe itself (different from telescopes).
Unraveling the new structures will rely on synergies between mathematics,
astrophysics and physics. The project will build on the PI?s prior results to
develop new methods to achieve these goals. The project will also have direct
impact in a broader sense via teaching and outreach activities. The PI will
train students and postdocs in these fields, and through broad outreach
activities also the public including underrepresented groups. The PI will attend
conferences to communicate the results. The PI will also make the results
available via the internet and publications.

In this project the PI will develop new mathematical methods to investigate the
Einstein equations and other nonlinear PDE describing physical phenomena. The PI
will investigate: (1) the Cauchy problem for the Einstein equations focusing on
(I) spacetimes with radiation, and (II) the formation of black holes in GR when
the Einstein equations are coupled to matter systems, (2) the mathematics of
gravitational waves, their memory and related effects in GR as well as analogs
of memory in other physical theories, (3) Euler equations and other PDE. These
main directions comprise several projects. Many of them will rely on the PI's
former results but also require new ideas and new mathematical methods. The PI's
recent results for the Einstein equations in vacuum and with neutrino radiation
revealed a panorama of new structures in gravitational radiation and memory that
are expected to be seen in current and future gravitational wave detectors.
Parts of the planned research link the mathematical insights to experiments
(LIGO/VIRGO in particular). Moreover, the gravitational wave memory is expected
to be detected in the near future. The PI and D. Garfinkle derived two analogs
of memory within the electromagnetic theory. These are expected to be measured
in an experiment as well. The mathematical methods are widely applicable to a
broad spectrum of problems from mathematics to physics. The PI and collaborators
will continue their research to complete the understanding of gravitational
radiation and memory in GR, and to extend their research to other physical
theories. The PI's research on the mathematical investigation of the Einstein
equations in GR provides geometric-analytic methods to tackle other PDE.
Moreover, newly found structures will be important in geometry as well as in PDE
theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
