
* 2204322
* Geometric Scattering Theory, Resolvent Estimates, and Wave Asymptotics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/15/2022,07/20/2022
* Jacob Shapiro,OH,University of Dayton
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2025
* USD 43,210.00

This research project studies the propagation of waves in non-smooth media. Wave
and Schrödinger equations are important partial differential equations that
describe how waves, including sound, light, and gravitational waves, propagate
in the natural world. Much is known about the behavior of solutions to these
equations when the underlying media are smooth. However, most practical
applications involve waves propagating in media that contain obstructions or
discontinuities. The aim of this project is to resolve open questions about how
waves scatter and decay when the underlying medium is not smooth. The results of
the project are expected to inform predictions in several applications involving
wave behavior in non-smooth media, including the propagation of seismic waves,
the behavior of plasma, and light propagation in optical fibers. The project
will contribute to the training of undergraduate and graduate students in a
central, active area of mathematical physics.

This project concerns research in geometric scattering theory. The project has
two objectives. The first is to prove upper bounds on the resolvent of the
semiclassical Schrödinger operator in limited regularity. Such resolvent bounds
are a precursor to local energy decay rates for rough wave equations. The second
objective is to use the recently developed Fredholm method to establish the
existence of scattering-type eigenfunctions for a wide class of nonlinear
Helmholtz equations. The main tools for this project come from semiclassical and
microlocal analysis. In particular, the principal investigator aims to extend
positive commutator and Carleman estimates, separation of variables, and
b-vector field analysis to Schrödinger operators with low regularity
coefficients. This will yield high frequency resolvent estimates, and in turn
precise energy decay rates for waves traveling in heterogeneous media.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
