
* 2231783
* Geometric Partial Differential Equations and Complex Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2022,08/05/2022
* Valentino Tosatti,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2024
* USD 91,134.00

This project is concerned with the study of problems of geometric nature, often
involving the curvature of a space or object, using primarily tools from partial
differential equations. This is a central field in mathematics, which has
ramifications and connections in physics and other sciences. One of the main
themes of this research is the study of a class of spaces, known as Calabi-Yau,
which play an important role in mathematics as well as high energy theoretical
physics. According to string theory, our four-dimensional physical space-time
possesses six extra dimensions which are extremely small, so that we don't
normally perceive them, but are crucial for understanding elementary particles.
These six dimensions together form a tiny Calabi-Yau space, which captures
essential features of particle physics. Understanding its geometry would allow
us to understand how particles are created and how they interact, and is one of
the main current problems in mathematical physics.

The PI will use techniques from geometric analysis and nonlinear partial
differential equations to investigate problems about the geometry of complex and
symplectic manifolds. The first project is about understanding limits of Ricci-
flat Calabi-Yau manifolds as the Kahler class degenerates. This is closely
related to the theory of mirror symmetry, which was inspired by physical
considerations. The second project concerns the long-time behavior of the Ricci
flow on compact Kahler manifolds, in the most difficult case when collapsing
occurs at infinite time. The Ricci flow was used spectacularly to prove the
Poincare and Geometrization conjectures for 3-manifolds, and understanding its
behavior on higher-dimensional manifolds is a central problem in the field. The
third project is centered on Donaldson's program to extend Yau's solution of the
Calabi Conjecture in Kahler geometry to symplectic four-manifolds. This would
provide a new analytic tool to construct symplectic forms four-manifolds as
solutions of a highly nonlinear PDE, and would have striking applications in
symplectic topology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
