
* 2232812
* Foundations of Computational Mathematics Conference ? FoCM 2023
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, STATISTICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Combinatorics
* 12/01/2022,08/04/2022
* Peter Binev,SC,University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 11/30/2023
* USD 49,500.00

The next triennial international conference in the series Foundations of
Computational Mathematics, FoCM 2023, will be hosted at the Sorbonne University
in Paris, France, June 12?21, 2023. The Foundations of Computational Mathematics
(FoCM) conferences aim to be a main vehicle in the exploration of the broad
interface between mathematics and contemporary computation, a subject area of
importance both intellectually and for practical applications. It is expected
that about 500 researchers will attend the conference from around the world, and
about a third of them will be from the US. This project will partially cover
travel and lodging costs for a diverse group of US researchers attending the
conference. The majority of the funds will be distributed on a competitive basis
to junior US participants, including graduate students, postdocs, and tenure
track faculty.

The conference will follow the format of former FoCM conferences: plenary
lectures in the mornings and theme-centered parallel workshops in the
afternoons. Each workshop extends over three days, and the conference will
consist of three periods, each period featuring 7 mathematically diverse but
interconnected workshops, with 21 workshops in total. These activities combined
with poster sessions and informal interactions among participants all synthesize
forefront research with mentoring and training opportunities for young
participants, helping them develop networks that include the world?s leading
researchers. A number of themes connect the diverse workshop topics, such as
learning from computation to automate, adapt and optimize the computational
process which by itself becomes an analysis tool, ties from homotopy methods
used in computational algebraic geometry for systems of algebraic equations and
interior point methods in continuous optimization to numerical methods for
differential equations and aspects of differential geometry, machine learning
and signal processing cast as very large and challenging convex optimization
problems, common themes among symbolic algorithms used for the solution of
algebraic and differential equations, and relationships between decidability and
tractability in real/complex arithmetic computational models and the Turing
machine models considered in the context of combinatorics and intractability as
well as discrete optimization. More information about the FoCM 2023 conference
can be found at https://focm2023.org

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
