
* 2238091
* CAREER: Symplectic Weyl Laws, Spectral Invariants, and Beyond
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2023,12/05/2022
* Daniel Cristofaro-Gardiner,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2028
* USD 56,575.00

Symplectic geometry is the geometry implied by classical mechanics, which in
turn is central to understanding how our universe works. The field of dynamical
systems studies how systems evolve in time. This project?s focus is on new
tools, called spectral invariants, that facilitate a study of symplectic shapes
and connect symplectic geometry to dynamical systems. Although these invariants
have been developed and used to resolve various longstanding conjectures in
recent times, several mysteries remain, and new horizons continue to come into
focus. The project aims to complete foundational work related to spectral
invariants, clarify how they relate to each other, prove new and more refined
results, explore higher dimensions, and study potential new and important
applications. A synergistic educational component is centered around building a
digital hub for undergraduate mathematical research, supporting mathematics
education of incarcerated individuals, and supporting high school education
beyond the traditional curriculum through volunteer efforts.

In previous research, the PI proved symplectic analogs of Weyl laws for embedded
contact homology, periodic Floer homology, and link spectral variants in
dimensions 2, 3, and 4, recovering classical symplectic invariants from the
asymptotics of more modern ones. These ideas were then used in joint work of the
PI settling various longstanding questions, including the Simplicity Conjecture
that had been open for about forty years. In the current project the PI aims to
explore foundational questions about the spectral invariants, prove more refined
Weyl laws, settle various longstanding problems, and explore natural questions
in higher dimensions. The project is divided into three parts. In the first
part, the PI will study the relationships between the spectral invariants. The
second part is about two-term Weyl laws and conjectures regarding the subleading
asymptotics. The final part involves applications as well as new horizons in
higher dimensions. An example of a potential application is establishing
symplectic packing stability for all closed symplectic manifolds of any
dimension.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
