
* 2300370
* Hyperbolic Manifolds, Geodesic Submanifolds, and Rigidity for Rank-1 Lattices
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 11/15/2022,11/21/2022
* Nicholas Miller,OK,University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2023
* USD 76,057.00

Geometry is broadly focused on studying manifolds (multi-dimensional shapes) and
their intrinsic properties, such as volume, curvature, and lengths of curves
between two points on the manifold. In this field, understanding symmetries of a
given manifold plays a key role in studying its other geometric properties.
These symmetries are encoded in an algebraic construction called the fundamental
group; this project aims at studying the connections between this group and
geometry. Specifically, among hyperbolic manifolds there is a special class
called "arithmetic" that tend to be the most symmetric and whose fundamental
group has strong connections to number theory. This project aims to use new
techniques in geometry and dynamics to study the fundamental group of hyperbolic
manifolds in an attempt to understand when such a group is arithmetic and the
ramifications of arithmeticity (or lack thereof) on the geometry of the
associated manifold. Broader impacts of this project include work with
undergraduates.

More specifically, the overarching goal of this research project is twofold --
to better understand the classification of hyperbolic manifolds and their
geodesic geometry and to build a robust framework for exploring rigidity
phenomenon for fundamental groups of finite-volume real, complex, quaternionic,
and Cayley hyperbolic manifolds. The principal investigator has recently made a
series of advances that facilitate the development of geometric, group
theoretic, and dynamical techniques for understanding the geodesic geometry of
manifolds built by gluing submanifolds of arithmetic manifolds, as well as the
development of superrigidity style techniques for lattices in the isometry group
of real hyperbolic space. This project plans to continue to develop these new
techniques with an eye toward geometric applications. Specifically, the project
will address the following broad themes: 1) understanding constructions of both
low- and high-dimensional hyperbolic manifolds and their geodesic submanifolds,
2) further developing a general framework for superrigidity results for rank-1
lattices, and 3) attempting to use recent advances in rank-1 rigidity as a
mechanism to understand integrality of complex hyperbolic lattices and
arithmeticity of quaternionic and Cayley hyperbolic spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
