
* 8703429
* Mathematical Sciences: The Dynamics of Digital Computers andMechanical Systems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/1987,04/21/1988
* Richard McGehee,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* James Glazebrook
* 06/30/1990
* USD 120,650.00

Richard McGehee proposes to carry out research on two topics. These involve the
application of the theory of dynamical systems to digital circuits and a study
of the dynamical systems on finite state spaces which arise from approximations
of continuous systems. Richard Moeckel's work will be concerned with an
investigation of collisions and of rejection to infinity in the three body
problem, a study of central configurations in the n-body problem, and an
investigation of normal forms near elliptic fixed points of mechanical systems.
The research on finite approximation of continuous dynamical systems recognises
the fact that computer experiments can necessarily only reveal approximations of
the original continuous system. The focus of attention will be on questions
asking whether the properties of attractors of the original system are
faithfully exhibited on the video screen. McGehee's other project is to study
the mathematical idealizations of the digital and analog levels of hardware and
develop a theory of how digital devices can be derived from analog circuits.
Moeckel's work will continue studies of periodic points and invariant curves of
area preserving maps, of homoclinic phenomena and of normal forms. These
investigations are all aimed towards an understanding of the possible
qualitative behaviors of three point masses. The study of central configurations
is important in the context of escape to infinity, multiple collisions, and the
topology of energy surfaces.
