
* 8703407
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Global Analysis
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/15/1987,03/03/1989
* Richard Palais,MA,Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* James Glazebrook
* 11/30/1990
* USD 273,564.00

Palais will continue his work on differentiable transformation groups. The main
focus of this work is to find interrelationships between these groups and other
geometric concepts. In particular the concept of isoparametric submanifold will
be studied. These are submanifolds of Euclidean space with simple local
invariants. Although the finite dimensional case has been extensively worked on
there is still much to do in the infinite dimensional setting of a Hilbert
manifold. Adler and van Moerbeke will work on algebraically completely
integrable systems. This work involves very difficult questions which are now
seen to have close connections with problems in algebraic geometry. Shiota, an
algebraic geometer, will also work on strengthening and clarifying these
connections. The topics under investigation will include linearizing completely
integrable systems on complex algebraic tori, expressing solutions in terms of
hyperelliptic integrals, the geometry of quadrics and quartics. Following his
proof of the Novikov conjecture, Shiota obtained an analogous characterization
theorem for a certain class of Prym varieties. His current project is to further
develop these techniques to characterize appropriate classes of principally
polarized Abelian varieties.
