
* 8913354
* Mathematical Sciences: CR Manifolds and Holomorphic Embeddings
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/1989,05/03/1991
* Sidney Webster,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* James Glazebrook
* 12/31/1992
* USD 90,145.00

The principal investigator will analyze the problem of existence and regularity
of holomorphic embeddings of certain CR manifolds of real hypersurface type.
These are manifolds having the same internal structure as is induced on the
boundary of a smooth, strongly pseudoconvex domain in complex Euclidean space.
Key elements of the method to be applied are Henkin's solution operators for the
tangential Cauchy-Riemann equations. For the local problem he will improve
previous estimates and reduce, as much as possible, the considerable derivative
loss in his existing arguments. The problem of global embeddings will be further
analyzed. The study will lead to a deeper understanding of the concept of
boundary of a complex manifold and of properties of certain over-determined
systems of linear, first order, partial differential equations. An endless curve
in the plane which wraps up on itself is an example of an immersion of the real
line which is not an embedding. An embedding always manages to steer clear of
itself. Holomorphic embeddings require that the function, which injects the
curve or surface into the target manifold, be smooth in the complex analytic
sense. Theorems from the study of CR or complex analytic manifolds have always
seemed miraculous by the standards of traditional real analysis. The results to
be completed by this project will be no different.
