
* 9106938
* Mathematical Sciences: Global Differential Geometry and Singularities
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/1991,05/10/1991
* Malcolm Adams,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* James Glazebrook
* 06/30/1994
* USD 43,950.00

The principal investigators will study problems involving singularities in
algebraic and differential geometry. In particular they will consider the
singularities of Gauss maps and Lagrangian structures, tangent cones of the
Thom-Boardman singularity loci, and Stiefel -Whitney classes of singular real
analytic varieties. The broad background of the six investigators will allow
them to apply a range of methods which might not ordinarily be focused on this
set of problems. In particular they will apply sheaf theoretic methods, flows on
Jacobians, and integral geometry in their research. Singularities in geometry
present a set of problems much more difficult than those in which the surfaces
studied are smooth. Consequently much less is known about this case and more
sophisticated techniques are needed to make progress. On the other hand our
physical world is full of examples of spaces in which singularities are
important - from fractures in materials to boundaries between liquid and solid
phases of metals. Describing and understanding these singularities is important
from both a practical and theoretical standpoint. The principal investigators
will use their varied backgrounds to study this important collection of
problems.
