
* 9404298
* Mathematical Sciences: Inverse Spectral Problems in Riemannian Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/1994,05/09/1996
* Carolyn Gordon,NH,Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/1997
* USD 105,000.00

9404298 Gordon The research supported by this award focuses on questions related
to the geometry of manifolds. It concerned with the determination of the extent
to which the spectrum of the Laplace- Beltrami operator of a compact Riemannian
manifold determines the geometry of the manifold. Recent examples show, for
instance, that the spectrum alone does not determine manifolds up to isometry.
Further work will also be done in efforts to understand how manifolds can be
isospectral yet not even locally isometric. Examples growing out of these
examples provide excellent opportunities to identify specific local geometric
invariants which are not spectrally determined. Work related to isospectral
plane domains will also continue. Constructions of such domains are surprisingly
simple; they arise as underlying spaces of certain orbifolds. Using this method,
work will be done to establish whether or not it is possible to construct
isospectral sets of non-isometric plane domains of any finite order. Finally,
studies on Laplace versus length spectra of hyperbolic manifolds and on the
Schrodinger operator on tori and Heisenberg manifolds will be carried out.
Analysis of domains and manifolds through the study of classical differential
operators defined on these spaces is now an established field of geometric
analysis. One knows that geometric properties of the domains are intertwined
with properties of the spectrum of the operators. Results of the last decade
show that the dependence is not as simple as once thought. This work seeks to
clarify the connections and broaden the scope of the theory's applications. ***
