
* 9626303
* Mathematical Sciences: Combinatorial and Measure-Theoretic Structure of Dynamical Systems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/1996,07/24/1996
* Alexander Blokh,AL,University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/1999
* USD 62,039.00

Abstract Blokh We study attractors in the sense of Milnor in complex dynamics
and for piecewise-continuous interval maps. The latter requires the proof of the
absence of wandering intervals for such maps as well as developing for them new
analytical and dynamical methods. In the case of polynomial/rational maps we
hope to combine ideas which led to the solution of the problem in question for
smooth interval maps with tools from complex dynamics. We plan to work on the
specification property and the space of limit sets with Hausdorff metric. Also
we pose the problem of introducing new kinds of rotation numbers for orbit
portraits of quadratic maps. A series of problems deals with the growth of
pointwise itineraries, multipliers at periodic points and Lyapunov exponents in
smooth families of interval maps. Another topic is studying rotation numbers for
one-dimensional maps. We define rotation numbers as ergodic averages of a
function. A specific choice of this function allows one to compute the union of
all rotation numbers in interval case. This generalizes the Sharkovskii theorem
and gives rise to a number of problems (connections to surface and graph/tree
dynamics, rotation sets with respect to a periodic orbit, forcing relation,
analogs of circle rotations and their connection with Fibonacci maps, growth and
typical behavior of the rotation set in spaces of smooth interval maps in
connection with the problem of hyperbolicity of a typical map, the monotonicity
of the entropy in one- and multi-parameter families including unimodal families
and cubic family). Dynamical systems theory describes processes that develop
over time. In particular, dynamical systems arise in physics (Lorenz map),
biology and environmental studies (population dynamics) and chemistry (e.g.
modeling the Belousov-Zhabotinskii reaction). The development of the system
depends on its initial state and parameters coming from the "environment." It is
of great importance that we understand the future behavior which may be
exhibited by the system for the "majority" of its initial states; this
corresponds to the description of so-called attractors to which the first part
of the project is devoted. Also in the first part of the proposal we study how
properties of some important dynamical systems depend on "environmental"
parameters. Sometimes phenomena exhibited by a system are related to one another
and information about some of them allows one to make a judgment about the
existence of others; in other words phenomena coexist. A good example here is
periodicity, i.e. cyclic occurrence of the same states in the system. It turns
out that the existence of a cyclic process with a given period for some initial
state guarantees that another cyclic process with a different period can be
realized for a different initial state and the same environment. In the second
part of the project we plan to thoroughly study this relationship between
different periods of cyclic processes in the same system.
