
* 9703485
* Valley Geometry Seminar
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/1997,04/09/1997
* David Cox,MA,Five Colleges Inc
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2001
* USD 12,000.00

Abstract for "Valley Geometry Seminar" (DMS-9703485) The purpose of this grant
is to support the activities of the Valley Geometry Seminar. We interpret
"geometry" broadly to include algebraic geometry, differential geometry,
symplectic geometry, differential topology, arithmetic geometry, geometric
topology, and related areas. Our principal activity is a weekly series of talks
given by local speakers or experts from other colleges and universities. Some
semesters, the seminar will concentrate on a special topic. Possible topics we
will pursue in coming semesters include the Langlands program, toric varieties
and mirror symmetry, and real algebraic geometry. The participants in the Valley
Geometry Seminar come from Amherst College, Mount Holyoke College, Smith
College, and the University of Massachusetts. The purpose of the seminar is to
give local mathematicians working in different areas of geometry the chance to
speak about their recent work to an audience of sympathetic peers. Also, by
bringing in outside experts, we get to hear about recent developments in
geometry. The seminar is a crucial part of the research atmosphere for the
geometers in our area. Also, we have structured the seminar so that the talks
are really useful. Rather than the usual one-hour lecture, we encourage speakers
to give a two-part talk, separated by a short break. The first part consists of
motivations and examples-the seminar members get to see the "big picture" of how
the topic being discussed fits into the larger framework of contemporary
research. The second part of the talk then gives the technical details, for in
mathematics, you not only have to discover something interesting, but you also
have to be able to give an airtight proof. Hence the second part is a necessary
complement to the first part of the talk. We find this format very useful and
most of our speakers adopt this format. Finally, some semesters we concentrate
on a specific topic. This means that some (but not all) of the talks conc ern
aspects of the same topic. In this way we can get some real depth in our
understanding of the topic.
