
* 9704760
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in Relativity and Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/15/1997,06/27/1997
* Gilbert Weinstein,AL,University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 05/31/2000
* USD 68,609.00

This project will address a number of problems, mainly in the following two
related areas: harmonic maps, and the Einstein equations. The investigator will
study the asymptotic behavior of harmonic maps into negatively curved spaces
near prescribed singularities. This study is motivated by, and has applications
to, the problem of stationary black holes in general relativity. The PI also
proposes to generalize blow-up results for wave maps. Wave maps which develop
singularities from regular initial data will be constructed from harmonic maps
defined on hyperbolic space. In the area of general relativity, the investigator
will continue his work on equilibrium configurations of co-axially rotating
charged black holes. A uniqueness theorem is sought independent of the number of
black holes present. Also proposed is the study of the topology of the space of
initial data for the Einstein equations, and questions related to equilibrium
configurations of rotating and nonrotating perfect fluid bodies. Harmonic maps
are mappings between Riemannian manifolds (geometrical spaces) which satisfy
nonlinear elliptic partial differential equations. They were first introduced on
two dimensional domains by C. B. Morrey Jr. in the 1950's in his study of
Plateau's Problem in Riemannian manifolds: to find a soap film which spans a
given contour. Harmonic maps have since found numerous applications in physics,
geometry, and other fields. Harmonic maps with prescribed singularities will be
used in this project to model equilibrium configurations of co-axially rotating
charged black holes. Understanding these configurations is an important step in
the future study of the evolution equations. Wave maps are the dynamical
counterparts of harmonic maps. They satisfy nonlinear hyperbolic partial
differential equations. These equations have been studied by many researchers as
a first step in a program to understand more complex evolution equations of
classical field theory such as the Einstein field equations of general rel
ativity. The Einstein field equations model the large scale evolution of
spacetime. One of the interesting features of this class of nonlinear evolution
equations is that solutions starting from regular data may sometimes yield blow-
up after a finite time laps, leading to singularities. The investigator will
construct and study wave maps with such singularities. Another problem, with
applications to astrophysics, to be addressed in this project will be to
construct a model for relativistic dense rotating stars in equilibrium.
