
* 9706910
* Probabilistic Methods in Geometry and Analysis
* DMS,PROBABILITY, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/15/1997,06/06/1997
* Elton Hsu,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 11/30/2000
* USD 76,000.00

9706910 Hsu This research proposal forms an integral part of the Principal
Investigator's program of studying analytical properties of (nonflat) finite or
infinite dimensional spaces (mainly Riemannian manifolds and path and loop
spaces over them) by analytic and probabilistic methods. The PIs long range goal
for the program is to establish a complete analytical and probabilistic theory
of path and loop spaces over Riemannian manifolds, whose counterpart in (flat)
Euclidean space (finite or infinite dimensional) has been known for quite some
time. Successes in these efforts will contribute significantly towards our
general understanding of nonlinear infinite dimensional spaces. For the
analytical part, the PI will concentrate his research on further developing
analytic techniques subsumed under the name "Malliavin Calculus." In particular
for the period covered in this proposal, the PI will spend a substantial amount
of his research resources on the equivalence of various Sobolev norms (the so-
called Meyer's equivalent problem) and on the spectral properties of the
generalized Ornstein-Uhlenbeck operator. For the probabilistic part, the PI
intends to launch a detailed study of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process through
sample path, especially the effect of curvature on short-time and long-time
behaviors of the process. The models under study, path and loop spaces over such
geometric structures such as spheres, ellipsoids, and tori, have been used
extensively in recent years in the theory of relativity, quantum physics,
astrophysics, and cosmology. The Principal Investigator will study these models
by both traditional analytical methods and the more recent methods of
probability theory. Specifically he will investigate both long-time and short-
time behavior of a specific random process on path and loop spaces in the hope
that it will reveal geometric properties which can be applied by theoretical
scientists and engineers in their respective disciplines.
