
* 9802077
* Strings, Solitons and Random Matrices
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Mark Adler,MA,Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2003
* USD 204,000.00

Abstract Proposal: DMS-9802077 Principal Investigator: Mark Adler What is the
connection of random matrices with integrable systems? Is this connection
useful?The answer to these questions leads to a new and unifying approach to the
theory of random matrices. Introducing an appropiate t-dependence in the
probability distribution of the matrix ensemble, leads to vertex operator
expressions for the n-point correlation functions (probabilities of n
eigenvalues in infinitesmal intervals) and the corresponding Fredholm
determinants (probabilities of no eigenvalues in a Borel set of R). This
representation leads to PDE's for the Fredholm determinant. This covers the
finite Hermitean ensemble,the symplectic and symmetric ensemble and even a
coupled matrix ensemble. These are related to reductions of 2-Toda and 1-Toda
and the KP hierarchy. We work in the general theory of nonlinear equations of
engineering and mathematical physics.The type of equations we study figure into
ultra-short transmissions in fiber optics,intense pulses in lasers, water wave
transmission in narrow channels,slow nuclear reactions and the physical
properties of bulk metals at high temperatures as well as the general excitation
theory of heavy nuclei. We also study equations connected with string theory in
quantum field theory, an exciting area of research in modern physics.
