
* 9802577
* Mathematical Sciences: Hamiltonian Theory of Soliton Equations and Geometry of Moduli Spaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/1998,07/15/1998
* Igor Krichever,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2001
* USD 88,140.00

Abstract

Proposal: DMS-9802577 Principl Investigator: Igor Krichever

The main objective of the present project is a further development of the
algebraic-geometric integration theory of non-linear equations, models of solid
state physics, and models of quantum field theories. An immediate goal is a
complete algebraic-geometric approach to the Hamiltonian theory of integrable
equations, applicable to 2D equations as well as finite-dimensional models.
Particular attention will be paid to the investigation of the non-local
symplectic structures for 2D integrable equations which arise in this way, and
to the Hamiltonian theory of finite-dimensional systems equivalent to the pole
dynamics of elliptic, trigonometric and rational solutions of 2D soliton
equations. Among these systems are spin-generalizations of Calogero-Moser and
Ruijsenaars-Schneider systems. These systems are related to Seiberg-Witten
solutions of N=2 supersymmetric gauge theories, and have attracted recently
considerable interest. Efforts will also be devoted to the clarification of some
unexpected relations between Seiberg-Witten solutions of N=2 supersymmetric
gauge theories and topological field theories. The moduli spaces of algebraic-
geometric solutions of soliton equations provide a unifying framework for these
problems. Seiberg-Witten solutions are related to the symplectic geometry of
Jacobian bundles over these moduli spaces, while topological field theories are
related to their Riemannian geometry. The effective Lagrangian in the first case
and the free energy in the second case are just restrictions of the exponential
of the tau-function of the universal Whitham hierarchy, which is itself a corner
stone of the perturbation theory of soliton equations. It is very important to
determine whether these relations can be explained from first principles.

The algebraic-geometric theory of soliton equations developed in the middle
seventies has had enormous influence on many branches of mathematics and
theoretical physics. Originally it was mainly aimed to construct exact solutions
of the wide variety of equations describing wave phenomena in the plasma
physics, non-linear optics, oceanology, super-conductivity. In recent years the
universality of the methods and ideas developed has led to the outreach far
beyond the initial framework. It includes applications to the string theory and
supersymmetric gauge theories. The new approach to the Hamiltonian theory of
soliton equations combines all these directions and should allow us to make the
next important step. A development of the Hamiltonian theory of difference
equations as a Hamiltonian theory of systems with discrete time is a challenging
problem which should provide a bridge between classical and quantum integrable
systems.
