
* 9802388
* RUI: Geometric Tomography
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1998,06/17/1998
* Richard Gardner,WA,Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2002
* USD 115,491.00

Geometric tomography uses data concerning sections by planes and projections on
planes of geometric objects to obtain information about these objects. The
latter include general compact sets, but often they are convex bodies,
polytopes, star-shaped bodies, or finite sets. One advantage of this setting is
that it becomes more probable that inverse problems have a unique solution.
Generally, the a priori knowledge that the unknown object is of uniform density
can be exploited to retrieve more information than would otherwise be possible.
This can lead to algorithms that are more effective when few measurements are
available, and less sensitive to measurement errors or noise. Within
mathematics, geometric tomography has links to functional analysis, convex
geometry, Minkowski geometry, and combinatorics. The project will focus on
several topics in this area and continue the development of geometric tomography
begun in two previous NSF proposals. New directions include reconstruction of
objects from measurements of volumes of projections onto planes or concurrent
sections by planes, stability questions related to sections, and the systematic
development of discrete tomography (involving inverse problems concerning finite
sets). Examples of proposed techniques are the use of recently discovered
Fourier transform formulas and of special bodies defined by $p$th means of
metric quantities. Also included is a program designed to stimulate
undergraduate research. CAT scanners are machines that save lives daily. They
take X-rays in a number of different directions, and synthesize the information
to create an image of a two-dimensional section of part of the body. The
mathematics behind this process is called computerized tomography. It is very
successful, but not perfect; the reconstructed image is only approximate, and to
get a better picture with the same procedure one has to take more X-rays,
causing greater expense and likelihood of side effects. In geometric tomography,
only homogeneous objects ar e allowed-the density of the object is the same
everywhere inside it. An example from medicine would be a bone or a kidney. One
can use this information to find better reconstruction procedures. The scope of
geometric tomography is actually much wider. Any measurement involving sections
of a homogeneous object by lines or planes or its shadows on lines or planes can
be considered. Because of this, it has many links to other areas, both in
mathematics (there is a large overlap with convex geometry, the geometry of
shapes without holes or dents) and outside. For example, a new technique in
electron microscopy allows measurement of the number of atoms in a crystal lying
on certain lines. The material scientist wants to reconstruct the crystal from
this information. The object in this case-the crystal-is mathematically
represented by a finite set of points. This project continues the development of
several aspects of the mathematics of geometric tomography.
