
* 9802054
* Cycles, Residues & Global Problems in Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/1998,07/11/2001
* H. Blaine Lawson,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2002
* USD 228,216.00

Abstract

Proposal: DMS 9802054 Principal Investigators: H. B. Lawson, Jr. and M.-L.
Michelsohn

This multi-part project is concerned with the study of cycles and residues in
geometry. One part concerns the groups of algebraic cycles and cocycles on a
projective variety X and aims to relate these groups to the global structure of
X. A theory of homology type for algebraic varieties based on homotopy groups of
cycle spaces has been developed, and will be used to study concrete questions
about algebraic spaces. A second part of the proposal concerns cycles in
projective space, which have surprizing connections to fundamental constructions
in algebraic topology. Some of the resulting questions concern spaces of real
and quaternionic cycles related to characteristic classes and representation
theory. Others concern cycles under the action of a finite group. Here the
spaces have led to new equivariant cohomology theories whose development and
application will be explored. A third area of investigation concerns singular
connections and characteristic currents, a generalization of classical Chern-
Weil theory which relate singularities of mappings to characteristic forms in a
canonical analytic way; applications and developments of the theory include a
new approach to Morse Theory. A fourth area concerns calibrated cycles in
geometry: special Lagrangian cycles in Calabi-Yau manifolds, cycles related to
existence of p-Kaehler spaces, and cycles appearing in M-brane theory. This
project is also concerned with graduate student development, especially
interaction at the research level among graduate students.

This project concerns questions of global structure in geometry and has several
interrelated parts. The first aims at furthering our understanding of the spaces
which arise as solutions of systems of algebraic equations (so called
``algebraic cycles''). These spaces have a long history and play a central role
in many areas of mathematics, applied mathematics and physics. Breakthroughs
over the past ten years have given fresh insights into the subject and a richly
structured theory has emerged. The proposed research will forge new links
between algebra and geometry/topology, and lead towards settling some important
conjectures in the field. Another area of investigation is concerned with
relations between cycles and geometry which arise from connections. Connections
are fundamental in mathematics, where they constitute differentiation laws, and
in physics, where they represent the fundamental forces of nature at the
classical level. The investigators have developed a theory of singular
connections which encompasses many previously unrelated phenomena and has
applications to several areas of geometry. This project will continue this work
with emphasis on applications. In studying the least area problem one of the
investigators developed a theory of calibrated cycles which currently plays an
important role in physical theories. This new relationship has raised some
important questions and conjectures that will be studied.
