
* 9802154
* Contact and Symplectic Structures and Holomorphic Curves
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/1998,07/19/2000
* Helmut Hofer,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2002
* USD 305,618.00

Abstract Proposal: DMS-9802154 Principal Investigator: Helmut Hofer In this
project Hofer studies the dynamics of Reeb vector fields. The main tool is a
particularly adapted theory of holomorphic curves, which has been developed by
the principal investigator and his co-workers in recent years. The fact, that
there is a such a close, but completely unexpected, relationship between some
important class of dynamical systems and a suitable theory of holomorphic curves
has deep implications. Immediately it makes it, in principle, feasible to relate
questions about an important class of dynamical systems to recent mathematical
theories like quantum cohomology, Gromov-Witten invariants, and in low
dimensions even to Seiberg-Witten invariants. The fact, that two intersecting
holomorphic curves in a four-dimensional space have always a positive
intersection number implies that these new methods are most powerful for Reeb
vector fields on a three-dimensional space. The main goal of this project will
be the development of a mathematical machinery for constructing global surfaces
of section for three-dimensional Reeb flows and generalisations thereof. In
practice this means that the study of certain three-dimensional dynamical
systems can effectively be reduced to two dimensions. The importance and scope
of Reeb dynamics is illustrated by the following examples. The motion of a
satellite in the presence of the gravitational forces of the sun, the planets
and the moon is described mathematically as the dynamics of a Reeb vector field.
A charged particle moving in an electrical and a magnetic field is described by
a Reeb vector field if the magnetic field is not too large or the kinetic energy
of the particle is sufficiently large. The motion of the particles of an ideal
incompressible fluid in some system of pipes is, if the motion is in an
equilibrium (steady) state, described by a Reeb vector field if the pressure is
not too far f rom being constant. Also many evolution equations of mathematical
physics, which describe systems, in which energy is preserved, can sometimes be
approximated by finite-dimensional dynamical systems, which are described by a
Reeb vector field. Such approximations are of course necessary if one tries to
find solutions for such equations by using a computer.
