
* 9803520
* Representations of the Fundamental Group and Connections with Deformation Theory, Geometry and Integrable Systems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/1998,07/29/1998
* John Millson,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 01/31/2002
* USD 80,000.00

9803520 Millson Millson will continue to explore connections among spaces of
representations of finitely-generated groups into Lie groups, linkages in model
spaces of constant curvature, arrangements of subspaces, and integrable
Hamiltonian systems and their quantizations. Much of this work will be done with
Michael Kapovich of the University of Utah. Millson and Kapovich used the above
relations to construct Artin groups that were not the fundamental groups of
smooth complex algebraic varieties. This work has just been accepted by the
Publ. Math. IHES. Millson is also working with Hermann Flaschka of the
University of Arizona on constructing integrable systems on symplectic quotients
(by the adjoint representation) of products of orbits in simple Lie algebras.
They have recently found such systems for minimal orbits. A critical role is
played by the Aronszajn-Weinstein formula of perturbation theory. Their end goal
is to give new insight into the work of Lusztig and others on decomposing tensor
products of irreducible representations. Millson's work begins with one of the
first theorems of high-school geometry -- the theorem that if two triangles have
the same set of side lengths then they are congruent. The analogue for
quadrilaterals is clearly false: one can change a square into a rhombus without
changing the side lengths. So one is led to try to parametrize the set of all
planar n-gons with the same side lengths. From there one is led to a favorite
theme of nineteenth century mathematics, the study of planar linkages (systems
of rods and hinges). In the nineteenth century such a study was of immense
practical significance -- the problem was to convert linear motion (of a piston
rod) to circular motion (turning of a wheel) by a linkage. The problem was
solved by a French naval officer, Peaucellier. It turns out that from the modern
point of view the nineteenth century work is insufficiently precise. Millson and
Kapovich have corrected the errors and written up a proof of a result (often
attributed to Thurston) that given any smooth manifold M, there is a planar
linkage whose configuration space is diffeomorphic to a disjoint union of a
number of copies of M. The above work on planar linkages led to a study of n-gon
linkages in space. This theory is enormously richer, connecting with symplectic
geometry, integrable Hamiltonian systems, and representation theory. The
analogous theory in spherical and hyperbolic three-space appears to connect up
with some of the newest objects in geometry and algebra, Poisson Lie groups and
quantum groups. ***
