
* 9803129
* Geometry of Riemannian and Finsler Spaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/01/1998,05/07/1998
* Dmitri Burago,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2001
* USD 144,598.00

Abstract Proposal: DMS-9803129 Principal Investigator: Dmitry Burago The main
topics of the proposal (large-scale geometry and billiards systems) belong to
both geometry and dynamical systems. Continuing his (joint with S. Ivanov)
research in the large-scale geometry of periodic metrics, D. Burago proposes to
study the asymptotic volume growth for Finsler tori; a related problem is to
analyze area-minimizing properties of affine subspaces in Banach spaces. This
may help to understand how the absence of conjugate points for a Lagrangian
system on a torus is reflected in the dynamics of its geodesic flow. D. Burago
also proposes to continue his analysis of higher dimensional analogs for
geometric conclusions of Aubry-Mather theory. Trying to further understand the
relationship between biLipschitz equivalence and quasi-isometries, it is natural
to consider such cases where density arguments (developed by the proposer
jointly with B. Kleiner) do not work; the most striking of such cases include
Penrose tilings and uniform lattices. Continuing his (joint with S. Ferleger, A.
Kononenko) study of semi-dispersing billiard systems, D. Burago plans to
investigate if their topological entropy can be infinite. Another problem which
arose from the proposer's method of applying singular geometry to billiard
theory is constructing CAT(0) development spaces whose geodesics represent all
billiard trajectories. E. Johnson, the proposer's advisee, works on applying the
proposer's method to prove the unboundness for complete surfaces of finite
variation of curvature to show stability of the class of embedded flat surfaces.
The main subjects of the proposal have very clear physical analogs. Large-scale
geometric properties of periodic metrics can be interpreted as global properties
of a periodic medium consisting of copies of the same microscopic pattern
repeated in a regular fashion, as in crystals. In particular, dynamical
properties of geo desic flows for periodic metrics reflect how the light or
radiation spreads in such media. The technique developed by the proposer and his
collaborators allows us to solve many of the open problems in this area for the
most important case (quadratic Lagrangians); in general, this circle of problems
remains wide open. The proposer's research in the theory of billiard systems
started from a problem that goes back to Boltzmann: can one give an upper bound
on the maximum number of collisions in a given time interval in a system of
several balls colliding elastically (gas model)? The number of collisions per
time unit plays important role in thermodynamics. Surprisingly, this problem has
been solved by establishing a connection with singular geometry; in its turn,
this connection led to new intriguing problems of both geometric and dynamical
origin.
