
* 9803549
* Singularities of the Kahler-Ricci Flow, Einstein 4-Manifolds and Seiberg-Witten Theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/1998,07/17/1998
* Huai-Dong Cao,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2001
* USD 75,813.00

Abstract

Proposal: DMS-9803549 Principal Investigator: Huai-Dong Cao and Jian Zhou

We propose to study certain problems in geometric analysis, including the
asymptotic behavior of the Kaehler-Ricci flow, the study of certain Ricci flat
four-manifolds, and Miyaoka-Yau Inequalities on closed Einstein four-manifolds.
For the Kaehler-Ricci flow, we would like to understand the structure of certain
gradient Kaehler-Ricci solitons, which arise as limits of dilations of
singularities of the Ricci flow. This has important applications in Kaehler
geometry and may lead to new knowledge and new insights in the field of
geometric evolution equations. It turns out, as our research indicates, that the
study of gradient Ricci solitons has a close link to the symplectic geometry of
existence of closed orbits for certain special Hamiltonian vector field. For the
second problem, our goal is to classify asymptotically locally Euclidean Ricci-
flat four-manifolds via Seiberg-Witten theory. This is related to the
generalized positive action conjecture of Hawking and Pope. For the third
problem, note that a remarkable consequence of the existence of a Kaehler-
Einstein metric on a Kaehler surface is the Miyaoka-Yau inequality between the
Euler characteristic number and signature of the underlying four-manifold of the
Kaehler surface. In this proposal we also propose to study the interesting
question whether every closed oriented Einstein four-manifold satisfies the
Miyaoka-Yau Inequality.

The Ricci flow is an important geometric "heat" equation. In general, heat
equations describe the process of changes of tempreature of material to a steady
state. The Ricci flow describes changes of metrics. Its "steady state" is an
Einstein metric, whose existence is of fundemental importance in geometry,
topology, and general relativity. Our proposal relates nonlinear partial
differential equations, differential and complex geometry in mathematics, and
gravity, general relativity in physics. A thorough understanding of the problems
proposed should advance our knowledge in these aspects and give us new insight.
