
* 9803171
* Curvature and Metric Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/1998,07/13/1998
* Jeff Cheeger,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2001
* USD 123,691.00

Abstract Proposal: DMS-9803171 Principal Investigator: Jeff Cheeger The main
thrust of this project is to study the analytic, geometric and topological
properties of various classes of metric measure spaces, which while typically
much more singular than smooth riemannian manifolds, have enough good properties
to give rise to rich and interesting theories. Specifically, we consider
measured Gromov-Haudorff limits of (possibly collapsing) sequences of riemannian
manifolds with a definite lower (or two sided) Ricci curvature bound (including
Einstein manifolds), corresponding limits of manifolds with a definite two sided
sectional curvature bound and metric measure spaces (possibly fractal in nature)
which satisfy a doubling condition on the measure and a Poincar'e inequality. A
central concern is that of proving ``partial regularity theorems''. Such
theorems assert that the underlying space is regular (in a suitable sense) off a
set which is of measure zero or even of some definite positive codimension.
Throughout mathematics and physics one finds a tension between the notions of
``regularity'' and ``singularity''. For instance, a ``typical'' object (one
which is chosen completely at random) will, with high probability, be very
irregular (or even singular). On the other hand, the most fundamental geometric
shapes, say that of round sphere, exhibit symmetry, homgeneiety, and smoothness.
In any event, in many (if not most) problems of interest, singularities are
simply ``there'' and cannot be avoided (e.g. ``black holes''). In such cases, in
becomes important to study the extent and structure of the singularities. This
is precisely the focus of our project. We consider the problem for some very
general but extremly natural classes of geometric objects.
