
* 9803554
* Analysis of J-holomorphic Curves
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/15/1998,07/06/2001
* Thomas Parker,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2002
* USD 63,285.00

Abstract

Proposal: DMS-9803554 Principal Investigator: Thomas Parker

This project involves analytic aspects of the theory of pseudo- holomorphic
curves. The aim is to develop effective methods for computing Gromov-Witten
invariants of symplectic manifolds and enumerative invariants of algebraic
manifolds. The main thrust is a continuing project with E. Ionel on a gluing
formula for Gromov invariants under the operation of `symplectic connect sum'.
The idea is to collapse the connect sum to a singular manifold, keeping track of
the holomorphic curves along the way. Parker and Ionel have already obtained a
gluing formula in special cases; these imply the well-known recent formula of
Caporaso-Harris. A general gluing formula should be an effective new tool for
computing Gromov and enumerative invariants. A second part of the project seeks
to for answer the following question. Suppose C is curve that is J-holomorphic
for some non-generic J. If one perturbs J to a nearby generic J', how many
J'-holomorphic curves are there close to C? Several well-known problems in
enumerative geometry, some solved, some unsolved, reduce to this problem. Parker
and Ionel have an approach based on the `Taubes obstruction bundle' . The last
part of the project suggests using modified Gromov invariants to obtain
invariants that count curves which exist only for special classes of almost
complex structures.

One of the most basic problems in mathematics is to determine the solutions of a
system of polynomial equations, and an important first step toward that goal is
to determine the NUMBER of solutions. There is an explicit formula for the
number of simultaneous solutions of a set of n polynomials in n variables. One
can then ask for the number of solutions for n polynomials in n-1 variables. In
this case there is a free parameter, so the locus of solutions will be a union
of curves. How many? This question has been systematically studied for 100
years, but only a few special cases were solved. Then, around 1990, it was
realized that these problems can be translated into symplectic geometry, and
then tackeled using the powerful machinery of mathematical gauge theory. (Gauge
theory, originally part of physics, has been the focus of many very fruitful
interactions between mathematicians and physicists over the past twenty years;
it includes Yang-Mills and Seiberg-Witten theory, and String theory). This
`Gromov invariant' approach led quickly to formulas answering some of the
original enumerative problems, and there are clear indications that there are
more to be discovered. This project is aimed toward further developing the
symplectic gauge theory in order to produce additional general formulas, and to
meld these formulas into a coherent theory.






