
* 9803051
* Geometry of Hamiltonian Group Actions and of Hamiltonian Systems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/1998,01/16/2002
* Eugene Lerman,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2002
* USD 167,284.00

Abstract Proposal: DMS-9803051 Principal Investigators: Eugene Lerman and Susan
Tolman The issues being investigated in this study of Hamiltonian systems
include: classifying symplectic manifolds with Hamiltonian group action,
determining when such manifolds admit Kaehler structures, computing their
cohomology rings, the capacities of symplectic quotients, intersection
cohomology of singular quotients, and the two-body problem on the sphere. The
special case of symplectic manifolds with large torus actions is particularly
amenable to study. Working with Y. Karshon, S. Tolman has reduced the
classification question to combinatorics and homotopy information in the case
where the torus is of dimension which is one less than half the dimension of the
manifold. The principal investigators plan to use these methods to find
necessary and sufficient conditions for such a space to admit an invariant
Kaehler structure. S. Tolman also hopes to use these techniques and recent
results in symplectic topology to extend the results to tori of dimension two
less than half the dimension of the manifold. The investigators also plan to
address the question of invariants of reduced spaces, and together with T.
Tokieda they will investigate the capacity of symplectic quotients. They will
also study the cohomology of reduced spaces, both at regular values (joint work
by S. Tolman and J. Weitsman), and at singular values (joint with J. Ho.)
Finally, E. Lerman (jointly with T. Tokieda) will study the two body problem on
the two sphere -- a limiting case of two coupled rigid bodies. The techniques
include classifying relative equilibria, the energy-momentum method, and
numerical simulation. On the scale of everyday life, essentially all objects
follow paths determined by the laws of classical mechanics. In many cases -- for
example, a spinning top, two coupled rigid bodies, a satellite with flexible
attachments, or the solar system itself -- the mechanical system possesses a
great deal of symmetry. In these cases, for each degree of symmetry there is a
conserved quantity, called ``momentum''. Linear and angular momentum are the
most common examples of this phenomena. A great deal can be learned about such
systems both by studying the momentum, and by ``dividing out'' by the set of
symmetries to study a simpler system. We study systems which, while not
necessarily examples of concrete physical systems, abstract out many of the
common features of such systems. We intend to study, among other questions, what
happens when systems have very large amounts of symmetry, how to deal with
singularities which sometimes arise in ``dividing out'' by symmetries, and how
to use the momentum to answer important questions about the system. Our
work,including both the results and some of the methods we plan to develop,
should be useful to scientists and engineers studying concrete physical systems.
