
* 9804833
* Topics in Formal Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/1998,09/26/2001
* Ian Anderson,UT,Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2002
* USD 142,756.00

Abstract Proposal: DMS-9804833 Principal Investigators: Ian Anderson and Mark
Fels Formal differential geometry is the study of localized deformation
invariants defined on the solution space of a given differential relation. These
deformation invariants arise as cohomology classes in various invariant
variational bicomplexes defined on the jet spaces of the given differential
relation. The objectives of this research proposal are to develop new methods
for the computation of these localized deformation invariants, to study the
properties of these invariants through the use of jet bundle techniques, and to
develop new applications of formal geometry in global analysis, integrable
systems and mathematical physics. Three avenues of research are proposed. The
first project will explore the relationships between the variational bicomplex
for two differential equations which are related by one of the various
integration or reduction methods, some of which date back to Lie and Vessiot.
The second project is based upon two new extensions of the inverse problem of
the calculus of variations. One extension is directed towards the existence and
classification of Hamiltonian structures; the other extension seeks to
characterize integral invariants arising in global analysis such as the Kazdan-
Warner integrals which obstruct the solution to the prescribed curvature
problem. The third project is motivated by the role that the variational
bicomplex plays in the general theory of characteristic classes and seeks to
generalize this role to general pseudo-group actions on fiber bundles using the
method of moving frames and differential invariant theory. The prevalent theme
of the proposed work is symmetry. By the symmetry of an object one means the
group of motions in space which leave the object unchanged. The symmetry of a
cube includes discrete rotations by 90 degrees about each one of its 3 axis. The
symmetry group of a sphere includes the continuous rotations t hrough any angle
about any axis through the center of the sphere. In problems in applied
mathematics, differential geometry and mathematical physics, one is interested
in the symmetries which leave the governing (differential) equations unchanged.
Such symmetries are extremely important in studying both the analytical and
qualitative features of the governing equations. Indeed, almost all known exact
solutions of important non-linear equations (such as the Einstein, Yang-Mills,
or harmonic map equations) have a high degree of symmetry and can be obtained by
symmetry methods. Nevertheless, there are many theoretical and practical issues
yet to be studied. In particular, theoretical techniques which have previously
been computationally inaccessible can now be investigated using powerful
symbolic mathematics computer programs.
