
* 9805524
* Laminations and Foliations Conference
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/01/1998,04/24/1998
* John Milnor,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 04/30/1999
* USD 18,000.00

The concepts of lamination and foliation have recently been the focus of much
attention. They have been incorporated into the renormalization theory of one-
dimensional dynamical systems, played a crucial role in the foundations of
higher dimensional holomorphic dynamics, enabled advances in long-standing
problems in hyperbolic geometry, witnessed the solution of classical problems on
analytic differential equations, and led to new concepts in topology. The
conference will bring together people looking at laminations and foliations from
different points of view in the hope that it will create fruitful interactions
between intimately related but somewhat separated fields. Laminations and
foliations play a fundamental role in the theory of dynamical systems, which is
the general study of evolution of systems that change with time. Dynamical
systems theory emerged, historically, in celestial mechanics, and has since
found numerous further applications everywhere: in statistical mechanics,
biology, chemistry, economics, and so on. It has deep implications for any
aspect of science involving the time-evolution of complex systems. The study of
foliations is concerned with the way that a large system can be broken up into a
family of smaller systems, like layers of dough in a pastry. For example, a
physical system in which energy is conserved separates into thin layers, one for
each energy level. The ability to analyze a system in this way is of crucial
importance, and leads to deep connections between the dynamics and phenomena in
other important subfields of mathematics, in particular, in geometry and
topology. The broadly interdisciplinary nature of the subject was one of the
main motivations for this conference. With this in mind, the conference will be
strongly directed towards the interests of graduate students and young
researchers, who will have a chance to see a broader perspective of mathematics
in its active development. To support this educational goal, the conference will
include , in addition to the customary research lectures, a number of
introductory "mini-courses" which will provide participants with a more
comprehensive outlook on different aspects of the field.
