
* 9971371
* Infinite-Dimensional Integrable Systems and Moduli Spaces of Riemann Surfaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/1999,07/17/2000
* Motohico Mulase,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2003
* USD 51,838.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-9971371 Principal Investigator: Motohico Mulase

The proposed research is directed to problems in moduli theory of Riemann
surfaces, algebraic curves defined over the field of algebraic numbers, geometry
of Hermitian matrix integrals, and integrable nonlinear partial differential
equations. The goals are (1) To give an explicit combinatorial description of
infinitesimal deformations of a compact Riemann surface in terms of deformations
of graphs on the topological model of the surface. This will establish a
canonical diffeomorphism between the differentiable orbifold structure of the
moduli space of pointed Riemann surfaces that is obtained by the Strebel theory
and the algebro-geometric construction over the field of complex numbers. (2) To
find an algebraic and combinatorial description of the relation between ribbon
graphs and Riemann surfaces. It is proposed to study an algebro-geometric
counterpart of a ribbon graph with complex edge length. This study is expected
to lead to a discovery of algebraic description of the relation between ribbon
graphs and Riemann surfaces. (3) To establish a theory of transcendental
solutions of the KP equations. A class of matrix integrals give totally new
solutions of the KP equations which are not obtained by the generalized higher-
rank Krichever construction. These matrix integrals include generating functions
of the orbifold Euler characteristics of the moduli spaces of pointed Riemann
surfaces.

The motion of any string-like object in space-time leads to a Riemann surface as
it sweeps out some region. The DNA strands in our body, for example, come from
our ancestors. We can imagine a DNA loop, that was created a long time ago, has
been traveling in time and now stored in our cell. The whole history of this
particular DNA is described by a Riemann surface. The time slice of the surface
is the DNA at this particular time. We do not know the exact past of our genes.
But we can consider the collection of all possible scenarios that would end up
with the current structure of our DNA. This collection is the moduli space of
Riemann surfaces. Deeper analysis of the collection of all possible past of our
genes through studying the moduli spaces is expected to lead us to a better
understanding of molecular evolution of DNA. Because of its connections to
string theory in high energy physics and potential applications to molecular
evolution of DNA, graduate and undergraduate students show strong interests in
this research, which interweaves algebra, geometry and analysis.
