
* 9971304
* Noncommutative geometry, supergeometry, gauge theory and M-theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 10/01/1999,07/19/2001
* Albert Schwarz,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2003
* USD 128,177.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-9971304 Principal Investigator: Albert Schwarz

The main goal of the proposal is to apply methods of noncommutative geometry and
supergeometry to the mathematical problems arising in theoretical physics. These
problems have also intrinsic mathematical value; they will be treated
rigorously. Many of the projects listed in the proposal are related to Yang-
Mills theory ( in particular, supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory) on
noncommutative spaces and to duality in this theory. The PI is planning to
exploit the relation between Morita equivalence and duality discovered in his
recent papers with the goal to understand dualities in gauge theories, string
theory and M-theory and to give rigorous treatment of these dualities. It was
shown in recent paper by A. Connes, M. Douglas and A.Schwarz that noncommutative
tori arise naturally in the problem of compactification of M-theory ( in Matrix
formulation of this theory). The PI intends to study noncommutative deformations
of other Poisson manifolds and compactifications of M-theory on non-flat
noncommutative spaces. Other projects are related to applications of
supergeometry to various problems of quantum field theory, including general
problem of quantization of gauge theories and topological quantum field theory.

For several years superstring theory was considered as a candidate for a theory
describing all interactions that exist in the Nature. Now we know that
superstring theory is not complete; it should be extended to a more general
theory, containing not only strings, but also their multidimensional analogs
(branes).This general theory was named M-theory; it was conjectured that
M-theory can be formulated as a matrix model (so called M(atrix) theory). It was
shown recently by PI and by other scholars that the methods of noncommutative
geometry are very useful in the analysis of M-theory, especially in M(atrix)
formulation of this theory. The PI is planning to work further in this
direction; in partucular, he studies the energy spectrum and dualities in the
framework of noncommutative geometry.
