
* 9971374
* Shapes of Symplectic and Legendrian Submanifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/15/1999,07/21/1999
* Lisa Traynor,PA,Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2003
* USD 94,540.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-9971374 Principal Investigator: Lisa Traynor

A central theme throughout all branches of symplectic geometry is the importance
of the special symplectic or lagrangian submanifolds of a symplectic manifold
and of the special legendrian submanifolds of a contact manifold. This proposal
outlines a number of projects that explore the interesting fine line between the
rigidity and flexibility of the shapes of these special submanifolds. Projects
include studying the possible efficiency of symplectically packing subsets of
euclidean space or cotangent bundles of tori and studying the possible evolution
of symplectic balls or legendrian links and tangles under symplectic or contact
transformations. Techniques include combinatorics and homology theories defined
via generating functions and pseudo-holomorphic curves. In addition, connections
between symplectic geometry and biology are proposed based on observed
coincidental behaviors of legendrian curves and DNA.

Symplectic and contact geometry have their origins in physics: they are the
setting for understanding spinning tops, mechanics of underwater vehicles, and
planetary trajectories. A basic problem is to understand how a system can evolve
under the natural motions imposed by a contact or symplectic structure. One
approach to understanding the dynamics is to start with a standard object such
as a ball or a looped piece of string and to study the possible configurations
that this basic shape can attain. The results can be quite surprising. For
example, although many deformations of a ball are possible, a classical result
is that it can never be squeezed in particular directions. This is a geometric
version of the Uncertainty Principle from physics. This project aims is to give
further insight into the flexibility and rigidity of these canonical
transformations.
