
* 9972065
* D-Modules Associated with Representation of Reductive Lie Algebras and Superalgebras
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/15/1999,08/10/1999
* Vera Serganova,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2003
* USD 85,335.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-9972065 Principal Investigator: Vera Serganova

The project is dedicated to the study of relation between representation theory
and the theory of D-modules. The first part concerns a generalization of
Bernstein-Beilinson result for Harish-Chandra modules. It was shown by Fernando
that if M is an irreducible module over finite-dimensional Lie algebra G then
the set of elements which act locally finitely on M is a Lie subalgebra. If the
corresponding Lie subgroup K has finitely many orbits on the flag manifold then
Bernstein and Beilinson showed that such modules can be obtained as D-modules
extended from K-orbits on the flag manifold. The principal investigator hopes to
relate a subgroup K and algebraic properties of M with geometric properties of
the corresponding D-modules. As a first result she has a geometric construction
of (G,K)-module for every K containing the maximal torus. The second problem to
be attacked is a generalization of Bernstein- Beilinson theorem for Lie
superalgebras. A straightforward generalization works only for non-degenerate
central character, while the most interesting representation theory happens in
degenerate case. The principal investigator hopes to use a superanalogue of
Bernstein-Beilinson theorem to prove her earlier conjecture for Kazhdan-Lusztig
polynomials in the super case.

The symmetries of geometric objects and physical theories form Lie groups, whose
local and infinitesimal structure are described by Lie algebras: vector spaces
with a product operation satisfying simple rules. Representation theory concerns
basic decompositions and manifestations of these Lie algebras and groups in
geometry, analysis, and algebra. The D-modules of the project title are
algebraic structures which capture essential aspects of calculus and analysis.
The principal investigator believes that geometric aspects of representation
theory founded in works of Brylinski, Beilinson, Bernstein, Kashiwara, Kazhdan,
Lusztig and others can be applied to pure algebraic representation theory,
especially in the theory of weight modules developed by Fernando, Futorny and in
recent work of Mathieu. One hopes that technical algebraic details of their
proofs can become clear when done in geometric language of D-modules.
