* 0800940
* Modular representation theory, triangulated categories and cohomology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Julia Pevtsova, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2011
* USD 84,056.00

This project is mainly devoted to some aspects of representation theory and
cohomology of various families of finite dimensional algebras. The questions
range from calculating a specific geometric invariant for particular classes of
representations to understanding the (geometric) structure of triangulated
categories associated to a given algebraic object. In particular, Pevtsova
proposes to continue the study of modules of constant Jordan type and related
invariants for a finite group scheme, initiated in a joint work with E.
Friedlander and J. Carlson. Pevtsova is seeking further knowledge on cohomology
and associated geometric invariants of certain non cocommutative finite
dimensional Hopf algebras. The project also aims to investigate the geometric
properties of triangulated categories, such as the derived category of perfect
complexes of a stack. Bringing the projects on finite group schemes and derived
categories to a meeting point, Pevtsova is seeking to compare derived categories
associated to different algebraic objects via their
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Representation theory as a subject has emerged
about 100 hundred years agoin the work of Frobenius and Schur and quickly became
an active area of research. In its current stage of development, representation
theory has been discovered to be intimately connected to numerous brunches of
mathematics, such as geometry, topology and combinatorics, as well as physics.
Pevtsova is particularly interested in connections with geometry. Representation
theory studies actions of groups and other algebraic structures on vector
spaces. In particular, modular representation theory studies actions in a
context when they are not semi-simple: not every vector space splits as a direct
sums of orbits under the action. Pevtsova studies invariants of such actions
which arise from geometric considerations. Her work takes its roots in the
fundamental work of Quillen on group cohomology and expands in two different
directions: one is to understand and compute invariants for particular actions,
the other is to understand global properties of families of vector spaces with
an action of a particular group. Pevtsova is also actively involved with math
enrichment programs for school children. She will continue running a math
challenge program at a local elementary school, and will be teaching at a
residential summer math program for high school students from the Northwest
organized yearly at the University of Washington.