* 0800658
* Tip Directed-Assembly of Nanoparticles via Surface-Plasmon Excitation
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2013
* M. Pinar Menguc, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2013
* USD 506,000.00

The overall objective of this effort is to establish the theoretical and
experimental foundation for tip-directed nanoparticle assembly using surface-
plasmon excitation. Specific research objectives include expanding understanding
of (1) optical excitation, heating, and cooling of nanoparticle/nanoprobe
systems; (2) melting, fusion, and evaporation of nanoparticles; and (3) factors
involved in scaling up directed nano-assembly for manufacturing. The research
approach exploits the unique optical and thermal properties of metallic
nanoparticles. Specifically, certain metal nanoparticles can be selectively
heated using optical excitation at their surface plasmon resonance wavelength.
The presence of a sharp, nanoscale tip, under control of an atomic force
microscope in this case, spatially localizes the excitation. Finally,
nanoparticles melt at temperatures significantly below their bulk melting
temperatures allowing fusion of the particles into desired structures and
ultimately into active nanoscale devices. Both multi-physics simulations and
tip-based assembly experiments will be conducted to determine the conditions
required for optimal resolution, throughput, and reproducibility of the assembly
process.&lt;br/&gt;The investigation of tip directed nanoparticle assembly will
have a far reaching impact on the understanding of nanoscale electromagnetics
and thermal transport. This new nano-manufacturing technique will have broad
societal impact by enabling the production of active devices, with applications
in fields such as computing, communications, and medicine, from nanoscale
building blocks. In addition, this relatively simple and low-cost nano-assembly
approach will make nano-manufacturing technology more widely accessible. In
order to establish a highly-trained nanotechnology workforce, participants will
receive extensive interdisciplinary training in nanoscale optics, thermal
sciences, fabrication, microscopy, metrology, and modeling. Outstanding
undergraduate participants will be drawn from the University of Kentucky?s
Nanoscale Engineering Certificate Program (NECP) and the Honors Program on
Nanotechnology. In addition, the project provides a foundation for
nanotechnology and optics related outreach efforts to high schools students in
both urban and Appalachian regions of Kentucky.&lt;br/&gt;