* 0800972
* Optical surface and defect states in light-induced photonic structures
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Zhigang Chen, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendell Talbot Hill
* 06/30/2011
* USD 185,000.00

Surface and defect states exist in a variety of systems that obey linear and
nonlinear equations. In this RUI research project, new concepts and fundamental
issues of wave propagation along surfaces and defects will be explored both
experimentally and theoretically. The specific areas of investigation will
include defect modes, defect-soliton interactions, nonlinear surface solitons,
and Tamm- and Shockley-like surface states in biperiodic superlattice
structures. Recently it has been suggested that the small refractive index
variation induced as periodic arrays of evanescently coupled waveguides can be
used for excitation of surface and defect states, but experimental demonstration
in a two-dimensional configuration has been hampered by fabrication of such
periodic structures with desired surfaces and defects. This project will be
carried out in an optical setting of reconfigurable periodic structure using
optically-induced photonic waveguide structures.

The research will have direct impact on other areas of sciences, ranging from
solid state physics to photonic crystals, and from hydrodynamics to atomic
physics such as Bose-Einstein condensates trapped in periodic potentials. A
major emphasis of this project is placed on mentoring undergraduate students,
particularly those from the ethnically diverse San Francisco Bay Area
population. A strong educational component of this work is that the research
project will be used as a form of teaching as well as discovery, and the
students will be actively involved in learning research methods and in sharing
discoveries and interpretations. Thus, the broader impacts of this project lie
in the integration of research and education through training of students in a
fundamentally and technologically important area.