* 0800207
* Superconducting Pinning with Artificially Prepared Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,10/31/2012
* Ivan Schuller, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 10/31/2012
* USD 517,500.00

Non Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vortices are prevalent in nature all
the way from the atmosphere, charge and uncharged plasmas, magnetic and
superconducting materials. An important issue in this field is the way to anchor
these vortices, the so called "pinning" because physical properties are modified
in fundamental ways if vortices are pinned. A particularly interesting physical
situations arises in superconductors where the magnetic field penetrates the
material by the formation of arrays of superconducting vortices. These vortices
can be pinned by artificially prepared pinning arrays which can be produced
using novel lithographic techniques. This project is dedicated to the study of
fundamental issue which arise when superconducting vortices interact with
nanostructured arrays. Issues such as the effect of the array geometry,
materials, shape of the pinning sites will be studied.In addition to its basic
research interest, these studies may lead to schemes for reducing spontaneous
noise and enhancing the superconducting properties of the
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of vortex pinning in superconductors is
an interesting basic research area, with implications for the fabrication of
high critical current tapes and low noise superconducting devices. The
interaction between artificially prepared pinning arrays and the superconducting
vortex lattice leads to quantum matching phenomena which manifest as enhanced
critical currents and decreased resistance at particular fields. This research
project, will be dedicated to (a) finding the type of pinning structure which
individually provides strong pinning of vortices, and (b) introducing
appropriate "defects" within the periodic array of pins, such as stripes and/or
random fluctuations on the pinning site positions. (a) will increase the domain
wall energy for the periodic point pins and increase the magnetic field width
for the periodic stripe pins, thereby reducing thermal fluctuations, while (b)
can change the universality class of the commensurate phase, thereby suppressing
thermal fluctuations in fundamental ways. The issues concerning (a) are mostly
material-specific, involving the microscopic mechanism of individual vortex-pin
interaction. The issues concerning (b) are statistical in nature, having to do
with the collective interaction of the vortex lattice with the array of pins.
Both of these issues will be investigate systematically, and through extensive
experimental collaborations and interactions with theoretical groups active in
the field.&lt;br/&gt;