* 0800753
* Collaborative Research: Novel Microscale Resonant Sensors for Chemical and Biological Detection
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Kimberly Foster, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2012
* USD 259,999.00

The proposed research is aimed at advancing resonant microelectromechancal
(MEMS) mass sensors such as those used for detecting specific chemical or
biological agents. Two investigative themes are proposed: (1) mass sensors
utilizing array-type detection single-input-single-output device configurations
which is simpler than existing array-based approaches and would allow designer
to minimize on-chip electronics, and (2) mass detection using parametrically
resonance sensors. Methods will be developed for assessing sensor metrics for
performance comparison with traditional resonance-based mass sensors. Nano
scaled material modeling and assembly for synthesis and performance enhancement
will be investigated. The development and simple single-input-simple-output
design would allow minimization of on-chip electronics and enable packaging of
the resonators in vacuum and enhancement of overall system performance and
sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative multi-disciplinary research
between a theorist and experimentalist will advance the graduate education
programs across the departmental and institutional boundaries, and address
outreach at the junior high and high school levels through art, the internet,
and interactive activities, all of which are enhanced by computational
components.&lt;br/&gt;