* 0800241
* Contact Interface Modeling and Stiffness-based Biomedical Diagnosis with Sensing Technology Towards a Better Quality of Life
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2012
* Imin Kao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2012
* USD 255,957.00

The objectives of this proposal are (i) to conduct research on the study of the
modeling of contact interface and stiffness-based biomedical diagnosis, and (ii)
to perform experiments with sensing technology and applications with intelligent
diagnosis. The project aims at leveraging and complementing the expertise,
research experiences, and infrastructure at both institutes in an international
research collaboration between the PI at Stony Brook University and the
collaborator, Prof. Makoto Kaneko at Osaka University, under the joint NSF-JST
support. The research and technology development are focused on modeling and
applications towards "better quality of life." This collaborative US-Japan
research strives to deal with research that focus on improving the quality of
life by bringing about techniques which enhance the ability to reliably diagnose
healthcare issues as well as the prevention of high-risk areas (for example,
diabetes and glaucoma) for better quality of life, through the applications and
modeling of both direct physical contact and non-contact interfaces. Taking
advantage of the international collaboration and exchange, the research project
also invites participation of undergraduate students in the STEM disciplines in
order to motivate them to choose a career in STEM. The dissemination plan
includes an annual symposium to increase the broader impact of this
international research collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;