* 0800967
* Nonlinear Evolution Equations
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Gustavo Ponce, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2012
* USD 115,372.00

The proposed research will focus on mathematical models involving systems of
nonlinear partial differential equations that arise in fluid mechanics and in
the study of wave propagation. The emphasis of the work will be on the
qualitative properties of solutions to the initial value problem associated with
any such system. Unique continuation properties of nonlinear dispersive models
will be investigated by exploiting the relationship between the dispersive
relation and the structure of the nonlinearity. A specific problem will be to
establish the uniqueness of a solution, as well as its possible reconstruction
from some incomplete information given at two different times. Other problems
concerning the time evolution of several forms of the vorticity will be also
considered.

As a consequence of the classical principle of determinism, the evolutionary
laws of a physical system together with an initial configuration should
delineate the state of the system at all future times. To rephrase this in
mathematical terms, the laws of physics are encoded in a system of partial
differential equations whose solutions should exist and depend uniquely and
continuously on the initial configuration. Hence, the development of a
mathematical framework in which the existence, uniqueness, and stability of the
solution to a given system can be verified and quantified is a problem of
fundamental importance. Mathematical analysis offers a powerful tool for
investigating the properties of solutions to these models well beyond the point
of purely phenomenological assumptions. Much of the research in this project is
devoted to such basic questions for models describing the dynamics of water
waves and incompressible fluids.