* 0800629
* Horn's Conjecture and related Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2012
* Wing Suet Li, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 04/30/2012
* USD 157,681.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Li&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since Klyashko's major
breakthrough in the mid 1990s, there has been great excitements and renewed
interests on a wide range of problems related to the Horn's conjecture in
representation theory, algebraic geometry, and combinatorics. In particular,
significant results were obtained by Balkale, Buch, Fulton, Knutson, Tao,
Woodward, and many others.&lt;br/&gt;In contrast, the Horn's conjecture has not
attracted as much attention in operator theory, even though the conjecture was
formulated in terms of self-adjoint matrices. The proof of Horn's conjecture
uses highly nontrivial tools from algebraic geometry and
combinatorics.&lt;br/&gt;For the past ten years, it has been an ongoing project
of Bercovici and the PI to find a constructive proof of Horn's conjecture which
can be generalized to the von Neumann algebra setting.&lt;br/&gt;Recent progress
has shown new promises. The propose project will provide new understanding of
the eigenvalue problem and the intricate geometry of the eigenflags. The PI and
her collaborators also plan to use the machinery that they have developed so far
to extend the Horn's conjecture to type II_1 von Neumann factors. A recent
result of Collin and Dykema may allow one to use their approach to settle the
Connes'embedding problem, i.e., if every type II_1 factor can be embedded in the
ultrapower of the hyperfinite II_1 factor, a fundamental question in operator
algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of eigenvalues of sums of selfadjoint
matrices has intimate connections with algebraic geometry, intersection theory,
representation theory, and combinatorics. The proposed project will provide the
much needed insight from the operator theory point of view.&lt;br/&gt;The
generalization to type II_1 factors will bring interesting problems and
feedbacks to algebraic geometry and representation theory.&lt;br/&gt;The PI is
the Georgia Tech ADVANCE professor in the College of Sciences. She is working
with others at Georgia Tech to promote the advancement of women in science and
engineering in academic.&lt;br/&gt;She is also working with AMS on issues that
are especially affecting the advancement of women mathematicians in academics.
The proposed project will be an essential part of her research program that will
help her greatly at this endeavor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;