* 0800961
* Development of a Hybrid Nano-Electro-Mechanical Sensor Technology for Nanoscale Aerosol Mass and Momemtumprobing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* James Wilson, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2012
* USD 246,302.00

The objective of this proposal is to develop Micro/Nano-Electro-Mechanical
(MEMS/NEMS) resonant sensor arrays enabling measurement of mass and size of
individual nanoscale aerosol particles. The sensors will be tested in the
laboratory with monodisperse aerosol under conditions similar to those what will
occur in the instruments for which they are designed.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed silicon-based resonant sensors are extremely
mass sensitive due to their small size and high quality factors. The resonance
frequencies of the devices change as they are loaded with aerosol particles. On
the other hand, the deflection of the elastic structures is used to measure the
kinetic energy of particles striking the resonant sensors. Combining the mass
and energy measurements for individual particles permits the collision velocity
to be determined which leads to the determination of particle size in situations
where the velocity is size dependent.

Broader Impact: This project is expected to lead to an active and comprehensive
research program that fuels several under-development undergraduate and graduate
level courses on micro/nano-electromechanical systems and combines them with
extensive laboratory experiments and demos. It also allows the PIs to actively
contribute in high school outreach programs conducted by the University of
Denver as well as employ and educate several undergraduate and graduate students
(preferably from underrepresented minorities) to participate in the research
activities.

