* 0800507
* Machining Accuracy Improvement Through Visual Control of an Active Display
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* John Ziegert, Clemson University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 06/30/2012
* USD 363,013.00

The goal of this project is to investigate a new class of spatial position
measurement systems where the sensing element observes an active target whose
properties are dynamically controlled by the user. It is anticipated that
digital sensing of a controllable array of pixel elements will allow high-
precision position and orientation information to be communicated for the
purpose of motion control of simultaneous-axis positioning. Therefore, the
objective of this research is to determine if the achievable resolution of such
an active image sensing system can be completely defined by the fundamental size
of the array element, the true element shape, viewable array size, system
magnification, and color depth controllable by the user. The approach is to
first formulate a physics-based relationship between achievable resolution and
the system parameters of interest, and to predict the system resolution over an
applicable range of test cases. Experiments will then be performed to observe
actual achievable resolution and verify the prediction. After resolution is
verified, the system will be tested on a two-axis positioning stage for
simultaneous axis closed-loop motion control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful
results of this research will enable design of a true closed-loop motion control
system for simultaneous axis positioning of multi-degree-of-freedom
manufacturing equipment. Such a design has the potential to eliminate the need
for complex and expensive axis error mapping, significantly reducing cost and
greatly increasing usability and applicability in a number of manufacturing
applications. Broader impacts of the research include: fundamental advancements
in accuracy and direct control of manufacturing equipment using vision detection
of an actively controlled display; intelligent pattern generation for ultrafine
position control; analysis and reduction of uncertainty in digital image
generation and sensing; optimal architecture of a new class of position sensing,
and; control of coupled systems with disparate update rates. The proposed
embodiment is low cost and has wide applicability for manufacturing equipment
positioning over a range of scales for any system requiring multi-dimensional
precision feedback. Results of this work will be disseminated to the engineering
community through journal and conference publications. Additionally, an
interactive website will be established to track the current state of work, and
to provide online simulation demonstrations of the fundamental ideas.