* 0800154
* Collaborative Research: Dissipation in Atomic-Scale Friction - A Coordinated Experimental and Modeling Study
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2008,11/30/2011
* Robert Carpick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 11/30/2011
* USD 213,684.00

The objective of this research is to understand the phenomenon of atomic stick-
slip friction, including the newly discovered transition to stable sliding with
ultralow energy dissipation. The research will be conducted through a closely-
coordinated experimental and modeling effort. The experiments will use advanced
atomic force microscopy (AFM) with well-defined samples and tips to measure
atomic-scale friction. This will be synergistically coupled to an atomistic
modeling effort that will employ physically representative potential models and
accelerated molecular dynamics (MD) to match the time scale of the experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide an understanding of atomic-scale friction
and energy dissipation at a new level of insight. It will also help to provide
new, fundamental, and widely applicable principles that govern the sliding
motion of nanoscale devices such as nano-electromechanical systems (NEMS) and
ultrahigh density probe-based data storage devices. The project will leverage
highly effective educational outreach programs at both Purdue University and the
University of Pennsylvania. Specific priorities include hosting ?research
experience for teachers? fellows, development of multi-purpose demonstration
modules based on AFM, and active participation in international collaborative
cyber-network communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;