* 0800606
* Lamina Emergent Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Larry Howell, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 06/30/2012
* USD 282,060.00

Lamina Emergent Mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;Howell and
Magleby&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective of this award is to develop methods for modeling and design of lamina
emergent mechanisms (LEMs). These special types of compliant mechanisms are
fabricated from planar materials (lamina) but are able to produce motion that
emerges out of the fabrication plane. The research will result in methods which
are general enough to apply across multiple size regimes and that can be
exploited in diverse applications. The research approach progresses from the
development of simple components and basic mechanisms, to the creation of
devices capable of complex motions and sophisticated tasks. LEM components and
basic mechanisms will be designed, fabricated, and tested to validate the
models, identify weaknesses, and demonstrate results. Deliverables include a
catalog of fundamental components and basic mechanisms, modeling and analysis
tools, demonstration and validation via hardware, documentation of research
results, engineering student education, and engineering research experiences for
pre-service teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will provide an opportunity to create compact, cost-effective devices
that are capable of accomplishing sophisticated mechanical tasks. Example
applications include orthopedic implants that have specified motion
characteristics but are small during insertion, and microelectromechanical
systems with precise out-of-plane motion. Devices made possible by the research
will offer the advantages of planar fabrication, a flat initial state, and
monolithic composition. The results will be widely disseminated to allow the
creation of commercial devices that have increased precision, reduced cost,
reduced weight, and improved recyclability. Graduate and undergraduate
engineering students and pre-service teachers will be involved in the research.
Students studying to be 6-12 technology and pre-engineering teachers will also
be engaged to provide them firsthand research experience that they can draw on
throughout their teaching careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;