* 0800399
* Earthquake Damage Detection in Buildings and Early Warning Based on Wave Travel Times
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Maria Todorovska, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2011
* USD 210,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract 0800399&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project
is to develop a novel methodology for remote structural health monitoring that
is robust when applied to actual structures and large amplitude response, and is
calibrated using data from full-scale structures. The focus of this project will
be on buildings. The methodology is based on detecting changes in travel time of
seismic waves propagating through the structure, that have been radiated by a
virtual source created by de-convolution of recorded vibration response. The
methodology will be calibrated using earthquake records from full-scale
buildings that have been damaged or could have been damaged by an earthquake.
Further, the effectiveness of this methodology for general condition monitoring
will be explored. The major advantages of this wave-based method are that it can
localize the damage with relatively small number of sensors, and that it is not
sensitive to the effects of soil-structure interaction and changes in other
structural boundary conditions.&lt;br/&gt;The availability of a validated
methodology that works with real structures and field data will greatly
facilitate the decision making during emergency response and recovery following
an earthquake, and will help reduce loss of life, injuries and monetary losses
caused by earthquakes. For example, a timely decision to evacuate an unsafe
building will reduce the risk of loss of life and injuries caused by potential
collapse of the weakened structure by its shaking from the aftershocks. The
methodology, with capability for general condition monitoring of structures,
will be a useful tool in managing the aging infrastructure. The results of this
project will be broadly publicized and reported in technical journals for
information dissemination. The project will also enhance the educational
infrastructure of the nation by training a graduate student working on her/his
Ph.D. thesis.&lt;br/&gt;