* 0800680
* Highthroughput Assembly of Nanowires, Nanotubes and Nanodevices on Silicon Platforms for Massively Parallel Nanoelectronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Dalibor Hodko, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2013
* USD 351,000.00

The semiconductor industry will soon be ramping for the 32nm node based on 193nm
lithography. As the scaling of silicon-CMOS is approaching its physical
limitations with the current patterning methods, alternative approaches for
better lithographic resolution are required to keep a $260 billion market
stable. Bio-inspired assembly of functional nanostructures and devices based on
micro-array and nano-array platforms is one of the main objectives of this work.
It has been a longstanding major challenge to efficiently integrate carbon
nanotube or nanowire building blocks into functional systems. Only a large-scale
integration technology will bring them the scientific and commercial importance
of present day silicon technology. High-throughput assembly of nanoelectronics
via a bottom-up approach using a top-down platform could become the method for
integration on silicon.&lt;br/&gt; Bio-inspired assembly is a revolutionary
approach to nanofabrication that could have major technological impact on
computing, storage and display applications. The students trained on this
project will be well positioned to pursue careers in academia and in the
semiconductor, display and storage industries. UCR serves a fast-growing region
of California that is highly diverse but lagging in educational and economic
opportunity; this project is designed to attract more young people to studies
and careers in science and technology. Through education and spin-off technology
commercialization, this project can completely change the face of engineering
education in our region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;