* 0800545
* Algebraic Theory  of Tensor Categories
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Dmitri Nikshych, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 115,821.00

In this project Nikshych will investigate structure of tensor categories and
their module categories from an algebraic point of view. Proposed problems
include the theory of graded tensor categories and central extensions, study of
module categories and categorical Morita equivalence, geometric analysis of
braided categories, and classification of semisimple tensor categories and Hopf
algebras. Most of the known examples of such categories appear from group-
theoretical constructions (such as, e.g., equivariant sheaves on groups) and
from representations of affine Lie algebras and quantum groups. Nikshych intends
to extend and formalize these constructions, to develop categorical analogues of
classical algebraic methods (extension theory of groups and Hopf algebras,
Morita duality of rings, geometry of metric groups and metric Lie algebras), and
to apply them to a structural study and classification of tensor
categories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tensor categories are ubiquitous in
representation theory and have applications in many areas of mathematics and
physics. They are used to describe various non-commutative, or "quantum"
symmetries, just like groups are used to describe classical symmetries. For
instance, tensor categories appear in conformal field theory, in the study of
invariants of knots&lt;br/&gt;and 3-manifolds, and in the theory of Jones-von
Neumann subfactors in operator algebras. A recent conjecture of Boyarchenko and
Drinfeld relates modular tensor categories with the theory of character sheaves.
The main goal of Nikshych's research project is to study algebraic properties,
structure, and classification of tensor categories and extend to a categorical
setting the theory of Hopf algebras and quantum groups.