* 0800237
* A Mechanistic Understanding of the Process-Property Relationships in an Alternative Electrospinning Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Laura Clarke, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 401,189.00

The research objective of this award is to make a paradigm shift in
electrospinning, from fiber growth originating at a droplet suspended from a
needle, to fiber growth from a large concentration of droplets on a charged
plate, in order to significantly increase mass throughput. Furthermore, this
methodology may result in the fabrication of smaller diameter fibers (~50 nm) by
controlled design of the plate surface (including interfacial tension and
surface architecture). In particular, the interaction between the fluid and
plate will be controlled by application of patterned or continuous self-
assembled monolayers. The overall deliverable of this work is to develop a
mechanistic understanding of processing-property relationships in this nanofiber
fabrication technique which will impact many diverse applications as described
below.

If successful, this research will have a technological impact on increasing
nanofiber fabrication throughput, allowing further tuning of fiber size, and
developing schemes to maximize property improvement with minimal particle
concentration in nanocomposite fibers. These goals are crucial to ultimately
utilizing nanofibers in diverse commercial applications such as tissue
engineering, filtration, fuel cells, and sensors. Therefore, the results will be
disseminated widely to support commercial development of highly engineered
fibrous substrates for myriad applications. In addition, graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students will benefit from this research program
by participating in interdisciplinary research in the laboratory setting.
Furthermore, the research will be integrated with an engineering senior design
course and education/research in a clean room facility with an associated course
on modern experimental techniques (such as lithography and high speed imaging -
examples of which will be taken from this project). Finally, graduate and
undergraduate students will participate as leaders in a polymer science/
engineering experience that is a significant part of a week-long program for
high-school students.