* 0800070
* The Regularity Method and Problems in Extremal Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2014
* Vojtech Rodl, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2014
* USD 368,911.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Rodl, Vojtech
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: DMS - 0800070&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Emory
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: The Regularity Method and Problems in Extremal
Combinatorics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes research in the
area of discrete mathematics with emphasis on Ramsey theory and extremal and
probabilistic combinatorics. The project seeks further development of the
Regularity Method that has had many successes over the past 30 years, and
applications of the method to a variety of problems in extremal combinatorics
and Ramsey theory. The PI also plans to use methods of probabilistic
combinatorics to attack some older problems in Ramsey theory. In the area of
quasi-randomness, one of the PI's long-term projects is to investigate the
properties of quasi-random sparse graphs and uniform
hypergraphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last two decades, the use of
probability has become one of the most powerful tools in discrete mathematics
and computer science. The understanding of discrete, combinatorial structures is
very important in modern science and technology. For instance, probabilistic
reasoning is crucial for the design of large networks and algorithms. In
discrete mathematics, one of the most successful techniques is the probabilistic
method, which enables one to prove results about deterministic objects. One of
the more recent techniques employs the idea of quasi-randomness. Quasi-random
properties that enable one to find and enumerate sub-objects of a given type are
of particular interest. The main part of this proposal aims to extend the
applicability of the current techniques to a broader class of combinatorial
structures. The results should lead to applications in various areas such as
phase transition, game theory or theoretical computer science.