* 0800155
* Collaborative Research:  Protocols for Wireless Networking and Multi-application Data Handling for Freeway Traffic Safety Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Ralph Robinson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 07/31/2012
* USD 154,985.00

The objective of this project is to develop a framework for vehicle-to-vehicle
information networking to support emerging Intelligent Transportation System
(ITS) applications aimed at improving safety and performance of surface
transportation networks. This project features two parallel, but interrelated,
research tracks. The first track focuses on the design of a multi-hop wireless
network architecture using the newly adopted Dedicated Short Range Communication
(DSRC) standard for inter-vehicle communications. The second track focuses on
the communication needs of ITS safety applications that may benefit from the
proposed networking features. Research is approached with a particular emphasis
on the needs of freeway safety systems such as collision and hazard warning
systems. Elements to be investigated include functions for data inquiry and
retrieval through the communication network, data filtering needs, data fusion
factoring the impacts of potential communication delays, data prioritization
needs, and decision control considering data quality. The project will develop a
simulation based virtual testbed which will not only help design the
communication functions, but also help assess the potential impacts of
alternative communication network designs on the operation of ITS applications
and on traffic behavior and safety. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Project
contributions in the networking front will include development of network
protocols for low-collision broadcasts in highly dynamic environments, design of
new context-aware multi-hop routing, and demonstration of feasibility and
performance of the developed protocols through a virtual testbed. Contributions
to ITS applications will include categorization and prioritization of data
communication needs, data fusion algorithms, and decision algorithms supporting
driver assistance systems by leveraging the ability for vehicles to communicate
with vehicles multiple hops away. The project?s broad impacts in advancing
science and engineering are in its potential to exploit emerging mobile network
technology for the development of information-based applications. In addition to
extending communication capabilities for ITS applications, the project will
provide an evolving data networking framework for supporting new applications as
they emerge. The research results will be also usable for the design and
commercialization of in-vehicle internet access. The project is further
envisioned as a stepping stone for the development of a joint multi-disciplinary
ITS research program across Michigan State University and the University of
Michigan. Such an effort will bridge research areas in electrical, computer
science, civil and industrial engineering. It will also provide unique
opportunities for academic researchers and transportation engineers to work
cooperatively on the development of information-based applications enhancing the
efficiency and security of the nation?s transportation infrastructure.