* 0800100
* Dynamics of Schroedinger Cocycles and Applications to Spectral Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* David Damanik, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 305,932.00

This project will investigate spectral problems with the help of dynamical
systems tools. The object of study are Schroedinger operators whose potentials
are obtained by sampling with a continuous function along the orbits of an
ergodic transformation on a compact metric space. This framework covers many
examples of interest, such as almost-periodic potentials and random potentials.
The spectral properties of such operators are closely linked to the dynamical
behavior of an energy-indexed family of SL(2,R)-valued cocycles over the given
ergodic transformation. Of interest are in particular the Lyapunov exponents
associated with these cocycles. The following spectral problems will be
investigated: purely absolutely continuous spectrum for quasi-periodic
potentials at small coupling for arbitrary irrational frequency, the genericity
of Cantor spectrum for suitable classes of transformations and sampling
functions, the irregularity of the Lyapunov exponent as a function of the
energy, spectral phenomena for perturbed quasi-periodic potentials, and
restrictions put on the potentials by the existence of absolutely continuous
spectrum.

Quantum mechanics is a fundamental branch of physics whose foundations were
established during the first half of the twentieth century. The study of quantum
mechanical phenomena in disordered environments has been an area of ongoing
active study since the 1950's. A landmark paper was published by Anderson in
1958. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1977 for his work on the
absence of diffusion for certain random lattice Hamiltonians. Another event of
importance was the discovery of quasicrystals by Shechtman in 1982, which was
reported in a 1984 paper he wrote jointly with Blech, Gratias and Cahn, and
which caused a paradigm shift in crystallography and solid state physics. The
mathematical study of electronic properties of disordered structures is carried
out within the framework of ergodic Schroedinger operators. Since the potentials
of these operators are defined dynamically, namely by sampling along the orbits
of one or more ergodic transformations, it is quite natural that dynamical
systems tools should prove to be useful in the study of such operators. The
field has recently taken major leaps after a number of very talented young
researchers from dynamical systems entered it. This has also lead to fruitful
collaborations across the disciplines and there is promise for further success
of these interactions.