* 0800932
* Advanced Structural Damage Detection Methods for Normal and Extreme Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2008,10/31/2012
* Anne Kiremidjian, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 10/31/2012
* USD 249,410.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to develop damage
diagnosis algorithms based on distributed decision-making whereby signals
collected locally at each sensing unit within a dense wireless sensor network
are processed, the information is fused at various network levels and only
assessments are transmitted to network endpoints. The approach includes the
development of data preprocessing and structural damage detection algorithm
development. The damage detection algorithms will utilize autoregressive and
wavelet based analysis for signal modeling. Damage detection will be achieved by
first defining features within signals and then tracking changes in the features
using statistical pattern classification methods. Localization and
quantification of damage will be addressed by using sensor fusion and feature
change statistics correlation to physical damage levels. Algorithm calibration
and verification will be performed with data obtained from recent laboratory and
field tests. These will include measurements from vibration, strain,
temperature, humidity and crack propagation experiments. Sample algorithms will
be embedded on microprocessors of existing wireless multi-sensor structural
sensing units and utilized in ongoing tests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of this research will greatly increase the capabilities of wireless structural
monitoring by providing diagnosis at the local component, subassembly and
overall structural levels. Furthermore, the algorithms will significantly reduce
the need for direct data transmission and thus reduce data communications rates.
The lower data rates and local embedded data processing will also greatly
decrease power consumption increasing potential field deployment of wireless
sensor networks. Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from the
research conducted under this research. The inclusion of one Hispanic graduate
student who has a diversity fellowship from Stanford University and a female
student to be supported by this project will increase the doctoral pool from
these underrepresented groups. A new MS/PhD level course will be initiated from
this research. The research team will involve students from local high schools
currently under the Stanford Chartered School system. Results from the research
will be disseminated through publications in journals, conferences and symposia.
&lt;br/&gt;