* 0800249
* Novel Structural Composites Using Surface Grown Carbon Nanotubes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Claudia Luhrs, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2011
* USD 231,518.00

The proposed work aims to grow carbon nanotubes, using a novel technique known
as Graphitic Structures by Design, on the surface of carbon fibers and fabrics
toward forming hierarchical composite structures. These composites will benefit
from the microscale reinforcement of carbon fibers and from the complementary
nanoscale reinforcement by the nanotubes. The synthesis process is rapid,
affordable, and offers controlled-growth of nanotubes and thus eliminates the
problems of dispersing nanotubes in epoxies. The proposed synthesis method is
the only technique that allows growth of carbon nanotubes on fiber surface at
relatively low temperature (450 oC) and thus does not damage the fibers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The produced composites will be investigated at the nano,
micro and macro scales, paving the way for next generation structural composites
with high strength, fracture toughness and deformability long sought for durable
infrastructure. The new composites will significantly enhance the shear strength
of fiber reinforced polymer pre-stressing strands used in structures (e.g.
bridges). Problems associated with anchoring these strands will be eliminated.
Four graduate students will participate in the research toward their degrees
requirements. Four multi-disciplinary courses are planned as part of the
proposed research activities to benefit students in Mechanical and Civil
Engineering departments. The two departments have more than 40% minority
population (Hispanic and Native American) and more than 20% of our students are
females. The results of this work will be communicated to students at
math/science charter high schools located in the state of New Mexico.
&lt;br/&gt;