* 0800233
* Interferometric Quantum Scattering in a Juggling Atomic Clock
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Kurt Gibble, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 06/30/2012
* USD 327,300.00

This experimental research program will precisely study quantum scattering of
ultracold cesium atoms in an atomic clock that juggles clouds of atoms. The
group has recently demonstrated a fundamentally new type of scattering
experiment in which a cesium atom, prepared in a superposition two states,
scatters off of atoms in another cloud launched in the atomic clock. Each state
of the superposition experiences a scattering phase shift, a measure of the
strength of the interaction between the atoms. By detecting only the scattered
part of each atom's wave function, the difference of the scattering phase shifts
is directly observed as a frequency shift of the clock. A unique feature of this
technique is that the frequency shift is independent of the atomic density. The
technique allows scattering measurements with atomic-clock-like accuracy.
Measurements of atomic scattering lengths with unprecedented accuracy are
expected. They will precisely study the scattering of the different ground-
substates of cesium atoms as a function of collision energy and magnetic field
to unambiguously constrain ultracold cesium-cesium interactions. They will
measure threshold effects and try to identify Feshbach and shape resonances.
They can also probe the frequency shifts due to juggling collisions, important
for improving the stability of future clocks. Highly precise measurements of
scattering phase shifts near a narrow Feshbach resonance may stringently
constrain the time variation of fundamental constants, such as the electron-
proton mass ratio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this program include
the training of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in many areas of
modern technology from lasers, electro-optics, radio-frequency and microwave
techniques, ultra-high vacuum, and atomic clocks and frequency control. This
group has significantly contributed to the development of atomic clocks,
including laser-cooled rubidium clocks, space clock design, juggling atomic
fountains, ultra-stable lasers for optical frequency clocks, and studies of
microwave cavities and cold collisions. The proposed research will lead to
higher accuracy and stability of the cesium clocks that realize the definition
of the SI second. The work will impact the understanding of ultracold atom-atom
interactions with a breakthrough in clarity and precision.