* 0800912
* GOALI: Computing Tip-Specimen Shape Interaction for Accurate, High Throughput Nano-Imaging of General Three-Dimensional Structures by Atomic Force Microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Xiaoping Qian, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 08/31/2012
* USD 320,237.00

0800912 PI: Qian

The research objective of this award is to develop theories and algorithms for
tip-specimen shape interaction modeling for an emerging class of scanning probe
microscopy (SPM) instruments. The resulting methods will support imaging general
3D structures with vertical sidewalls and undercut features at the nanometer or
even atomic scale. The current image produced by such a microscope is a
distorted representation of the specimen due to the dilation produced by the
finite size of the tip. The tip-specimen shape interaction must be modeled to
understand the relationship among tip shape, specimen surface, and the resulting
SPM image in order to remove the distortion of the image. This research uses a
tri-dexel for tip and specimen shape representation. Principled methods based on
3D mathematical morphology and their efficient implementation on graphics
hardware will be developed for fast SPM imaging simulation, accurate surface
reconstruction, and robust tip estimation. Experimental validation will draw
specimens from state-of-the-art semiconductor and data storage devices.

If successful, the results of this research will provide a means to understand
and correct potential dimensional bias in SPM imaging of general 3D
nanostructures. It will lead to high accuracy and high throughput 3D
reconstruction in nano-imaging of these structures. The collaboration with Veeco
and NIST provide ample opportunity to testbed these methods on highly reentrant
and morphologically complex nanostructures typically found in industrial
settings. It can positively impact the entire spectrum of industries that use
SPM such as semiconductor, data storage, MEMS, and molecular imaging industries.
It will thus provide a metrological basis for nanoscale manufacturing. Through
its integrated research, education and outreach activities, this project will
provide advanced knowledge in mathematical morphology and nano-imaging for
students from high school to graduate school and will increase domestic
students' interest in science and engineering resulting in strengthened
competitiveness in the global workforce.

