* 0800929
* Collaborative Research: Energetics of DNA Tangling in Complex Nucleoprotein Assemblies
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2014
* Stephen Levene, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,363,633.00

Large macromolecular assemblies involving multiple proteins and genomic DNA are
important themes in biological mechanism and regulation in all organisms. An
integral aspect of many systems involved in genetic recombination, gene
expression, DNA replication, and DNA repair is that proteins bound at different
locations along a single DNA molecule interact through looping and wrapping of
the bound DNA. Understanding the detailed structure and interactions of these
large assemblies poses a major challenge to structural biologists because the
intact protein-DNA complexes are too large for high-resolution techniques such
as x-ray crystallography or NMR. Other techniques such as single-molecule
experiments require at least a low-resolution model of the complex for their
interpretation. Tangle analysis, a branch of mathematical knot theory, in
conjunction with difference-topology experiments has become a powerful emerging
approach for the analysis of looped nucleoprotein assemblies both in vitro and
in vivo. At present, tangle analysis provides only two-dimensional information
in the form of solutions to topological equations; moreover, the solutions to
many problems of interest are often not unique. Knowledge of the relative
energies of tangle solutions is essential in order to evaluate the physical and
biological plausibility of a particular structural model. Tangle analysis will
be fused with semi-analytical and numerical calculations of DNA-loop free
energies to develop a theoretical description of the structure of complex
nucleoprotein assemblies. These new methods will be implemented in the computer
program KnotPlot, a powerful and extensible multi-platform tool for visualizing
and manipulating physical knots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insights into the structures of looped protein-DNA
assemblies are crucial for developing new molecular strategies for treating
cancer, understanding the immune system, and ameliorating the biological effects
of aging. These insights can be gained from knowledge of the geometry and
energetics of DNA bound by multiple protein molecules and are critical for
understanding underlying principles of biological mechanism and regulation. The
importance of DNA looping in living cells is underscored by an abundance of
accessory proteins that facilitate looping by effectively altering the
mechanical properties of DNA. The team will apply a mathematical and
computational approach along with novel biophysical techniques to elucidate the
relationship between biological structure and mechanism in Mu transposition, a
model system for retroviral integrases such as that of human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV). Because these methods can be applied both in living cells as well
as in solution, it is possible to investigate the role of the intracellular or
intranuclear environment and intrinsic levels of DNA-bending accessory proteins,
in regulating loop-mediated protein-DNA interactions. These insights will
advance our understanding of biological regulatory networks and pathways, which
will have direct benefit to multiple areas of molecular
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;