* 0800030
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: The Integrity of Geosynthetic Elements of Waste Containment Barrier Systems Subject to Large Settlement and Seismic Loading
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Patrick Fox, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* John Daniel
* 08/31/2010
* USD 272,252.00

The objective of this project is to investigate the ability of modern landfill
waste containment systems to maintain their integrity when subject to waste
settlement, earthquake loading, and loads from operational practices. The
researchers will also examine design strategies and details to mitigate these
potential threats to containment system integrity. Landfills are an essential
component of our nation?s civil infrastructure. Modern landfills rely upon
sophisticated engineered liner and cover systems composed of soil and
geosynthetic (i.e., polymer) materials to contain the waste and waste by-
products and thereby protect the environment. A breach of a landfill containment
system can result in serious and costly environmental impacts. While it is
widely recognized that waste settlement can apply stress to landfill liner and
cover systems, the impact of the large waste settlement typically associated
with solid waste landfills on the integrity of these systems is generally not
considered in current design practice. The impact of seismic loading on
containment system integrity is generally considered in a gross empirical
fashion; however, current methods do not quantify the loads applied by a seismic
event to the containment system. Furthermore, damage that does occur to liner
and cover system elements may be hidden, with no surface expression to alert the
engineer, operator, owner, or regulator to the problem. The objectives of this
collaborative research project will be achieved through: 1) experimental
measurement of the load-deformation behavior of key geosynthetic/geosynthetic
and geosynthetic/soil interfaces, including their response under dynamic
loading, 2) development of realistic computational models that describe the
load-deformation behavior of these elements and interfaces, 3) numerical
implementation of the computational models to predict the behavior of waste
containment systems subject to waste settlement and seismic loads, and 4)
application of the numerical method to typical landfill configurations to
identify conditions that pose a threat to the integrity of landfill liner and
cover systems and develop strategies for mitigating these conditions.

This project has the potential to transform the way landfills are designed in
engineering practice. The research conducted on this project is expected to lead
to improved procedures for evaluating the integrity of landfill liner and cover
systems; more realistic design methods; enhanced confidence in the long term
reliability of landfills; improved landfill construction procedures; and,
improved product design for geosynthetics used in landfill construction. The
societal benefits of more realistic and reliable waste containment system
designs should not be underestimated. Moving away from the crude and largely
unsubstantiated design criterion currently used in practice and toward a more
rational methodology will be a major advance in landfill design and help to
enhance public acceptance of and confidence in waste containment systems. This
project, funded in part under the Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) program, is a collaboration between two industry/academia
teams: Ohio State University and CETCO (a leading geosynthetic manufacturer) and
Arizona State University and Geosyntec Consultants (a leading geoenvironmental
consulting firm). The GOALI workshops proposed for the third year of the project
will disseminate the research findings to a broad spectrum of stakeholders,
including the USEPA, the California Integrated Waste Management Board and State
Water Resources Control Board, geosynthetic manufacturers, landfill owners
including major waste management firms and municipal governments, and
environmental consulting firms.