* 0800492
* Fourier Analysis Techniques, Operators, and Function Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Rodolfo Torres, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2012
* USD 192,341.00

This proposal focuses on new and challenging problems in various areas of
Fourier analysis and the study of singular integrals. Several of the problems
involve mutilinear operators. Torres will work on problems involving norm
estimates for variable coefficient bilinear singular transforms and bilinear
pseudodifferential operators, maximal functions for the multilinear Calder√≥n-
Zygmund theory, multilinear weights, and multilinear strongly singular integral
operators. In particular, several issues about the regularity of the symbols and
kernels of the operators investigated, end-point estimates, Lebesgue and Sobolev
space estimates, and related problems will be considered. The PI will also carry
on research on the characterization of various spaces using information about
the samples of functions. Finally, Torres will continue to investigate
mathematical formulations that quantify quasi-ordered geometries in connection
with Fourier analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quite often the solution
of a hard problem in analysis cannot be achieved until effective ways to
decompose functions and transformations are found. Fourier analysis decomposes a
function into a superposition of waves oscillating in time with specific
frequencies. Other related time-frequency decompositions refine this analysis by
codifying information at multiple scales or levels of resolution. This permits
the understanding of more interesting properties of functions and the operations
that transform them. The techniques have established themselves as very valuable
tools in many areas of science and engineering. Applications are found in
compression of information, audio filtering, satellite photography, and other
forms of image processing. The extreme effectiveness in applications of the
time-frequency techniques has become evident through research originally done in
mathematical analysis. New progress in this area is expected to continue to have
impact in problems in other disciplines where there is a need to quantify
complicated multi-scale information and organize it in a coherent
way.&lt;br/&gt;