* 0800542
* VORTEX 2:  Storm-scale Baroclinity Using Fine-scale Observations and Numerical Models
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* David Dowell, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 09/30/2014
* USD 719,197.00

This award is one component of a mutli-investigator effort known as the
Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment 2 (VORTEX 2).
VORTEX 2 is a follow on to VORTEX 1 whose field phase was conducted during the
Spring of 1994 and 1995. The VORTEX 1 advanced knowledge of the kinematic
structures of tornadic and nontornadic storms and provided some hints as to the
sensitivity of the evolution of supercell storms and tornadogenesis to very fine
spatial scale heterogeneity. The VORTEX 2 research objectives will focus on the
genesis and maintenance of tornadoes and on the structure of the near wind field
of the tornado. The VORTEX 2 is being conducted in conjunction with the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and it will involve an unprecedented
observational network of stationary and mobile facilities that include Doppler
radars, surface and upper air observations. . &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supercell
thunderstorms are known to contain potentially significant thermodynamic and
kinematic gradients, many of which are suspected to be relevant to low-level
mesocyclogenesis. Owing to the strong gradients in virtual potential temperature
that have been resolved in prior numerical studies, storm-scale baroclinity is
suspected to play a role in the baroclinic generation of horizontal vorticity,
which can be tilted and stretched by the principal updraft of the storm in some
circumstances. Though the relatively sparse in-situ observations gathered in the
field to this point have shed some light on the issue of baroclinity, these
observations are typically poor in spatial resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the research under this award follows from the
introduction of newly-developed "StickNet" technology, an array of rapidly-
deployable surface stations. These systems will be deployed during VORTEX 2 to
address the issue of storm-scale baroclinity both from the standpoint of
tornadogenesis and the verification/improvement of storm-scale numerical weather
prediction models. These measurements will provide unprecedented detail of
variations in thermodynamic and kinematic quantities in close proximity to
supercell mesocyclones which, in combination with air parcel trajectories
calculated from dual-Doppler analyses and numerical models, will permit the
construction of a vorticity budget for air parcels entering the low-level
mesocyclone. StickNet measurements will also provide insight into what
properties of multi-storm interactions are favorable to tornadogenesis and
tornado maintenance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The StickNet data also will be used
to validate numerical storm-scale models and also will provide a basis for
verification and improvement of existing methods of thermodynamic retrieval
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the study will be felt
in a number of ways. A number of graduate and undergraduate students will be
utilized in the planning and execution of StickNet data collection. Some of
these students have background in fields other than meteorology (e.g., wind
engineering), and therefore will have the opportunity to expand their knowledge
base. Given the typical ethnic diversity of the student population at Texas Tech
University, it is expected that traditionally underrepresented groups,
particular those of Hispanic descent, will have full opportunity to participate
in the StickNet component of VORTEX2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of
the research is the improvement of severe thunderstorm and tornado forecasts,
both through real-time observation and short-term numerical modeling. This
increase in forecast skill is of utmost importance for the protection of life
and property. Through the broad dissemination of research results in journal
publications and conference presentations, all research objectives that are met
will have significant impact in the community.&lt;br/&gt;