* 0800560
* Material Effects and Tool Wear in Vibration-Assisted Machining
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2008,02/29/2012
* Thomas Dow, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 02/29/2012
* USD 419,136.00

The research objective of this award is to test the hypothesis that micrometer-
amplitude vibration of a diamond cutting tool will reduce forces, improve
surface finish and decrease wear of the tool. Material science and mechanical
engineering faculty and students will measure and model the material removal
process and define the parameters that control tool forces, tool wear and
surface finish for the selected materials. Materials have been chosen to provide
a range of physical and chemical properties that will test proposed concepts of
material flow, temperature generation and wear mechanisms. Unique techniques for
measuring the chip geometry, surface finish, tool edge sharpness and diffusion
of the carbon from the tool to the chip/workpiece will be used to describe the
details of the process.

If successful, this project will quantify the vibration conditions needed to
create high-quality surfaces on materials such as steel, glass or ceramics that
were thought to rapidly wear diamond tools. Steel is the most frequently used
engineering material due to its excellent properties, availability and low cost.
A national and global demand for ultra-precision steel parts and systems with
sub-micrometer accuracy exists in automotive, medical and optical industries.
Precision glass and ceramic components are also in high demand. In addition,
this research project provides the opportunity for graduate and undergraduate
students at North Carolina State University to learn the details and extend the
capability of ultraprecision machining. The results of the work will be
presented at technical meetings and published in scientific journals. The
research experience provided to each of these groups will improve the quality of
the science and engineering education.