* 0800968
* Loewner Evolutions and Quasiconformal Mappings
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Steffen Rohde, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2012
* USD 448,356.00

The principal investigator will study conformal mappings generated by the
Loewner differential equation, and random conformal and quasiconformal mappings.
The Loewner equation relates a continuously increasing sequence of planar simply
connected domains to a real-valued function, the driving term of the equation.
The correspondence is by means of conformal maps onto a standard domain (such as
a disc). Through this mechanism complicated two-dimensional shapes can be
encoded by seemingly simpler objects, namely, real-valued functions of a real
variable. The correspondence between a shape and its driving term is complicated
and leaves many open questions. The aim of this project is to provide a better
understanding of this correspondence. For instance, the principal investigator
will study the continuity of the sets under deformations of the driving terms.
In light of Oded Schramm's SLE and the spectacular work of Lawler, Schramm,
Werner, Smirnov and others, random driving terms (in particular, Brownian
motion) are especially interesting and will be a focus of the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conformal mappings are often used to change coordinates
from one region to a simpler region, such as a disc. They have applications in
many areas within mathematics and to several branches of physics. On small
scale, conformal maps look like rotations and dilations. Hence it is plausible
that rotation- and dilation-invariant mathematical models of physical phenomena
(e.g., Brownian motion, percolation, crystal growth, electrodeposition) are
invariant under conformal coordinate changes. Theoretical physicists have long
used this heuristic and obtained predictions for many of these models. Oded
Schramm's discovery of the stochastic Loewner evolution (SLE, the Loewner
equation driven by one-dimensional Brownian motion) and Smirnov's work on
percolation have put this philosophy on a firm mathematical basis. The results
obtained in recent years have generated a lot of excitement in both the
mathematics and the physics communities. They have also created a new bridge
between the two disciplines. A goal of this research is to shed new light on the
mathematical side of this emerging theory.&lt;br/&gt;