* 0800648
* Collaborative Research: Laboratory Study of the Mechanics and Physical Properties of the San Andreas Fault and 3D SAFOD Volume
* GEO,EAR
* 08/13/2006,12/31/2009
* Harold Tobin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 12/31/2009
* USD 72,216.00

0545548&lt;br/&gt;Tobin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal goal of the SAFOD
borehole, and one of the main motivations for the NSF EarthScope initiative, is
to gather critical data needed to understand fault mechanics and earthquakes.
Through sampling, down-hole measurements, and long-term monitoring, the SAFOD
experiment will provide data to test key hypotheses regarding long-term fault
strength, earthquake nucleation, and fault slip behavior. However, the borehole
itself will penetrate only a small part of the crustal volume surrounding the
San Andreas Fault zone, and will sample only a subset of lithologies present in
the subsurface. Although SAFOD will provide observations of the shallow
seismogenic zone of a major plate bounding fault in unprecedented detail,
additional characterization of rock physical properties for the 3-D volume
containing SAFOD and the San Andreas Fault are critical for addressing several
of the most important outstanding questions in fault mechanics and earthquake
physics. These include: 1) What causes spatial variability in fault slip
behavior and seismicity? 2) Are elevated fluid pressures within the SAFOD 3-D
volume plausible? 3) How are geophysical observations such as low velocity or
resistivity linked to in situ conditions of stress and fluid pressure? 4) What
do thermal data in the shallow subsurface tell us about the fault energy budget?
&lt;br/&gt;We are conducting a comprehensive study of the processes and
properties that affect mechanical behavior and transport properties of fault
zones. The research involves laboratory measurements of SAFOD core and outcrop
samples. These measurements are designed to characterize the deformation
processes and physical properties of rocks from the 3-D SAFOD volume. This work
complements ongoing work on SAFOD samples. The data we collect will inform
regional geologic, hydrologic, and thermal models. &lt;br/&gt;Our research is
designed to address the following key objectives: &lt;br/&gt;- Determine the
frictional strength and constitutive properties for SAFOD core material and host
rock adjacent to the San Andreas Fault. &lt;br/&gt;- Test the hypothesis that
the upper stability transition from aseismic to seismic faulting is associated
with a change in mineralogy of fault gouge and/or host rock. &lt;br/&gt;-
Develop experimental constraints necessary to test 1) the hypothesis that the
San Andreas Fault is weak in an absolute and relative sense, and 2) models of
long-term pore pressure generation and dynamic fault weakening. &lt;br/&gt;-
Provide constraints on processes relevant to the energy budget of faulting:
including frictional heat generation, advective heat transport, and thermal
refraction. &lt;br/&gt;- Investigate the relationship between frictional
strength (including healing and steady-state velocity dependence), seismic wave
speed, and permeability. &lt;br/&gt;- Investigate the stress and pore pressure
dependence of P and S wave speeds and their anisotropies in fault zone and wall
rock, to evaluate and improve seismic-attribute proxies for pore pressure,
effective stress, frictional strength, fluid content, and other properties
inferred from borehole log and surface seismic data. &lt;br/&gt;This research
will provide an understanding of processes that govern the strength and
stability of major faults. In addition, we will measure those properties of
fault rock that determine remotely sensed geophysical signatures, which is
important for better assessment of earthquake hazard and for linking
observations of fault behaviors with fundamental physical processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;