* 0800575
* Collaborative Research: Workforce Management in Labor-Intensive Service Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Haipeng Shen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 06/30/2012
* USD 269,601.00

Abstract for &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: &lt;br/&gt;Workforce
Management in Labor Intensive Service Operations?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noah Gans
and Haipeng Shen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research seeks to
advance the state of knowledge concerning many of the fundamental drivers of
performance in call centers and other labor-intensive services. An important aim
of this work is to integrate the use of rigorous and robust statistical methods
into the development and analysis of capacity-management problems. One set of
projects develops methods that explicitly account for arrival-rate uncertainty
when making capacity-planning decisions. Distributional forecasting techniques
are integrated with stochastic-programming alternatives to traditional,
deterministic scheduling approaches. This stochastic-programming approach allows
for forecast updates, along with recourse actions. A second set of projects is
devoted to better understanding and managing the factors that drive agents'
service-time distributions. Regression analysis techniques are used to more
systematically understand how learning, shift fatigue, cross-training, and other
factors affect the distribution of service times. The results inform models of
short-term staffing decisions, as well as of longer-term hiring and training,
that more properly account for service-time heterogeneity across agents and over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this data-driven approach will provide
at least two benefits. First, a detailed examination of the data will help to
characterize important features of workforce management problems that are not
well addressed by the current state of the art, either practically or
theoretically. Second, the careful application of advanced statistical
techniques will enable the effective solution of these problems. The research
will lead to the development of new tools required for a detailed, rigorous
analysis of these service data. The data analysis, in turn, will enable the
recasting of traditional workforce management models and the formulation of new
problems of theoretical and practical interest.