* 0800500
* Interactive Ubiquitous Visualization of Construction Progress Monitoring with D4AR (4 Dimensional Augmented Reality) Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Silvio Savarese, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 10/31/2010
* USD 340,000.00

Systematic progress monitoring through rigorous identification, processing, and
visualization of progress discrepancies between planned and actual performances,
is a necessity for successful project management. It provides an early warning
to project managers and allows them to diagnose performance problems and to take
corrective actions in a timely manner to reduce the impacts of progress
discrepancies. However, systematic implementation of progress monitoring has
significant challenges because: 1) Current practice is time-consuming since it
needs extensive data extraction; 2) Quality of the manually collected data maybe
low and subjective; 3) Existing methods are also non-systematic; 4) Reports can
be visually complex and thus not effectively represent multivariable progress
information (i.e., schedule, cost, and performance) in a holistic manner nor
intuitively reflect information pertaining to spatial aspects of the
construction progress and their associated complexities; 5) Furthermore, current
reporting methods increase the time required to describe and explain progress
situation in coordination meetings and in turn could delay decision making.
Thus, with current mechanism, it may be not be easy to understand the progress
situation clearly and quickly. The proposed research will therefore focus on
addressing these challenges through an interactive visualization of construction
progress monitoring using 4 Dimensional Augmented Reality (D4AR) models.

In the proposed research, progress deviations (e.g., schedule, cost and
performance) would be visualized through superimposition of planned models onto
site photographs using different visualization techniques such as traffic light
and weather metaphors, fish eye, and x-ray. Within the proposed framework, a
project manager would be able to: 1) use the planned model as a baseline for
progress monitoring; 2) collect progress data from site photographs during
construction; 3) automatically analyze images and quantify built components; 4)
automatically measure discrepancies between planned and built progress; and 5)
visually represent progress deviations through superimposition of planned models
with on-site photographs combining interactive visual imageries. In such an
environment, project manager would be able to walk through or browse through a
rich visual dataset of augmented progress photographs , analyze progress, make
control decisions and effectively communicate with project participants. To
achieve these objectives, the proposed research methodology will consist of a
formal cycle of data collection, formalization, testing, validation, and
refinement. This will involve integrating research, education and practice at
every stage of the project. Through this integration, students will gain
valuable experiences by having industry partners involved in the process. In
order to reach educators, practitioners, researchers, and students who were not
involved in the proposed activity, broad dissemination of the project results
will be actively sought. Ultimately, in order to make the research truly
successful, involvement from a diverse group of students and practitioners, in
terms of economic, social, cultural, racial, and gender backgrounds, will be a
priority. This diversity will provide the research project insights from
different point of views, providing new perspectives for all involved.

