* 0800307
* Continuously Graded Cementitious Material for Blast Protection of Structures
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Yiannis Andreopoulos, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Y. Grace Hsuan
* 04/30/2012
* USD 307,241.00

Recent terrorist attacks in urban areas involving the use of explosives have
exposed the vulnerability of buildings and other infrastructure to blasts.
Structures directly in the path of the blast pressure wave are subjected to
high-intensity and short-duration pressure loading. Because many important
structures and facilities have been designed without considering such loads,
developing and implementing blast mitigation strategies for existing buildings
and other infrastructure, has become a critical priority. The central idea of
this research is to study the concept of a protective system which provides
dissipation to the energy of an incident blast pressure wave using geometric
effects and irreversible compaction of material. A cementitious material, with
continuously graded impedance (resistance) to the blast pressure wave
propagation will be developed. It is proposed to engineer the material
resistance to shock wave propagation to achieve optimum energy dissipation
through geometric effects and irreversible compaction of the material. The
outcome of the proposed research will form the basis for designing a
cementitious material for use in blast mitigation strategies in practical
applications. The work outlined in this proposal deals with three key issues:
(a) experimental determination of the blast response of material; (b) numerical
modeling of shock response of material; and (c) material production techniques
for material with graded properties.

The educational component is primarily focused on minority students. The
research will benefit from the presence on the campus of many programs already
in operation to enhance the participation of underrepresented groups in science
and engineering.