* 0800213
* Limiting Growth Mechanisms and Continuous Manufacturing of Aligned Carbon Nanotube Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2008,11/30/2010
* Brian Wardle, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 11/30/2010
* USD 350,000.00

This research will seek to enable a manufacturing technology for continuous
large-scale production of aligned carbon nanotube (CNT) films by chemical vapor
deposition (CVD), and for integration of these films in new hybrid material
architectures including structural composites. A detailed study of catalyst
activation, evolution, deactivation, and reactivation for substrate-bound growth
of CNT films will contribute to a broader understanding of the growth mechanism
of CNTs by CVD, particularly how the characteristics of a CNT forest depend on
process variables in each of four critical processing stages. A predictive
mathematical model will be created using our characterization data, particularly
real-time kinetics measurements and spatial mapping of CNT forests by X-ray
scattering. This will enable production of CNT forests having specified
tolerances on diameter, length, and structural quality, for both batch-style and
continuous processing. Direct integration of aligned CNT films to create nano-
engineered advanced composites will overcome drawbacks of composites which are
made by dispersion and mixing, and will serve as a testbed for evaluating the
relationship between CNT characteristics and bulk engineering properties.
Industry involvement in the continuing collaboration between PI?s through MIT?s
NECST Consortium provides a strong application context for the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educationally, growth and manufacturing process
models will be incorporated in the PI?s new graduate course on nanomaterials
manufacturing at the University of Michigan, and the heated platform reactor
used for our batch-style studies will be used in new undergraduate laboratory
exercises in synthesis and characterization of CNTs and in design of
experiments. Interactive lectures to high school students will introduce
nanomaterials and feature application brainstorming and physics modeling
challenges. Further, we will create visualizations such as high-resolution
electron microscope images of CNTs and videos of CNT growth, as already
pioneered by the PI?s nanobliss effort, to engage and educate broader and
younger audiences.&lt;br/&gt;