* 0800568
* Information Transfer in Biological Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2015
* Wojciech Szpankowski, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 06/30/2015
* USD 480,000.00

With the high-level goal of understanding the role of information in biological
systems, the proposed project focuses on a number of important problems at the
interface of mathematics, biology, and information science -- mathematical
modeling and analytical techniques for information flow in biological systems,
extraction of signals (informative substructures) in biological sequences, and
quantification and extraction of signals in biological networks. These problems
are motivated by structural and functional characterization of biological
abstractions, with significant implications for understanding disease and
intervention. There are foundational mathematical challenges at the heart of
these problems. To address these, the project introduces the concept of mutation
and Darwin channels to model flow of genetic information. It uses random walks
on nilpotent Lie groups to find significant subsequences and to solve the
capacity of the deletion channel. It targets a range of analytic and
probabilistic techniques for discovering motifs and informative structures in
biological sequences and networks.

Information is at the core of virtually every aspect of our lives and shapes our
universe in fundamental ways -- understanding and harnessing it holds the key to
foundational advances in life sciences. Information contained in the genes and
their interrelationships is what `informs' the organism and manifests in its
form. Essential functions of living organisms involve generation, consumption,
processing, preservation, and duplication of information. Quantification,
representation, and flow of information in biosystems, which form the essential
components of this project, pose important problems with tremendous impact. In
addition to analytical methods, algorithms, and software for understanding the
role of information in biological systems, this project also makes significant
contributions to education at undergraduate and graduate levels in the form of
instructional material, and outreach to underrepresented groups through focused
recruitment and retention efforts.