* 0800173
* Non-linear Dynamics of Traveling Wave Magnetophoresis for Applications in Colloidal Separation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Lawrence Virgin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 06/30/2012
* USD 286,000.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate the non-linear dynamics
of traveling wave magnetophoresis for applications in colloidal separation. The
traveling magnetic field wave used in the proposed work is generated by
superimposing a uniform rotating magnetic field with the local magnetic field
near an array of micro-magnets. When the external field rotates at a low
frequency, the magnetic beads become locked into the potential energy minima and
move synchronously with the traveling wave. At higher frequencies, the magnetic
beads tend to slip out of the potential energy minima, causing the bead to move
less quickly or stop moving altogether. The overall goals of this proposal are
to investigate the unexpected behavior recently observed in this ?slipping?
regime, in which the beads display strongly non-linear transport behavior, and
to use this non-linearity to explore a novel application in magnetic separation.
Numerical simulations will be a dominant tool in this study both for
interpreting the experimental results and for guiding future applications of
this technique. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the proposed work will lead
not only to new methods for sorting magnetic beads based on size and/or the type
of biological micro-organism attached to the bead, but will also reveal insight
into unresolved problems in first order non-linear dynamical systems. Due to the
highly interdisciplinary nature of this work, graduate and undergraduate
students will have broad exposure to the fields of dynamics, electricity and
magnetism, microfabrication, chemistry, biology and computer science. Minority
studies from Historically Black College and Universities (HBCU?s) or
Historically Minority Universities (HMU?s), will be included in this work for
two summer months. In addition, undergraduate students from Duke University will
participate in this research through the Duke University Pratt Fellows program.
&lt;br/&gt;