* 0800117
* Explicit Design Space Decomposition with Adaptive Sampling for Design Optiimization and Uncertainty Quantification
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2011
* Samy Missoum, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 04/30/2011
* USD 181,566.00

0800117&lt;br/&gt;PI: Missoum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of
this award is to develop a method to aid designers and engineers in optimizing
complex products under uncertainty. The design of complex systems such as a
vehicle or an engine often requires very long computational times due to the
presence of nonlinear behaviors. Because optimization requires repeated calls to
a simulation code (e.g., crash analysis) to investigate a multi-dimensional
design space, it is critical to use a sound methodology to select relevant
design configurations in the search for the best solutions. The proposed
approach, referred to as explicit design space decomposition, partitions the
design space into regions whose boundaries, which are defined explicitly in
terms of the variables, separate "acceptable" and "unacceptable" designs. These
boundaries are constructed using a Support Vector Machine (SVM) which is able to
define multi-dimensional, disjoint, and non-convex regions. This gives insight
to the designer through a direct correspondence between regions of the design
space and specific behaviors of a system. In addition, accurate SVM-based
boundaries can be obtained by adaptively adding relevant samples corresponding
to specific designs. This approach has the potential to limit trial-and-error
steps and reduce the total computational time. Finally, explicit boundaries are
useful for problems with discontinuous behaviors such as buckling and provide a
straightforward calculation of probabilities of failure. All in all, this
approach allows the designer to reach better and more reliable designs in fewer
design iterations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of
this research will provide a general framework for design optimization and
design under uncertainty of nonlinear problems characterized by, but not limited
to, discontinuous responses and long simulation times (e.g., design for
crashworthiness). The generality of the proposed approach will make it
applicable to traditional industries (e.g., automobile and aerospace) as well as
fields such as the design of biomedical devices. The reduction of trial-and-
error steps will, if successful, drastically reduce design cycle times and cost.
The results of this research will be included in graduate coursework and
disseminated through technical publications and presentations. In addition, this
approach is expected to have a significant impact on industry, resulting in
streamlined design processes and better products.&lt;br/&gt;