* 0800501
* Collaborative Research: Smart Shoes and Smart Socks for Abnormal Gait Diagnosis and Assistance
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2011
* Masayoshi Tomizuka, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2011
* USD 299,782.00

This research will investigate fundamental issues needed to develop advanced
sensing and mechatronic technologies for mobile assistive devices that will
assist elderly people and patients who have totally or partially lost the
capability to walk and/or assumed an inefficient abnormal pattern of movement.
The two new sensor systems to be developed are: 1) smart shoes, developed at the
University of California at Berkeley, and 2) smart socks, developed at the
University of Maryland. The proposed analysis and recognition method will have
the following capabilities: 1) identification of the phases of human motion, 2)
quantification of the abnormality of a patient's gait, and 3) estimation of the
human joint torques for the feedback control of assistive devices. The
effectiveness of motion phase identification will be evaluated on human subjects
who exhibit a normal gait as well as those with an abnormal gait through
clinical tests. Results will be utilized in a variety of ways such as providing
feedback information to patients to help them resume a normal gait. The research
program also involves an international component, working with researchers at
Tsukuba University, Japan on integration of these sensors and motion analysis
strategies into the exoskeleton 'HAL', the most sophisticated exoskeleton
available today to assist patients. The project team is multidisciplinary and
international, and it includes Principal Investigators from two leading
engineering schools in the United States, Dr. Byl with expertise in physical
therapy, Professor Y. Sankai of Tsukuba University, graduate student researchers
and undergraduate researchers. The broader impacts of this research include
contributions to betterment of the quality of life of physically impaired people
as well as elderly people having walking problems. It will also provide a
powerful tool to physical therapists in the diagnosis of gait of patients.
Experimental test setups will provide an ideal environment for undergraduate
students to have mechatronics experience, and will be made available to our
undergraduate laboratory course. Graduate students will travel to Japan to have
academic and social experience in a culture different from those in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a US-Japan research project on sensor for
the safe and secured society under the NSF-JST agreement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;