* 0800979
* Universality in random matrices and integrable systems: asymptotic analysis via Riemann-Hilbert and d-bar methods
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2008,09/30/2013
* Kenneth T-R McLaughlin, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 09/30/2013
* USD 430,673.00

McLaughlin's research concerns the development of new methods for the asymptotic
analysis of Riemann-Hilbert problems and d-bar problems, and to apply the full
body of such techniques to cutting edge (as well as classical) problems in a
range of fields including random matrix theory, nonlinear partial differential
equations, orthogonal polynomials, and asymptotic combinatorics. One driving
feature is the exploration of universal behavior in these areas. McLaughlin's
previous work in nonlinear partial differential equations has concerned the
study of violent oscillations in somewhat specialized ``integrable'' nonlinear
partial differential equations. Very recently, conjectures have emerged,
analogous to the famous universality conjectures in random matrix theory, which
posit that the microscopic generation of these oscillations is universal over
entire families of nonlinear partial differential equations. In random matrix
theory, universality refers to the phenomenon that eigenvalue statistics of
random matrices tend, as the size of the matrices grow to infinity, to behave in
a universal way, independent of the exact form of the probabilistic laws used to
generate the random matrices. McLaughlin proposes to extend the current realm of
universality substantially, in nonlinear partial differential equations and
random matrix theory, and to probe the limits of universality: what conditions
on V are sufficient to see a deviation from the typical universal behavior? A
variety of research projects are also proposed whose aim is the training of
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding and eventual control
of complicated phenomena is a primary goal of scientific research. Through this
fundamental goal we enhance our ability for technological advancement. Physical
models for complex nonlinear phenomena often boil down to the study of partial
differential equations in parameter regimes where their solutions exhibit
singularly wild behavior. In other instances, statistical theories with great
amount of randomness are developed to understand complex phenomena.
``Universality'' refers to robustness of certain phenomena, and to the counter-
intuitive prevalence of the same phenomena across a wide array of different
physical situations and models. Two examples: (1) Waves in the ocean can
organize themselves into "trains" transporting energy, and analogous trains are
also observed in laser beams propagating in optical fibers. (2) Statistical
fluctuations of nuclear resonance levels measured in the 1950s led to a new type
of universality, and the same statistical behavior has been observed in a wide
variety of situations modeled with randomness, as far-flung as the statistics of
spacings between parked cars! Scientists' ability to predict dramatic behavior
through the analysis of such general nonlinear partial differential equations,
or statistical theories, is limited. However, there is a class of canonical
models for a wide variety of physical settings. Their singular behavior is a
guide for the understanding of some complicated phenomena in nature. Some of
these are partial differential equations, others are statistical models, but the
unifying feature of these models is that researchers are making great progress
in their analysis. McLaughlin's research involves the detailed rigorous analysis
of these models; he (with collaborators) is developing methods to understand,
predict, and control their behavior. The broader impacts of this research
program stem from the emergence of universality as a new paradigm in nonlinear
science: probing its range of applicability is fundamental in emerging areas as
well as established ones. Another very important aspect of the proposed research
is the continued training of graduate students in these rapidly developing
areas.&lt;br/&gt;