* 0800704
* Turan-type problems and probabilistic methods in extremal combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Jacques Verstraete, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2012
* USD 144,000.00

This proposal concerns research in extremal and probabilistic combinatorics.
Broadly speaking, extremal combinatorics addresses the existence of and
theoretical bounds on the sizes of combinatorial objects with certain local
restrictions imposed. Many of the important problems, while simple to state and
attractive, are often representative of more general phenomena in mathematics,
and lead to many unexpected and useful applications in other areas. For example,
the topics of expander graphs and Ramanujan graphs have had a major impact on
coding, complexity and information theory. These problems also lead to new
theoretical methods, perhaps the most remarkable instance of which is the
probabilistic method pioneered by the renowned mathematician Paul Erdos.
Extremal combinatorial methods lead to the construction of new and more
efficient codes for correcting errors in data transmission, the reduction of the
number of bits required for Monte-Carlo algorithms, such as randomized
algorithms for primality testing. In fact, the spectacular recent breakthrough
of a deterministic algorithm for primality testing is highly connected to
preceding randomized algorithms which were long known to exist. In my proposal I
plan to study further theoretical and practical applications, including the
problem of time-complexity of matrix multiplication, quadratic sieve-type
integer factoring algorithms, and questions in other areas of mathematics. In
mathematics, this work has implications in functional analysis, projective
geometry, spectral graph theory, coding theory, and algorithms. While these open
problems are important and clearly difficult, some major inroads are possible by
combining probabilistic and combinatorial techniques with some new
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combinatorial mathematics lies at the heart of many
modern-day operations, such as digital security, web searching, and reliable
data transmission. Examples include multiplication of large arrays of numbers
for qualitative web searches -- these matrices tend to have billions of rows and
columns; the RSA cryptosystem, which underpins much of modern digital security,
and is based strongly on the belief that factoring integers is difficult;
finally, transmission of data over noisy or unreliable channels is at the core
of coding theory, where one attempts to design novel ways of encoding a message
so that even if the message is perturbed in transmission, the receiver can still
figure out with high probability what the original message was. One of the major
ingredients for constructing such good error-correcting codes is the existence
of combinatorial objects known as expander graphs. Using explicit constructions
and variants of these objects, together with basic probabilistic arguments, one
can compress a message in an optimal way such that the receiver has an excellent
chance of figuring out what the original message was. Constructions of graphs
with such extremal properties is fundamental to the proposed research. In
addition, the researcher plans to use combinatorial and probabilistic techniques
to approach the problems of matrix multiplication and integer factoring, both of
which are central to the concrete examples listed above. The researcher plans to
investigate both the practical and theoretical applications of the above-
mentioned combinatorial and probabilistic methods.