* 0800786
* Synthesis of Metallic and Multi-Component Nanoparticles from Metallo-Organic Precursors in Matrix-Assisted Laser Ablation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Leonid Zhigilei, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2012
* USD 412,600.00

The goal of this research program is to gain a fundamental understanding of the
elementary processes and molecular-level mechanisms of the matrix assisted laser
ablation synthesis of nanoparticles, and to apply the mechanistic understanding
to design and optimize this promising technique for an efficient, controllable,
inexpensive, and environmentally friendly generation of nanoparticles.
Experimental investigations governing the growth, physical limits, and
capabilities of the technique will be guided by the microscopic insights into
the mechanisms of nanoparticle nucleation and growth obtained in computer
modeling performed with coarse-grained molecular dynamics method. A
comprehensive investigation of the atomic/cluster mobility during the process of
the explosive disintegration of the target material and the expansion of the
multi-phase ablation plume consisting of liquid droplets, matrix vapor, and
products of chemical decomposition will provide useful information for several
emerging nanoscale materials processing techniques.&lt;br/&gt;This research
program is closely integrated with the current educational activities of the PIs
in the areas of laser-materials interactions and computational materials
science, thus providing immediate benefits for training of graduate students
while stimulating related research activities for undergraduates with additional
exposure through the REU program. The project will continue a strong existing
interaction between the PIs, aiding in the continued development of a core
activity on laser-material interactions at the Materials Science and Engineering
department. The research results of this project will be integrated into
graduate courses on Materials Characterization, Thin Films, and Modeling in
Materials Science developed and currently taught by the PIs.