* 0800245
* Evolution Problems and Free Boundaries
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Mikhail Feldman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 04/30/2012
* USD 174,157.00

The project consists of two main topics: (1) Free boundary problems for elliptic
and degenerate elliptic nonlinear equations and systems arising in the models of
compressible fluid dynamics. The goal is to study existence, uniqueness and
regularity and geometric properties of transonic shocks arising in self-similar
shock reflection for potential flows and full compressible Euler system. Euler
system for potential flow consists of the conservation law of mass and Bernoulli
law for the velocity. In the case self-similar flow the system can be reduced to
a second-order, nonlinear equation of mixed elliptic-hyperbolic type for the
velocity potential. Transonic shocks are discontinuities in the gradient of a
solution, such that the type of equation changes from hyperbolic to elliptic
across the shock. Transonic shocks arise in many situations of physical
importance. Boundary value problems for transonic shock solutions can be
formulated as free boundary problems for the elliptic phase. This framework will
be applied to the study of self-similar shock reflection for potential flow.
Shock reflection problem will also be considered for full compressible Euler
system, which is a more physical model. This leads to the study of free boundary
problems for a coupled system consisting of a nonlinear second order equation of
mixed elliptic-hyperbolic type and transport equations. One of the goals is to
verify von Neumann criteria for transition between regular and Mach reflection.
(2) Another area of research is to study the system of semigeostrophic
equations, a model of large-scale atmosphere/ocean flows, using methods of
Monge-Kantorovich mass transport. In recent years a progress was made in the
study of semigeostrophic system with constant Coriolis parameter in the flat
geometry. We will study a more physically relevant case of the system with
variable Coriolis parameter on a manifold. This includes study of new Monge-
Kantorovich-type problems, and Monge-Ampere equations associated with these
problems.

Free boundary problems arise naturally in many models in physics, fluid
dynamics, economics. Free boundaries correspond to sharp changes in the
variables describing the problem. Significant progress has been made during last
several decades in the study of free boundary problems. However in the case of
nonlinear partial differential equations and especially equations of mixed type
many important questions are yet to be studied. This is the first theme of the
project. Better understanding of properties of free boundaries, such as
stability, regularity and geometric properties, makes possible to understand
complex phenomena in models and applications. We plan to study transonic shocks
in a flow of compressible fluid or gas. Another area of the project is optimal
transportation problem. Recent progress in Monge-Kantorovich mass transport
problem includes many important applications to nonlinear partial differential
equations, in particular to the models for front formation in the atmosphere,
kinetic theory, fluid flow, elastic crystals, granular materials, and
microeconomic decision problems. We plan to work on the applications of mass
transportation problem to the models of atmospheric flows. The broader impact
resulting from the project will be achieved since the project addresses the
problems important in engineering and meteorology. Also, graduate students will
be involved in the work on the project.