* 0800619
* Nanoengineering Electrodes for Reliable Microelectromechanical Ohmic Contact Switches
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2008,09/30/2012
* Christopher Muhlstein, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 09/30/2012
* USD 303,650.00

The objective of this award is to develop electrodes with enhanced reliability
for microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) ohmic contact switches. Gold is
commonly used as the electrode material because of its high ductility, low
electrical resistivity, inertness to oxidation, high thermal conductivity, and
relatively high melting point. However, the reliability of gold electrodes must
be improved for many intended applications. Electrodes in this study will
benefit from the high electrical and thermal conductivity of an underlying gold
film, but their surfaces will be engineered through the deposition of nanoscale
coatings or the creation of nanoscale morphological features. The influence of
the length scale of these surface modifications on the performance of the
electrodes will be studied to refine the electrode design. These surface
modifications are expected to mitigate failures caused by electrodes sticking
together, arcing and material transfer, and increasing contact resistance with
use. This investigation is coupled with materials characterization of new,
cycled, and failed switches provided by collaborators from industry and
government laboratories, including switches that will incorporate the electrodes
developed in this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MEMS ohmic contact
switches offer many advantages over solid-state switches for electronic
circuits. Advantages include lower power consumption, lower insertion losses,
better isolation, and higher linearity. Circuits with these switches are
therefore attractive for wireless communication, wireless sensors, aerospace
applications, and military and commercial radar systems. The proposed work will
lead to enhanced reliability of switches for these applications. It will also
further knowledge in the field of electromechanical properties of nanoscale
materials and their surfaces. The thesis research of a graduate student will be
supported, and undergraduate senior thesis students will participate. An
activity on the fabrication, electromechanical properties, and use of thin films
in microelectromechanical systems will be developed for a summer camp that draws
participants from high schools across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;