* 0800849
* Fundamental Understanding of Enhanced Thermal Transport at Aligned Carbon Nanotube/Substrate Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2013
* C. Wong, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2013
* USD 250,000.00

The PI proposes to use a novel CNT transfer process, which features separated
steps of in-situ open-ended CNT synthesis and low-temperature CNT assembly by
solder reflow and/or chemical covalent bonding to engineer well-aligned open-
ended CNT architectures for microelectronic thermal management. The fundamental
mechanisms of the adhesion via the chemical covalent bonding and the water-
assisted selective etching used to open the CNT ends in-situ during growth will
be studied. In addition, the PI will systematically study the thermal transport
properties of the CNT internal walls which are accessible due to the unique
open-ended structure of the CNTs. Moreover, the CNT-metal and CNT-silicon
junctions will be studied to learn how to reduce the interface thermal
resistance. The low-temperature transfer processing conditions will be optimized
for the application of well-aligned open-ended CNTs in the device thermal
management. The results of this research will enable us to control the aligned
CNT structures and properties. The optimization of the low-temperature transfer
process is a critical step toward taking advantage of the CNTs in actual device
level applications. The results will contribute to the development of CNTs as
electrical interconnects as well. The CNT transfer technology and thermal
transport mechanisms at CNT-metal and CNT-silicon interfaces can be readily
transferred to microelectronics industry. This will certainly speed up the
advancement of high performance and high power electronic devices, and retain
numerous high tech jobs in the US. The broader impacts also include the
recruiting and advising of students at pre-college, undergraduate and graduate
levels, especially those from the underrepresented groups in the research and
education activities. The PI will continue his practice of providing resources
to the metropolitan Atlanta area with an emphasis on underrepresented groups.