* 0800428
* Scattering and Traveltime Tomography
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2014
* Plamen Stefanov, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 04/30/2014
* USD 424,634.00

The proposer will study problems in scattering theory and several non-linear
inverse problems that can be formulated as boundary and lens rigidity questions
and related tensor tomography inverse problems. Boundary and lens rigidity for
compact Riemannian manifolds with boundary are inverse problems where one wants
to recover the manifold from the distance (travel times)between each two
boundary points, or the scattering relation on the boundary. A linearization of
these problems is the integral geometry problem of recovering of a tensor field
from integrals along maximal geodesics. The proposer will study this type of
questions for various systems: Riemannian manifolds, asymptotically hyperbolic
manifolds, Lorentzian manifolds, and non-metric Hamiltonians. The case of
caustics will be studied carefully. The motivation to study those problems comes
both from pure mathematics: rigidity questions in geometry, inverse scattering,
inverse boundary value problems for hyperbolic equations, math theory of
relativity, integral geometry of tensors; as well from applications to
geophysics, medical imaging, oil exploration, non-destructive testing, cosmology
and conformal field theory, etc. The proposer will study stable ways to recover
the parameters of the system (the metric, the Hamiltonian, etc.). One of goals
of this project in the scattering theory part is to study the asymptotic
distribution of resonances and it relation to the classical mechanical behavior
of the system.

The Inverse Problems that will be studied in this project serve as mathematical
models in many practical situations: in medicine for imaging the internal
structure of a human body (CT, ultrasound, thermoacoustic tomography); in non-
destructive material testing; in geophysics for obtaining information about the
inner structure of the earth from travel times of seismic waves, or from travel
times of reflected acoustic waves; in oil exploration; in theory of relativity,
theoretical physics, etc. Riemannian metrics model anisotropic media, where the
speed of wave propagation may depend not only on the position but also on the
direction and this project's emphasis is on the study of anisotropic media.
Anisotropy naturally occurs in Earth, in the human body, etc. The proposed
research will develop further the mathematical tools of travel time tomography,
and will analyze the stability in various situations. The theory of resonances,
as a part of scattering theory, is of fundamental importance for quantum
mechanics, quantum chemistry. Resonances can be observed as certain peak
frequencies and one of the objectives of this research is to relate them to the
properties of the system.