* 0800300
* Uniqueness and Convergence of Analytic Integrals in Harmonic and Spectral Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Alexei Poltoratski, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This project concerns problems in Complex and Harmonic Analysis with
applications to Mathematical Physics. It consists of two parts. The first part
is devoted to the study of the Hilbert transform, one of the classical objects
of mathematical analysis. The second part involves applications to special
functions and spectral problems for differential operators. Despite being one of
the most studied elements of complex and real analysis, the Hilbert transform is
far from being completely understood. The first part of this proposal deals with
a long standing problem of boundedness of the two-weight Hilbert transform and
related topics. The second part of the project contains problems related to
generalizations and applications of the celebrated Beurling-Malliavin theory.
This theory was originally developed in the early 1960's to solve the problem of
completeness of exponential functions in the space of square-summable functions
on an interval, one of the canonical problems of Harmonic Analysis. The recently
developed Toeplitz operator approach allows one to extend the classical theory
and apply it to other families of special functions. Another important set of
applications lies in the area of direct, inverse and mixed spectral problems for
differential operators, such as the Schroedinger operator, Krein's string
operator and more general canonical systems of differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The applications considered in this project
are related to second-order differential equations, such as the Schroedinger
equation or the string equation, that are used in mathematical physics to model
the behavior of quantum systems, wave propagation and various other physical
phenomena. One of the important aspects of such problems is the ability to
analyze physical characteristics of the system by looking at spectral data. A
large part of this project is devoted to the further development of the
mathematical tools necessary for such spectral analysis. The PI will actively
involve his students in this project and will continue to review recent results
related to this project in his graduate courses at Texas A&amp;M University. The
results obtained in this project will be published in scientific journals and
reported at research conferences.&lt;br/&gt;