* 0800276
* Data Visualization, Reduction and Analysis Software for Single Crystal Time-of-flight Neutron Diffraction Instruments
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Ruth Mikkelson, University of Wisconsin-Stout
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2011
* USD 29,700.00

This award to the University of Wisconsin-Stout supports undergraduate students'
participation on software development for Single Crystal Diffractometers (SCD)
at the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS). SNS provides support for senior staff
from University of Wisconsin-Stout during a sabbatical leave granted to one of
the principal investigators by UW-Stout. The project is focused on raw data
reduction and visualization needs of the SCD instruments at the SNS.
Specifically, the project scope includes the following objectives: (1) to
support and revise the basic SCD data reduction tools of the Integrated Spectral
Analysis Workbench (ISAW) software developed by the principal investigators; (2)
to develop tools for efficiently and flexibly forming histograms of event data
in reciprocal space for efficient interactive visualization of reciprocal space
and future studies of diffuse scattering; (3) to develop new and improved
visualization software for SCD data and reciprocal space; (4) and to continue to
support and extend the functionality of the ISAW viewers and code base to
support their use at the SNS and elsewhere in the neutron scattering community.
Undergraduate students will help support and extend the ISAW code base and will
be involved in the design, implementation and testing of components for the
first three goals listed. &lt;br/&gt;