* 0800273
* Representation Theoretical Methods in the Theory of Special Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Adriano Garsia, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2012
* USD 205,321.00

The proposed work involves computer explorations and transfer of information
across several mathematical boundaries, from Representation Theory to the Theory
Special Functions and then to Combinatorics. The connection between
Representation Theory and the Theory of Special functions is provided by a
process that goes back to Frobenius. Combinatorics plays a role in that certain
important integers such as dimensions and multiplicities are obtained by
counting tableaux, paths, trees, etc. These connections provide an invaluable
vehicle of discovery, since results and mechanisms which may be obvious in one
of these areas often translate into highly non trivial and unexpected facts in
one of the other areas. The power of the combinatorial viewpoint should be
easily understood from the truism `` A picture is worth a thousand words''.
Combinatorial interpretations translate mathematical information be it
algebraic, analytical, logical or otherwise into visual information. The
proposed activities involve computation of Kronecker coefficients, determination
of Hilbert series, constructions of explicit basic sets of rings of invariants,
factorization of certain algebras as free modules over rings of invariants,
decompositions of graded representations into their irreducible constituents.
These are all activities that have a bearing in several branches of Mathematics
and Physics. All the proposed research lies in areas which are particularly
suitable to computer experimentation. Experience shows that, in this setting,
even students with limited background can experience the joy of non trivial
discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kronecker coefficients, which are integers
yielding the multiplicities of irreducibles in tensor products of
representations, are difficult to compute directly from their original
definition. New methodology that is being developped by the proposer in
collaboration with A. Goupil and M. Zabrocki obtains polynomial generating
functions of these coefficients, from which the coefficients themselves can be
easily extracted. Constructing these Kronecker ``polynomials`` and seeking for
their combinatorial interpretation will be one of the activities to be carried
out under this grant. Hilbert series of graded vector spaces are generating
functions of dimensions of the successive homogeneous components of these vector
spaces. The proposed reseach will develop algorithms for the calculation of
Hilbert series of rings of invariants. Invariants are polynomials which remain
unchanged under the action of certain groups of matrices. Hilbert series are
computed primarily to obtain information useful in the construction of basic
sets of invariants. The proposer in collaboration with N. Wallach explored and
expanded a way to obtain Hilbert series by constant term algorithms. Subsequent
collaboration by the proposer with G. Xin succeeded in refining these algorithms
to the extent that certain Hilbert series that hiterto required hours of
computer time were recently obtained in a few seconds. The acquisition of
explicit formulas and when not available the development of efficient algorithms
yielding mathematical constructs are the primary activities that will be carried
out under this grant. Significant success in these endeavours should be
beneficial to other researchers in the applied sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;