* 0800004
* Collaborative Research on Risk Management in Supply Chains Using Market Information
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Xiuli Chao, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 05/31/2012
* USD 281,167.00

NSF Proposal # 0800628: Management in Supply Chains Using Market
Information&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
provides funding for the development of risk management tools for supply chains
using market information. Preliminary studies have shown that the demand for
discretionary purchase items, such as automobiles, apparel, consumer
electronics, and home furnishings is correlated with the movement of economic
indicators. These findings present an opportunity to use information about
market expectations embedded in the prices of financial instruments to improve
demand forecasting, production planning, and inventory thus reducing risk. This
project aims to establish that the market indicators can be used to plan
inventories in supply chains that are optimal not just in a static sense but
also dynamically, and to test whether and how the value of the firm is
correlated with the economic indicators driving the forecasts. The proposed work
also includes the examination of the effect of price information on inventories
when the price of the product can be forecasted using prices of traded market
instruments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of four parts:
forecasting, optimal decision-making, hedging, and empirical validation. If
successful, this research will lead to better understanding of the connections
between economic factors with supply chain demand and inventory planning. The
results will provide a mechanism to inventory planners to use readily available
and reliable market information for inventory planning, profit forecasting, and
hedging purposes. They also provide a systematic method for developing and
testing profit and risk equations using models of supply chains, and allow the
enterprises to better understand how the cost of procurement and the volatility
of prices and demand affect risk in a simple and joint manner, and thus, the
firms will be able to make use of market factors in designing inventory and
production systems.&lt;br/&gt;