* 0800772
* Collaborative Research: A Biomimetic Concept Generator for Engineering Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2008,12/31/2013
* Daniel McAdams, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Christiaan Paredis
* 12/31/2013
* USD 317,464.00

Collaborative Research: A Biomimetic Concept Generator for Engineering
Design&lt;br/&gt;Daniel A. McAdams&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
award is to explore and develop tools that will expand the use of biological
analogies in engineering design. The results of this research will enable design
engineers to access the wealth of elegant and ingenious approaches to problem
solving that are found naturally present in biological systems. There are
several challenges that prevent designers from taking full advantage of the
biological knowledge domain. The first and most significant obstacle is that
most engineers do not have sufficient knowledge of biology to identify an
analogy from which to develop an engineered solution. To address this challenge,
this research has two main thrusts. The first is the creation of a thesaurus
that translates the terminology of function as used in engineering to the
terminology of function as used in biology. The second is the use of novel, new
computational search tools to access repositories of biological knowledge in an
effort to data mine biological systems for functional analogies Thus, as
engineers move a design from function to form, they can search nature for form
solutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;If successful, this proposed research makes
fundamental contributions to engineering design through creation of a biomimetic
design repository and associated concept generator. Key contributions include
better cross-domain search strategies on natural-language knowledge to identify
novel biological analogies, and better mechanisms to enable understanding of
biological phenomena so they can be more successfully applied to solve
engineering problems. The biomimetic solutions will be immediately available to
both academia and practicing engineering designers as the research is performed
through integration in an NSF supported Engineering Virtual Organization.
Curriculum development will provide a testbed for using this biomimetic
repository for concept generation.