* 0800212
* SGER: High-Resolution 3-D Surface Topography Measurement Using a Scanning Electron Microscope
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Fu-Pen Chiang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 06/30/2009
* USD 89,744.00

The research objective of this project is to develop a novel technique for high-
resolution 3-dimensional surface topography measurement using a scanning
electron microscope and explore its potential applications in
nanocharacterization and nanofabrication. The approach will be to extend the
concept of the traditional optical shadow moire technique to the electron domain
to develop a so-called electron shadow moire technique. Gratings with various
bar and space sizes will be designed and fabricated using MEMS technology. These
gratings will be used to investigate the feasibility of the technique and
determine the relationship between the grating parameters and the measurement
resolution. A phase shifting technique that uses the Carre algorithm will be
developed to improve the measurement resolution. A miniature computer-controlled
sample holder and grating scanning device will be designed and built to
implement the phase shifting technique. Software for processing electron shadow
moire images and reconstructing 3-dimensional surface topography will also be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this technique will not only
allow more useful information about the sample surface to be extracted from
scanning electron microscope images for nanocharacterization, but also make true
feedback control of nanofabrication possible in a dual-beam focused ion
beam/scanning electron microscope system. It will be a new tool that scientists
and engineers can use to aid their discoveries and innovations. This grant will
provide research training to graduate and undergraduate students as well as high
school students who are interested in gaining research experience. Special
efforts will be made to recruit female and minority students for the project.
Course materials and student projects for a graduate course will also be
developed based on the results from the research activities. &lt;br/&gt;