* 0800183
* Collaborartive Research: Monte Carlo Study of Pseudoknotted RNA Molecules: Motifs, Structure and Folding
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Rong Chen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 06/30/2013
* USD 689,553.00

RNA molecules are an important component of the cellular machinery. They are now
known to be essential for numerous biological processes, including protein
synthesis, transcription regulation, chromosome replication, viral infection,
and RNA interference. However, our knowledge of RNA molecules is still limited.
This research project fills important gaps in current RNA studies by introducing
novel molecular models and efficient computational tools. Specifically, the
research team aims to solve the following problems under a coherent theme of
studying pseudoknotted RNA structure and understanding their properties: (1)
Estimation of entropy of key secondary elements of RNA molecules; (2)
Identification of stable pseudoknot motifs from RNA sequences and developing
libraries of pseudoknot motifs for RNA families; (3) Prediction of three
dimensional ensemble of pseudoknotted RNA molecules and characterize their
folding mechanism. All these problems involve exploration of probability
distributions on very large state spaces where novel mathematical and
statistical tools must be developed. Specifically, the research team studies and
develops several techniques including efficient constrained Sequential Monte
Carlo (SMC) methods, efficient Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods and
mixing rate acceleration schemes and their combinations. The methodological
development provides a solid foundation for solving the underlying biological
problems. In return, those problems serve as the testing ground and inspiration
of new statistical ideas and procedures. The cross-fertilization is ideal for
significant advances in both biological and statistical sciences. It provides a
perfect environment of education and training of the next generation of
scientists and researchers in the interdisciplinary field of mathematics/
statistics and biology. Integrated education and research activities at post-
doc, graduate and undergraduate levels are conducted. A set of free software are
produced for implementing the developed
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to improve our
understanding of RNA, an important class of biomolecules and an important
component of the cellular machinery. They are now known to be essential for
numerous biological processes. A deeper understanding of RNA, its dynamics and
functionality, will increase our ability to develop new medicines and diagnostic
procedure and propel further technological advancement, hence beneficial to the
human society. Innovative statistical tools are developed to solve the
underlying problems. Such tools can also be used in many other applications. The
project is a cross-fertilization between statistical science and bioinformatics,
computational biology, and biophysics. It provides a perfect environment of
education and training of the next generation of scientists and researchers in
the interdisciplinary field of mathematics/statistics and biology. Integrated
education and research activities at post-doc, graduate and undergraduate levels
are conducted and special attentions are paid to attract women and minority
students into the wonderful research career in the field of math-biology. A set
of public and free software are developed for implementing the developed
algorithms. It is able to empower biologists and bioinformatics researchers with
new algorithms and software in their own research and discovery.