* 0800587
* Integrated Experimental- Computational Modeling of Deformation and Fatigue in Advanced Structural Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Michael Mills, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2011
* USD 245,681.00

In this collaborative effort, the PI?s will develop a system of 3D image-based
computational models for finite deformation crystal plasticity modeling that
incorporates morphological features and crystallographic orientations of real
material microstructures. An innovative grain-based adaptive finite element
model will be created for accurate and efficient analyses, overcoming
limitations of conventional FE methods. Each grain in a polycrystalline
aggregate will be represented by a single super-element incorporating a special
hybrid assumed stress-plastic strain formulation. The element will feature
adaptive augmentation of resolution to represent evolving localization zones and
nascent cracks in the microstructure. Crystallographic dislocation densities
will also be incorporated as spatial field variables, which can convect and
localize to affect plastic hardening. Effective multi-scaling schemes for
coupling the dislocation density model with efficient coarse-grained crystal
plasticity models will be developed. The GAFEM developments will also be
accompanied by a multiple time scale model for simulating large number of cycles
required to capture initiation and evolution in fatigue crack simulations. New
strategies for the measurement of microstructural response to mechanical loading
will be incorporated for calibrating constitutive models. Novel, complementary
experiments at different scales, will use a combination of focused ion beam
(FIB) micromachining of test articles coupled with testing in a modified
nanoindentor and other testing methods, enabling extraction of high quality
uniaxial and simple bending constitutive data, and state-of-the-art SEM and TEM
observations. Interfaces will be characterized with pillar/cantilever testing of
bicrystals and with a combination of orientation microscopy (OM) analysis,
surface strain mapping and optical interferometry. These procedures will form a
basis for the development of property databases necessary for verification and
validation of microstructure-sensitive deformation and damage modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program, upon completion, will provide an
unprecedented detailed and integrated understanding of the role of
microstructure on deformation and failure characteristics in Ti alloys. This is
critical to reliable materials design, especially with respect to creep and
fatigue characteristics. Success of this new paradigm will be of great interest
to industries such as GE Aviation since the time and cost saving for inserting
advanced alloys in safety-critical applications will be tremendous and will
allow industry to leapfrog present technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;