* 0800129
* Research topics in partial differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Hongjie Dong, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,001.00

This project focuses on several topics in partial differential equations, both
single equations and systems of equations, and considers problems involving
fully nonlinear elliptic equations, evolutionary equations that arise in fluid
mechanics, and error bounds for numerical approximations to solutions of fully
nonlinear elliptic and parabolic equations. The first part of the project deals
with the regularity of a family of fully nonlinear degenerate elliptic
equations. These equations turn up in the optimal mass transport problem and in
geometry. The second part is the investigation of global regularity, blow-up
phenomena, partial regularity, and regularity criteria for several models of
nonlinear parabolic equations in fluid mechanics. These include the well-known
Navier-Stokes equations, the quasi-geostrophic equations, and some other related
models. The third component is a study of error estimates for finite-difference
approximations to solutions of fully nonlinear and possibly degenerate elliptic
and parabolic Bellman equations. Bellman equations surface in many areas of
mathematics (e.g., control theory, mathematical finance, differential geometry).
It is thus a natural problem to seek numerical methods for approximating
solutions to such equations. The fourth portion of the project concentrates on
the theory of second-order linear elliptic and parabolic systems. A crucial
difference between scalar equations and systems is that the classical maximum
principle and the Harnack inequality are no longer applicable for systems.

The projects described in the previous paragraph are interesting not only from a
mathematical perspective. They are also of central importance and have
significant applications in areas such as physics, economics, and finance. For
instance, one application occurs in the area of fluid mechanics and turbulence,
where one would like to estimate external flow over all kind of vehicles such as
cars, airplanes, ships and submarines, to understand the formation of
hurricanes, or to predict the earth's atmospheric circulation. These examples
are all related to the three-dimensional Navier-Stokes equations, the theory of
which is far from complete. Another important application is in finance, say, to
calculate numerically the expected performance of a stock portfolio. For
example, the Black-Scholes option pricing model in finance, which is a well-
known mathematical model of the market for equity, is closely related to the
partial differential equation that governs heart flow. Moreover, many of these
problems are naturally modeled as coupled systems of partial differential
systems rather than as single equations. The results obtained under this
research will help to improve the mathematical models that are used in such
applications.