* 0800741
* Chipscale Multifinger Coordinated Manipulation Methodology for Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Laxman Saggere, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 04/30/2012
* USD 304,000.00

The main objectives of this research are: (i) to investigate the issues,
techniques and principles of a novel methodology to manipulate micro/nano-scale
objects by means of coordinated action of multiple micro-scale fingers, and (ii)
to realize a multifingered micromanipulator capable of coordinated manipulation
tasks such as grasp, rotate, move point-to-point and position micro-scale
objects in a defined workspace area on a substrate. The approach involves
synthesizing a chip-scale device comprised of multiple independently actuated
compliant micromechanisms with optimized topology and end effectors that can be
guided to any point of interest within the workspace to contact and interact
with a micro-scale object by suitably controlling the input actuations. The
approach includes understanding the kinematics and mechanics of coordinated
micromanipulation and necessary input actuation schemes through detailed models
derived from the first principles of rigid-body and flexible-body kinematics and
dynamics as well as the finite element method. The research exploits the
interdisciplinary knowledge of macro-scale robotics, micro/nano-scale physics,
compliant mechanisms, microsystems and
microfabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, if successful, could lead
to a new chip-scale micromanipulator with advanced capabilities for dexterous
manipulation of micro/nano-scale objects and thus offer several potential
benefits and broader impacts including: (i) advancement of the nanomanufacturing
technology for building complex micro/nano electromechanical systems, (ii)
facilitation of large-scale nanomanufacturing via an array of micromanipulators,
and (iii) advancement of the instrumentation in the scanning electron microscopy
and the atomic force microscopy by replacing simple cantilever end effectors
with more dexterous micromanipulators. The broader impacts in terms of
educational aspects of this research include providing several inquiry-based
learning opportunities to high school students and research opportunities to
undergraduate and graduate students including underrepresented and minority
groups, online dissemination of education materials, integration of emerging
topics from the research such as nanomanufacturing and micro/nano robotics in
undergraduate and graduate level courses.