* 0800023
* Performance Based Wind Engineering: Interaction of Hurricanes with Residential Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* John van de Lindt, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract

The objective of this research project is to establish the relationship between
spatially varying wind loads and structural load paths in wood-framed buildings.
Through a combination of analysis of existing wind tunnel data, applying
database-assisted design methodology and experimental tests on a 1/3-scale model
of a wood-framed residential structure, structural influence surfaces will be
developed and used to predict the load time-history on roof truss-to-wall plate
connections. Further, load transfers through the structure are determined from
spatially varied simulated wind loads generated using the Hurricane Simulator.
Deliverables include determination of influence surfaces used to predict the
structural load distributions through a wood-framed roof and an evaluation of
the database-assisted design methodology as applied to wood-framed structures.
The research will provide input a preliminary basis for performance-based wind
engineering of residential structures.

The research is expected to improve the design methods for the wood frame
buildings through the use of the performance-based design approach. The broader
impacts will be achieved through educational and technology transfer efforts.
Research results will be disseminated through the ASCE/SEI committees in which
the PI is involved. Recruitment efforts focused on students from
underrepresented groups and undergraduate research experiences will be
coordinated with existing multicultural affairs programs. Graduate student
education, mentorship and training will be done using formative and summative
assessment methods and through collaboration among the students and the PI.