* 0800873
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: The Integrity of Geosynthetic Elements of Waste Containment Barrier Systems Subject to Large Settlement and Seismic Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Edward Kavazanjian, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2012
* USD 289,580.00

Last Modified Date: 02/25/08 Last Modified By: Richard J. Fragaszy &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to investigate
the ability of modern landfill waste containment systems to maintain their
integrity when subject to waste settlement, earthquake loading, and loads from
operational practices. The researchers will also examine design strategies and
details to mitigate these potential threats to containment system integrity.
Landfills are an essential component of our nation?s civil infrastructure.
Modern landfills rely upon sophisticated engineered liner and cover systems
composed of soil and geosynthetic (i.e., polymer) materials to contain the waste
and waste by-products and thereby protect the environment. A breach of a
landfill containment system can result in serious and costly environmental
impacts. While it is widely recognized that waste settlement can apply stress to
landfill liner and cover systems, the impact of the large waste settlement
typically associated with solid waste landfills on the integrity of these
systems is generally not considered in current design practice. The impact of
seismic loading on containment system integrity is generally considered in a
gross empirical fashion; however, current methods do not quantify the loads
applied by a seismic event to the containment system. Furthermore, damage that
does occur to liner and cover system elements may be hidden, with no surface
expression to alert the engineer, operator, owner, or regulator to the problem.
The objectives of this collaborative research project will be achieved through:
1) experimental measurement of the load-deformation behavior of key
geosynthetic/geosynthetic and geosynthetic/soil interfaces, including their
response under dynamic loading, 2) development of realistic computational models
that describe the load-deformation behavior of these elements and interfaces, 3)
numerical implementation of the computational models to predict the behavior of
waste containment systems subject to waste settlement and seismic loads, and 4)
application of the numerical method to typical landfill configurations to
identify conditions that pose a threat to the integrity of landfill liner and
cover systems and develop strategies for mitigating these conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to transform the way
landfills are designed in engineering practice. The research conducted on this
project is expected to lead to improved procedures for evaluating the integrity
of landfill liner and cover systems; more realistic design methods; enhanced
confidence in the long term reliability of landfills; improved landfill
construction procedures; and, improved product design for geosynthetics used in
landfill construction. The societal benefits of more realistic and reliable
waste containment system designs should not be underestimated. Moving away from
the crude and largely unsubstantiated design criterion currently used in
practice and toward a more rational methodology will be a major advance in
landfill design and help to enhance public acceptance of and confidence in waste
containment systems. This project, funded in part under the Grant Opportunities
for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) program, is a collaboration between
two industry/academia teams: Ohio State University and CETCO (a leading
geosynthetic manufacturer) and Arizona State University and Geosyntec
Consultants (a leading geoenvironmental consulting firm). The GOALI workshops
proposed for the third year of the project will disseminate the research
findings to a broad spectrum of stakeholders, including the USEPA, the
California Integrated Waste Management Board and State Water Resources Control
Board, geosynthetic manufacturers, landfill owners including major waste
management firms and municipal governments, and environmental consulting firms.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;