* 0800311
* Transcendence on Varieties in Families
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Paula Tretkoff, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2012
* USD 120,943.00

We propose applying transcendence techniques to curves and abelian varieties in
a family and to classical period maps to deduce transcendence properties for
functions which are solutions of a Picard-Fuchs equation. This leads naturally
to considering the distribution of points with special properties on
subvarieties of Shimura varieties. These special properties can be interpreted
as meaning that the points lie on the intersection of the subvariety with
certain Shimura subvarieties. This leads to studying open conjectures in the
theory of Shimura varieties. We also propose an approach independent of these
conjectures which would involve studying the locus of ``irreducible'' points on
subvarieties of Shimura varieties. We propose developing a transcendence theory
for more general varieties in a family, and for more general period maps as well
as for periods of higher order forms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental
problem in transcendence theory is the determination of the exceptional set of a
function, that is the set of algebraic numbers at which the function assumes
algebraic values. A classical result is that the exceptional set of the
exponential function consists only of the origin. This implies that e and pi are
transcendental. In previous work, we determine the exceptional set of the
classical hypergemetric function and its generalization to several complex
variables by relating these functions to families of algebraic curves. We intend
to extend this work to a wider class of functions related to more general
families of algebraic curves and varieties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;