* 0800763
* Development of Unmanned Aircraft System and Its Use in Investigating the Impact of Pre-Existing Airmass Boundaries on Supercell Rotation
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Adam Houston, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 01/31/2011
* USD 88,185.00

Intellectual Merit: The purpose of this project is to develop and utilize
unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) to obtain critical meteorological observations
aloft in the vicinity of severe thunderstorms. This is an exploratory project
with the initial emphasis being on the system development and obtaining
experience in utilizing such systems in severe storm environments. The UAS will
then be used to collected data during the second Verification of the Origins of
Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment (VORTEX 2). An examination of the impact of
pre-existing airmass boundaries on supercell rotation serves as an important
component of the VORTEX 2 objectives. Observations made during the first VORTEX
clearly revealed the significant role that preexisting airmass boundaries
(boundaries that are not generated by the storm itself) can play in the
enhancement of supercell rotation. However, there are many unanswered questions
regarding the precise nature of supercell-boundary interactions. These questions
have so far remained virtually unanswerable largely due to insufficient
thermodynamic measurements above the surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Airmass
boundaries can be localized regions of enhanced horizontal vorticity, enhanced
convective available potential energy, and dynamically-driven upward motion.
Each of these properties could impact supercell rotation. The specific aim of
the experiments is to quantify these properties in order to determine how 1)
horizontal vorticity and 2) dynamically/thermodynamically-driven vertical motion
impact the rotation of a supercell interacting with a preexisting airmass
boundary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis required to answer these questions
requires data collected through coordinated observations of both the
thermodynamic and kinematic properties of airmass boundaries and nearby storms.
Data collected during previous field programs dealing with supercells and
tornadoes are insufficient to enable this analysis. However, observations in
VORTEX 2 potentially will provide a unique opportunity to collect these
coordinated data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis requires four dimensional
(4D) wind fields of preexisting boundaries and nearby storms as well as the
temperature and moisture fields across these boundaries. In the VORTEX 2, the 4D
flow fields will be retrieved with multiple Doppler radars and the detailed
thermodynamic structure of airmass boundaries will be retrieved using the
developed UAS and a mobile mesonet vehicle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This work will stimulate and support the development of advanced
instrumentation. Better understanding of how supercell rotation will respond to
a specific storm-boundary interaction potentially will benefit society through
better forecasts of tornado genesis. &lt;br/&gt;