* 0800267
* Fully-Distributed Fiber-Optic Sensors for Pressure and Transverse Stress Measurement
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2013
* Ming Han, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 01/31/2013
* USD 240,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to design, model, and demonstrate a novel
fiber sensor scheme for long-span fully-distributed measurement of pressure and
transverse stress. These two important parameters, as of today, still can not be
measured in a fully-distributed manner by any means. This unprecedented
capability will fulfill needs in many industrial and research
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed scheme is based
on optical time-domain reflectometry (OTDR) technology and specially designed
microstructured optical fibers. The OTDR can provide distributed measurement of
fiber birefringence while the microstructured fibers present change in
birefringence when pressure or transverse stress is applied. The major tasks
include novel fiber design and fabrication, sensor performance (sensitivity,
spatial resolution, and dynamic range) enhancement, and sensor test and
demonstration under harsh environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
proposed technology will expand the functionalities of the fully-distributed
fiber-optic sensing beyond the traditional only temperature and longitudinal
strain measurement. The multidisciplinary nature of the proposed research will
offer well-balanced training and research opportunities for the participating
students and enrich the current curriculum at Virginia Tech. Graduate students
from underrepresented minority groups will be recruited. Undergraduate research
projects will be designed in various areas of the proposed research. High school
students will also be involved into the proposed program through summer
internships.&lt;br/&gt;