* 0800086
* Collaborative Research: Making Nanostructured Ceramics from Micrometer-Sized Starting Powders
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Linan An, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2012
* USD 221,112.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a field-activated processing
technology for synthesizing bulk nanostructured ceramics (grain size &lt; 100
nm) from micrometer-sized starting powders. The effects of processing
parameters, such as electric current density, heating rate, frequency of pulse,
sintering temperature and holding time, on microstructural evolution and
densification of materials will be experimentally investigated to achieve an
understanding of the important processing parameters, which control the field-
activated processing of nanostructured ceramics. Analytical models will be
developed to study the effects of electrothermal-mechanical interactions on the
field-activated consolidation of materials and on the formation of
nanostructured materials. The theoretical results will be correlated to the
experimental findings to obtain a fundamental understanding of the dominant
mechanisms controlling the processing. Mechanical testing will be performed to
characterize the mechanical behavior of the nanostructured materials and to
establish the mechanical property-microstructural relationships of the resultant
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will lead to a fundamentally new processing technology for synthesizing bulk
nanostructured ceramics and potentially to the development of functionally
nanostructured materials through the field-activated processes. The primary goal
of this work is to determine the key processing conditions that control the
formation of nanostructures. The important processing conditions may include
distribution of electric current through the consolidated material, input of
electric energy into the material, and electrothermal-mechanical interactions.
Understanding the fundamental mechanisms in controlling the field-activated
processing will help to determine the optimal condition for achieving
homogeneous bulk nanostructured ceramics and to improve the design methodology
for industrial production of bulk nanostructured ceramics. The proposed work
will also contribute to numerical modeling for nonlinear electrothermal-
mechanical problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;