* 0800019
* Processing of Tensegrity-Inspired Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Meisha Shofner, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 04/30/2012
* USD 309,973.00

This research will lead to advanced, functional nanomaterials not seen
previously and provide general guidelines for the design of nanocomposites at
all concentration levels through a more complete understanding of the
nanocomposite?s components (nanoparticle, interphase material, and matrix) and
their associated networks. We are testing the hypothesis that processing
protocols may produce tensegrity-inspired structures from polymer nanocomposite
materials. Tensegrity structures are composed of isolated compression members
connected by a tensile web, occurring in nature and engineering design. They
have a unique combination of high mechanical properties, high resiliency, and
low weight. In this research, these structures will be created from
nanocomposites where nanoparticles will serve as the compression members, and
the polymer will serve as the tensile web. The research activities will
emphasize (1) understanding the impact of the processing steps (solution and
melt) on the evolution of the microstructure with nanoparticle shape and
concentration, (2) characterizing fully the interphase material in
nanocomposites and use/adapt appropriate physical models to describe the effect
of nanocomposite components on mechanical properties and (3) creating a
tensegrity-inspired structure from nanocomposite materials. The broader impacts
involve an integrated research and educational plan allowing interaction with a
broad population of engineering and science students at the graduate,
undergraduate, and high school levels. The investigator will continue her work
with chemistry teachers at Mays High School in the Atlanta Public School System.
This high school has a population consisting almost entirely of underrepresented
students. Each year, the investigator and a teacher will work together on
nanocomposite research leading to the development of inquiry-based learning
modules.

