* 0800353
* High-Performance Micro-Forming, Joining, and Punching Processes Enabled by a Novel Design and Control of Magnetostrictive Actuators
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Gap-Yong Kim, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2013
* USD 211,799.00

The goal of this project is to improve the current micro-manufacturing platform
for microforming processes by the ultrasonic-assisted microforming at
unprecedented operation speed. To overcome the limitations of existing
technology, actuators based on magnetostrictive Terfenol-D, capable of
ultrasonic vibration as well as high-speed macro deformations will be used. The
objectives of the project are to (1) design and construct a novel Terfenol-D
actuator to achieve the required performance of microforming applications; (2)
develop a suite of advanced model-based feedforward-feedback control techniques
to overcome the nonlinear hysteresis and dynamics effects of Terfenol-D on high-
speed, precision motion control; and (3) investigate the fundamental aspects of
microforming by studying how the tool life and part quality are improved by the
introduction of ultrasonic vibration and high speed
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research represents one of the
first attempts in utilizing Terfenol-D actuators in the next-generation micro-
machine tool system (mMTS). This will lead to increased tool life, improved part
quality, and reduced footprint addressing several critical challenges in micro-
manufacturing including maintenance cost, energy consumption, and throughput
limitations. The novel application of the dual stage magnetostrictive actuator
along with the advanced control techniques will enable the systematic study of
the fundamental effects of high frequency vibration on microforming processes
making significant contributions to moving microforming techniques towards
industry applications. Educational activities will include course module
development for graduate and undergraduate classes, summer internship
opportunities for undergraduates and high school teachers, open lab tours with
hands on activities, and middle school inquire module. The goal of these
activities is to expose undergraduate, graduate, and high school students and
teachers to cutting edge research in the areas of micro-manufacturing, active
materials, and advanced controls.