* 0800896
* Nanomechanical Characterizations of Interfaces in Carbon Nanotube Reinforced Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,01/31/2013
* Roberto Ballarini, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 01/31/2013
* USD 356,451.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award is to take a
systematic and integral approach to study interfaces in SWNT reinforced
nanocomposites, using combinations of Micro-Electro-Mechanical System (MEMS)
based testing platforms, Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), and Molecular Dynamics
(MD) simulations. The proposed research involves the following tasks, (1)
Development of novel, versatile and reliable MEMS based testing platforms to
perform nanotube pull-out experiments for quantitative characterization of
interfacial interaction between (a) SWNT and epoxy matrix, (b) SWNT and PDMS
matrix, (c) SWNT and Au matrix; (2) Quantitative AFM study in both normal and
lateral mode to provide direct and accurate assessment of adhesion and friction
forces between the above mentioned reinforcement/matrix interfaces, in
particular after the occurrence of de-bonding events; (3) Investigation of
modified SWNT/matrix interfaces by different sidewall chemical functionalization
methods using both the MEMS testing platform and AFM; (4) Theory and MD
simulation of the key interfacial structures and relaxation mechanisms between
SWNT reinforcement and matrix in correlation with observations from the
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will be a vital step towards fundamental understanding of the physical nature of
interfacial behaviors in nanocomposites, which in turn will enable the design of
synthetic nanocomposites for improved mechanical performance. Graduate students
and under-represented undergraduates will be recruited to work on this cutting-
edge research, and will be given opportunities to present their results at
research conferences and to local communities. Founded by the PI, the newly
established Paslay Nanoscale Science and Engineering Educational Lab at Rice
University will serve as a platform for outreach activities involving high
school students and science teachers in greater Houston area, and introduce the
findings from this research to the general public. In addition, the insights
gained through this research will be effectively disseminated to students
affiliate with the Clarkson Aerospace Minority Leader Research and Education
Program, which is one of the minority outreach program here at Rice, focusing on
Historically Black Colleges and Universities and Minority Institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;