* 0800612
* Integrating Multiscale Modeling and in vivo Experiments for Studying Blood Clot Development
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Mark Alber, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 864,660.00

To prevent the loss of blood following a break in blood vessels, components in
blood and vessel wall interact rapidly to form a blood clot (thrombus) to limit
hemorrhage. This hemostatic response is rapid and regulated, since excessive and
inappropriate clotting reduces the patency of blood flow. While knockout mice
provide qualitative results about the role of particular hemostatic components,
the mathematical and computational models can suggest threshold values of
particular elements critical for hemostasis. Determining such thresholds will
help identify hemostatic risk factors in human population. This has significant
biomedical implications. For instance, deep vein thrombosis affects 250,000
Americans each year and leads to 20,000 deaths mainly from clot fragments that
break off from the thrombus and cause pulmonary embolisms. The incidence will
increase as the population ages. Developing accurate, quantitative models of
thrombus formation that help us understand the physical and biochemical
processes involved in clot structure and stability will contribute to the
development of new diagnostic approaches and therapeutic strategies.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this proposal is to develop three-dimensional
multiscale mathematical models and a computational toolkit for simulating
thrombus formation. These models will be validated with specifically designed
experiments to test predictions of thrombus development, structure and
stability. Moreover, the development of reasonable models will serve as a
generator of new hypotheses that can be tested in experiments in vivo. To
achieve this goal, a new collaboration has been formed between Dr. Alber and Dr.
Xu (Notre Dame), Dr. Rosen (Indiana University Medical School) and Dr. Jiang
(Los Alamos National Lab). To bring different scale levels of thrombus model
together, new mathematical techniques and computational schemes will be
developed and these will include elements of stochastic analysis, nonlinear
analysis and kinetic theory. New methods will include coarsening methods, new
numerical schemes, error estimates of numerical solutions as well as
parallelization algorithms for the coupled discrete and continuous models needed
for the long time simulations. The mathematical and computational models will
incorporate many biological processes (platelet interactions, coagulation
pathways, hemodynamic effects) into the simulation thus integrating biological
fields that have traditionally been studied separately.&lt;br/&gt;