* 0800949
* Spectral Properties of Multidimensional Quasi-Periodic Schroedinger Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Ioulia Karpechina, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 08/31/2013
* USD 155,779.00

There is a huge variety of solids in nature. They have different physical
properties: electrical and heat conductivities, elastic coefficients, etc. This
variety of properties can be explained by inner structure of solids: first, by
types of atoms constituting a solid, and, second, very important, by the
arrangement of atoms forming a solid. For example, both diamond and graphite are
built from the same atoms of carbon, and their completely different properties
are due to different arrangements of atoms. A profound problem in solid state
physics is to explain the connections between micro structures of solids and
their macro properties. In our days, with the development of new industries
which are able to produce materials with prescribed inner structures, this
problem becomes more important, since understanding fundamental connections
between inner structures and macro properties will give opportunities for
industry to produce more materials with desired properties.

For a long time all materials studied consisted of periodic arrays of atoms or
were amorphous. However, in the last decades a new class of solid state matter,
called aperiodic crystals, has been found. An aperiodic crystal is a long range
ordered structure, but without lattice periodicity. It is found in a wide range
of materials: organic and anorganic compounds, minerals, metallic alloys, even
some proteins.

The Schroedinger equations with quasi-periodic potentials are used todescribe a
particular kind of aperidoc crystals: modulated crystals. Spectral study of
these equations leads to understanding of the mechanism of electrical
conductivity in modulated crystals, especially, of the phenomenon of the metal-
insulator transition. The metal-insulator transition means that at near zero
temperatures a material abruptly changes its properties from an electrical
conductor to insulator, when an external parameter, controlling electrons energy
inside the solid, passes certain critical value. Metal-insulator transition can
be described mathematically in terms of spectral properties of the corresponding
Schroedinger equation. The insulator corresponds to localized eigenfunctions
(localization) at low energies, while the conductor corresponds to non-localized
eigenfunctions extended states at higher energies.

The goal of the project is to describe extended states in the high energy region
for multidimensional quasi-periodic Schroedinger operators. Because of the lack
of periodicity the usual "periodic" techniques for the study of this operator no
longer work, and new techniques have to be developed. The PI will develop a new
modification of KAM (Kolmogorov-Arnold-Mozer) method to solve the problem.