* 0800904
* A Framework for Maintaining Product Superiority by Designing Hardware That Protects Itself From Reverse Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Christopher Mattson, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 05/31/2011
* USD 353,997.00

A Framework for Maintaining Product Superiority by Designing Hardware that
Protects Itself from Reverse Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0800904&lt;br/&gt;Christopher A. Mattson&lt;br/&gt;Brent L.
Adams&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award is to develop a
framework for designing consumer products that protect themselves from reverse
engineering. Upon completion, designers will be able to create products that can
be handled and examined by customers and competitors without disclosing the
phenomena by which the products function, essentially protecting the device from
reverse engineering. This will provide developers with the ability to maintain
the competitive advantage that results from their hardware development efforts.
The core of this research is the integration of three enabling design
methodologies: (i) microstructure sensitive design, (ii) heterogeneous design,
and (iii) embedded systems design. Advanced numerical and multiobjective
optimization methods make possible the search for superior material properties
and device geometry through the manipulation of numerous non-intuitive, non-
traditional, design variables. Experiments will be used to validate the design
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
provide a powerful new approach to product design with material considerations.
This research can fundamentally change design and manufacturing paradigms in
some industries. Because the material microstructure and associated
manufacturing processes will be extremely difficult to reverse engineer,
hardware secrets can be protected under the new framework. This will lead to the
development of more advanced hardware, thus increasing the competitive
technological and economical advantages enjoyed by the developing entity. This
gives companies that struggle to compete with low cost overseas manufacturing a
new value-added approach to design and manufacturing. The results of this
research will be used as the basis for the development of educational modules
for use in industry and academia which include reading packets, presentations,
homework assignments and experiment descriptions. These will be distributed
widely via the internet. &lt;br/&gt;