* 0800197
* GOALI:Effects of Directional Hardening and Texture Evolution on Earing During Cup Drawing
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Oana Cazacu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2011
* USD 199,997.00

The research objective of this award is to develop and validate a novel modeling
and computational platform for optimization of deep-drawing of textured metal
sheets. A multi-scale approach will be used to model the directional hardening
associated with texture and microstructure evolution during multi-stage forming
operations. Emphasis will be placed on the accurate description of the interplay
between slip and twinning and its effect on the macroscopic response for complex
strain paths. By using the developed directional hardening models in conjunction
with finite-element formulations, non-circular convolute blank design solutions
will be proposed. To reduce the computational time, an iterative constant
strain-based optimization method will be used. The design optimization solutions
based on the developed analytical and numerical models will be experimentally
validated in partnership with ALCOA.

If successful, the results of this research will address important strategic
needs of the US manufacturing industry for more aggressive products designs, for
decrease in cost of components, and in reduction to the time to market of new
products. Specifically, the application of the proposed anisotropic models will
improve forming of otherwise difficult to fabricate advanced light-weight
materials such as aluminum alloys and magnesium alloys. Verification and
validation of the new mathematical tools will allow the designer to assess the
behavior of a given alloy during the finite element analysis phase of the design
process and thus reduce the lead time. Environmental benefits are anticipated
through the increased recycling of lightweight materials in the rigid-packaging
industry.