* 0800871
* Development of Virtual CNC Machine Tools and Web-Based Machining Process Simulation and Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Anthony Okafor, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 05/31/2012
* USD 372,400.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate a number of technologies
for virtual manufacturing and web-based machining process simulation and
learning for research and education: 1) virtual modeling of computer numerical
control mill, lathe and vertical machining center, 2) mechanistic modeling of
cutting forces and surface roughness in high speed end-milling of thin-walled
components of difficult-to-machine metals, such as titanium alloys used in
aerospace manufacturing, 3) web-based machining process simulation and learning.
The research approach will be based on integration of three-dimension simulation
environment, mechanistic models, finite element analysis, sensor data, design of
experiment, and experimental verification for modeling and simulating cutting
forces and surface roughness, and simulation of machining processes. The effects
of cutting parameters (spindle speed, feed per tooth, axial and radial depth of
cut, and corner radius) and cutting tools will be investigated. Cutting force
models will consider end-mill corner radius and number of flutes.

If successful, the benefits and broader impacts of the research will be:
mechanistic models for simulating and predicting cutting forces and surface
finish in high speed end-milling of titanium alloys; reliable tool for virtual
manufacturing , that is, computer simulation of machining processes; improved
knowledge of cutting forces and the effect of cutting parameters; increased
manufacturing efficiency, quality and productivity; reduced lead-time and cost
of making both commercial and military aircraft parts; reduced training time for
computer numerical control programmers and operators; innovative use of
technology to teach students with interest in 3-dimensional environment; reduced
teaching time on physical machines with associated cost savings; portable web-
based learning environment that allows teaching computer numerical control
course off campus to researchers and engineers in industry worldwide; and
involvement of underrepresented minority students. The research results will be
disseminated to the engineering community through journal and conference
publications.