* 0800356
* RC Bearing Walls Subjected to Elevated Temperatures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Yahya Kurama, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2012
* USD 111,999.00

&lt;br/&gt;The primary research objective of this project is to investigate the
behavior and design of reinforced concrete (RC) wall structures under elevated
temperatures due to fire. To achieve this objective, the research will: (1)
experimentally investigate the out-of-plane axial-load-moment-curvature-
temperature behavior of RC wall cross sections under elevated temperatures; (2)
evaluate the effects of geometric, material, reinforcement, and loading
parameters on these structures; and (3) develop a rational, predictive fire-
resistant structural design procedure based on the test results. The project
will result in experimental evidence demonstrating the fire performance of RC
walls and validated design models using the test data. In addition, the
experiments will investigate the application of a cost-effective test method
using ceramic fiber radiant heaters to subject the specimens to elevated
temperatures. The ultimate project deliverables will be the ability to evaluate
the structural performance of a RC wall under fire and the ability to design a
wall that can withstand uncontrolled fires until burnout.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of the project tasks will
provide important data for fire-resistant design of reinforced concrete walls
commonly used in building structures, with ancillary contributions to fire
engineering and materials engineering/science fields. Wall structures designed
using this information will facilitate emergency response activities by
protecting elevator cores and stairwells, and contribute towards the resistance
of buildings to prevent catastrophic overall collapse. The project will train a
graduate student in fire resistant design of structures and encourage
undergraduate students to study structural fire engineering, strongly focusing
on underrepresented groups. The researchers will utilize the project to educate
future engineers through K12 activities as well. The research results will be
disseminated widely for utilization by practicing engineers, other researchers,
and other end users. &lt;br/&gt;