* 0800676
* Designing and Controlling Processing Networks with Parameter Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2008,09/30/2012
* David Morton, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 09/30/2012
* USD 380,000.00

This grant provides funding to examine models which combine queueing
network&lt;br/&gt;dynamics and a stochastic programming decision framework. The
study of both queueing networks and models with parameter uncertainty have a
long history in operations research and related areas, but there has been
relatively little work on systematically analyzing models which contain both
features. In the first part of the research, a fluid processing network is
analyzed in which the fluid arrival rates, processing rates, and initial
inventory are not known with complete certainty. The controller is interested in
minimizing expected inventory costs, given that certain structural operating
decisions must be made before the aforementioned random elements are revealed.
This fluid model will then be used to develop design and control policies for
stochastic processing&lt;br/&gt;networks, with discrete jobs, in which there is
parameter uncertainty. In the final phase of the research the control policies
will be tested in full-scale, detailed simulation models of semiconductor wafer
fabrication facilities. The simulation models will be developed in collaboration
with International SEMATECH. As part of the pedagogical contribution of this
work, the research results will be disseminated on the Stochastic Programming
Community Homepage via a tutorial on stochastic programming and stochastic
processing networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project will make
contributions to the queueing theory, stochastic programming, and manufacturing
research communities. In the queueing community the historical focus has usually
been on performance analysis and control, under either the assumption that all
system parameters are known or that a controller can instantaneously adapt to
changing parameters. At present, there is little research which takes a
systematic approach to incorporating parameter uncertainty into these models. In
many stochastic programming models, the goal is to make tactical- or strategic-
level decisions with the guidance of a coarse-grain submodel of more detailed
operations. The queueing networks studied in this project are ideal candidates
for such submodels. In the industry setting, the research will allow network
designers and controllers in the manufacturing sector, and beyond, to make
better decisions in the face of uncertainty. Since this project includes in-
depth involvement with the semiconductor industry, the research will have the
most immediate impact in this sector. However, there is strong potential for
broad impact in many sectors, such as telecommunications and traffic management,
where stochastic network control is necessary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;