* 0800688
* Collaborative Research: Inference, Analysis, and Assessment in Simulation Optimization
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Shane Henderson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 06/30/2013
* USD 267,045.00

Collaborative Research: Inference, Analysis, and Assessment in Simulation
Optimization

Abstract

This grant proposes three main areas of work on simulation optimization (SO)
problems, which are optimization problems where the objective function and
constraints involved can only be observed through a stochastic simulation.
First, many SO problems possess structure such as convexity or unimodality that,
if detected, can improve one?s understanding of the problem itself, and be
exploited in selecting solution algorithms. Numerical methods will be developed
to detect such structure. Second, performance measures, and methods for
efficiently computing them, will be developed to enable theoretically sound
comparisons of the performance of SO algorithms on test problems. Third, a
testbed of SO problems will be developed.

If awarded, the ability to numerically detect problem structure will greatly
improve understanding of one?s problem formulations, and allow greater use of
specialized algorithms that exploit structure. This could also lead to users
formulating problems to adhere to those structures, with the result that many
new subclasses of SO problems might be created. The testbed, along with
appropriate performance measures, should help to encourage algorithm comparisons
and development. We might then be able to tackle far larger SO problems than is
possible today. The results of the research will find application in areas such
as emergency services, transportation logistics, supply chain management,
revenue management and potentially many other fields.