* 0800805
* Functionally Graded Concrete for The Civil Infrastructure - A Multifunctional Material System Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Jeffery Roesler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 04/30/2012
* USD 373,875.00

This project develops novel multifunctional and functionally graded concrete
materials (FGCMs) for the civil infrastructure. FGCMs consist of multiple sub-
regions within a structural layer with varying concrete constituents following a
predefined compositional function, e.g. functionally graded fiber-reinforced
concrete slab with varying through-thickness toughness. A multi-scale testing
(including small-scale specimen fracture tests and large-scale tests of concrete
slabs), modeling, and education plan will be undertaken to achieve the project
goals. The integrated modeling will be accomplished by distinct constitutive
descriptions for the bulk (with special graded finite elements) and the
?separation? (cracked) materials through and a tailored cohesive zone model
approach able to capture material degradation and material gradient effects at
the mesoscale. A virtual internal bond (VIB) model will also be formulated using
a continuum approach for strain localization employing a new pair-bond potential
concept. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive educational plan is clearly
essential to the success of this project since teaching of students (in-reach)
and practicing engineers (out-reach) are needed to implement the multi-scale
FGCM testing and fracture modeling program. The integrated research and
education plan is expected to have a broad impact on the following areas:
infrastructure materials research, civil engineering student education through
development of an integrated design course at UIUC on ?Engineering Functionally
Graded Concrete Materials for the Infrastructure,? interaction with practicing
engineers through development of technology transfer activities (e.g. short
courses), research experience and mentoring for undergraduate students and
graduate research assistants, and summer mentoring and research experience for
underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;