* 0800122
* Integrating Experimental Design and Reliability for Multiple Stage Manufacturing of Multi-Scale Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Harriet Nembhard, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 06/30/2012
* USD 320,000.00

This grant provides funding to develop and analyze statistically-based
experimental designs especially suited for multiple stage manufacturing, and to
integrate these designs with reliability modeling for new product development.
The concept of a multiple stage fractional factorial split plot (MSFFSP) design
is proposed to accommodate complex manufacturing processes where restrictions on
the randomization of experimental runs are required. Specifically, a general
linear model, design catalogs, and variance estimates of the MSFFSP design will
be derived. This work will be applied to a multiple stage process involving gel-
casting lithography to manufacture a multifunctional forceps-scissors (FS)
instrument for minimally invasive surgery. The novel lithography process uses
nanoparticulates to impart the FS instrument with both nano- and micro- scale
features. The MSFFSP design will also be applied in the measurement system
analysis of an optical microscope, which is used to collect data on the FS
device. In conjunction with the FS device development, failure modes will be
identified, enumerated, and transformed into reliability data. The concept of
accelerated testing will be used to shorten the time to acquire this data and
will be integrated with MSFFSP design. The MSFFSP analysis will be modified in
order to properly analyze the reliability data, which has different statistical
characteristics than process and product data. &lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will lead to a reduction in the number of trial runs
and settings required for experimentation in complex manufacturing processes
with multiple stages while maintaining design efficiency. Using these designs
and integrating them with reliability testing into modeling and production for
micro- and nano-scale manufacturing research will yield strategic advantages by
speeding the research and development cycle, stretching the experimental budget,
and ultimately helping to create more reliable, robust, and better performing
small-scale products. The proposed work will not only advance the field of
experimental design, but also amplify the potential of quality methodologies to
be extended for other multiple stage manufacturing processes.&lt;br/&gt;