* 0800886
* Surface-Functionalization of Carbon Nanofiber Sheets by Electrochemical Synthesis for Large-scale Engineering Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Li Sun, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2012
* USD 270,828.00

The award will support the investigation of metal electrodeposition mechanisms
on carbon nanofiber surfaces so that multi-functionalized materials with desired
physico-chemical properties can be produced and evaluated for large scale
engineering applications. Carbon nanofibers have comparable sizes and unique
properties as multiwall carbon nanotubes but are available in large quantity
with a competitive cost. Incorporating metallic coatings or particles onto the
nanofiber surface can further improve its electric/thermal conductivity,
magnetic field response, electromagnetic wave absorption, and catalytic
activity. After being assembled into a paper sheet form, the carbon nanofibers
can be reproducibly handled and used as electrodeposition electrodes.
Electrodeposition provides an effective approach to introduce surface
functionalization. Yet the metal nucleation, growth and bonding on these carbon
nanomaterials remain largely unknown. This research will fill this critical gap
by exploring the relationship between the synthesis parameters and the coating
morphology and microstructures. &lt;br/&gt;The research can lead to the cost-
effective handling and functionalizing carbon materials for their assembly into
specific architectures in a reproducible fashion. This can help utilizaion of
carbon nanofiber structures in applications such as lightning strike prevention,
reinforced composites, electromagnetic shielding materials, static discharge,
vibration/acoustic dampers, catalyst substrates, supercapacitors and
bio/chemical sensors development. The broader impact on society will also be
accomplished through education outreach efforts to show the opportunities and
rewards of a career in science and engineering. In addition to support
undergraduate and graduate research and modernize materials engineering
curriculum, special emphasis will be placed on high school teacher and student
education and training.