* 0800471
* GOALI: Delicate Material Characterization Using Tapping Mode AFM: Soft Impact and Nonlinear Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Balakumar Balachandran, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 06/30/2012
* USD 403,751.00

Over the last two decades, atomic force microscopy (AFM) has been used to
measure the topography of a wide range of nanoscale samples, including
semiconductor surface features, biomolecules, carbon nanostructures, and organic
monolayers. Despite the tremendous progress, gentle characterization of
nanoscale biological and other delicate structures remains a challenge since
they are susceptible to tip damage. The University of Maryland at College Park
has teamed up with Asylum Research to address this challenge. This is addressed
by developing a nonlinear dynamics based tapping mode atomic force microscopy
scheme, where the cantilever is to be excited away from its fundamental
resonance and operated close to a period-doubling bifurcation point. In order to
realize and demonstrate this scheme, multi-scale simulations are to be used to
determine the tip-sample interaction forces and experiments are to be conducted
with delicate materials including DNA, soft protein molecules (bacteriorhodpsin,
actin &amp; myosin), and squamous cancer cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a
fundamental standpoint, the proposed study can help understand qualitative
changes associated with mechanical systems with soft contacts and non-
smoothness. From an application standpoint, the extension of AFM capabilities to
characterize a wider range of soft materials can help realize commercial
benefits in the areas of healthcare, drug design, pathology, tissue engineering,
biotechnology, and other high-impact emerging technologies that are intimately
related to the well-being of human beings and where mischaracterization can have
severe consequences, even including death. Further development of simulation
methodologies will also help reduce costs associated with extensive
experimentation. Finally, the application of nanoscale science to specific
problems in a systematic manner will be useful in the education of the next-
generation of students, which is essential to ensure the nation?s
competitiveness in nanotechnology in the next few decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;