* 0800388
* A Methodology for Design of Metamaterials and Their Integration in Advanced RF Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Alejandro Diaz, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 05/31/2012
* USD 377,033.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal # 08000388&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
Methodology for Design of Metamaterials and&lt;br/&gt;Their Integration in
Advanced RF Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A. Diaz and E. Rothwell&lt;br/&gt;
Michigan State University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective of this award is to develop a new methodology for the design of
metamaterials, and the design of systems that use metamaterials. The proposed
methodology is intended to enable designers to rigorously and methodically
explore novel, complex metamaterial designs, address complex, multifunctional
performance specifications and to integrate results in design of RF
(radiofrequency) systems. Optimization algorithms based on topology optimization
methods and inverse homogenization problems in material design will be used to
support the methodologies developed in this research. Design of electrically
small RF systems will be used as a model for design using metamaterials. A
fabrication/testing/validation program will be used to validate the methodology
and to adjust the computational procedures to account for factors such as size
and edge effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will provide a rigorous and practical foundation for the design of
devices that are likely to generate new growth in a number of high-technology
industries: personal communications, medical diagnostics, sensors. When applied
to the design of electrically small antennas, this research will help meet
increasing demands for miniaturization in personal communication devices and
wireless sensors. While demonstrating the process of integration of
metamaterials in RF systems, the research will also facilitate understanding of
how to insert metamaterials in components and devices used in other areas of
technological importance. The experimental program will provide guidance to the
community on how to evaluate the performance of metamaterials. More broadly, the
integration of this research in education and outreach activities will enhance
programs for undergraduate students through the introduction of multi-
disciplinary design-build-test projects in electrical and mechanical engineering
and through the development of web-based tools that expose discoveries to a
broad audience in a format suitable for exploration and learning. &lt;br/&gt;