* 0800641
* ARPES Studies of Complex Phases and Emergent Phenomena in Nonstoichiometric Transition Metal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2012
* Hong Ding, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 04/30/2012
* USD 345,000.00

Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In general metal oxides are good insulators.
However, some transition metal oxides become unusual metals when extra electrons
are added or removed through doping process. Many novel physical phenomena, such
as high temperature superconductivity and colossal magnetoresistance, are
discovered in those transition metal oxides. This experimental project is to
study the electronic properties of several important transition metal oxides,
using a modern technique of angle-resolved photoemission in which electrons are
emitted from a material by absorbing ultraviolet (UV) light. The emitted
electrons are then studied to gain information of their properties and
configurations inside the material. The information of electronic structure of
materials is crucial in understanding their physical and chemical properties
that may have great application potentials. The success of this project will
significantly advance our understanding of high temperature superconductivity in
particular, and condensed matter physics in general. This project will also make
a significant impact on education of students by introducing them to exciting
new materials, cutting-edge techniques, and advanced
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
individual investigator award will support systematic angle-resolved
photoelectron spectroscopy (ARPES) studies on complex phases and emergent
phenomena in nonstoichiometric transition metal oxide (TMO) materials. It is
known that many correlated TMO materials exhibit unusual physical phenomena,
such as novel superconductivity and colossal magnetoresistance. The materials
studied in this project include cuprates, ruthenates, and cobaltates, covering a
wide space of two-dimensional TMO materials, from square to triangular lattice,
and from 3d to 4d electron orbital. This project will focus on high-resolution
ARPES measurements of Fermi surface evolution and low-energy excitations in
various novel phases of these materials. A better understanding of electronic
structure in these important TMO materials will significantly advance our
knowledge of Mott physics, novel superconductivity, quantum criticality, and
non-Fermi liquid physics. This project will also make an impact on the education
of post-doc, graduate, undergraduate, and high school students by introducing
them to exciting new materials, cutting-edge techniques, and fundamental
condensed matter physics.&lt;br/&gt;