* 0800290
* GOALI: Hybrid Cellular Automata for Topology and Topography Synthesis in Automotive Structural Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Stephen Batill, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 05/31/2012
* USD 310,095.00

0800290 Renaud Abstract

The research objective of this award is the development of a crashworthy hybrid
cellular automata (crasHCA) method for nonlinear-dynamic transient topology and
topography optimization. Crashworthiness design methods are used to synthesize
vehicle structures to protect occupants against injury. Currently, the HCA
approach for structural design is limited to linear static analysis for
structural synthesis. In addition, competing topology optimization approaches
require sensitivity calculations and are therefore limited to linear static
analysis. Because analytic expressions for sensitivities or numerical approaches
for sensitivity calculation in nonlinear transient problems are not available,
current practice is limited to the use of surrogate models for design
optimization. The results of this research will provide users with a convergent
nonlinear transient topology and topography optimization approach for
crashworthiness design. The HCA framework to date has been limited by the
ability to use only brick elements for topology optimization. In this
investigation the HCA methodology will include the use of shell elements within
a framework referred to as topography optimization for the design of stamped
sheet metal components.

If successful this proposal will facilitate novel, new designs that will lead to
increased levels of protection for both drivers and passengers in automotive
vehicles. In the automotive industry the use of topology optimization for
structural component design is increasingly popular. The development of a
topology optimization capability that facilitates nonlinear transient topology
and topography optimization (crasHCA) will allow vehicle designers to
significantly improve vehicle safety in reduced product development cycle times.
CrasHCA topology optimization will allow designers to move beyond surrogate
models and to facilitate structural synthesis under nonlinear transient dynamic
loading. In this GOALI investigation the PI and students will interact with
Honda R&D Americas to insure technology transfer to industry. The crasHCA
methodology for nonlinear transient topology optimization will be validated
using real application test problems provided by Honda. Fabrication and
mechanical testing of the synthesized designs at Honda?s research facility will
further contribute to verification and validation.