* 0800048
* SGER: Developing a New Experimental Technique for Quantitative Nanotwin Microstructure Characterization by Using In-Situ Diffraction
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2008,12/31/2009
* Yu Wang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 12/31/2009
* USD 199,998.00

TECHNICAL: This SGER project will develop a new experimental technique to use
in-situ x-ray and neutron diffractions to quantitatively characterize nanotwin
microstructures and their real-time evolutions under applied stress, electric
and/or magnetic fields. This is a high-risk and high-payoff research. The high
risk lies in the untested and novel idea of extracting quantitative information
of nanotwin microstructures (i.e., dominant thicknesses and variant volume
fractions, and their statistical variations) from the diffraction patterns. Such
a nanotwin microstructure is a highly heterogeneous system producing
extraordinary diffraction patterns that cannot be explained by the conventional
diffraction theory of coarse domains. The idea is motivated by a newly
discovered, previously unexplored nanotwin diffraction phenomenon as recently
revealed by the PI's preliminary nanotwin diffraction theory, which shows that
the unusual position, shape, width and intensity of the superlattice reflection
peaks contain the quantitative information about nanotwin microstructures and
could be analyzed, thus creating a highly promising opportunity for the
exploratory research to develop new nanotwin diffraction analysis technique.
This SGER project will use the nanotwins of various periods (conventionally
known as multiple long-period layered martensitic phases) in ferromagnetic shape
memory alloy Ni-Mn-Ga as model system and perform small-scale critical
experimental and theoretical/computational tasks, namely, high-resolution
transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), x-ray and neutron diffraction,
nanotwin diffraction theory and computation, to benchmark the new experimental
technique. NON-TECHNICAL: If successful, the payoff is high: it will develop a
transformative experimental technique for quantitative nanotwin microstructure
characterization by using simple in-situ diffraction, open a new direction for
the "established" diffraction research, and catalyze rapid advances in
experimental investigation of nanodomained materials. In particular, the new
technique will use the much easier in-situ diffraction to at least partially
replace HRTEM, which is currently the only tool capable of nanodomain
characterization, but is painstaking, costly and time-consuming impractical for
analyzing many samples. The new experimental technique will provide a new,
powerful and convenient experimental tool for nanodomained materials
characterization, which will, in turn, expedite our understanding of nanodomain
phenomena in many important functional materials. The project will contribute to
human resource development by providing opportunity for participants to work on
state-of-the-art exploratory research.