* 0800414
* Development and Implementation of  Staggered BEM-FEM For The Assessment of Vibrations Induced By High Speed Trains
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Dimitris Rizos, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2012
* USD 240,000.00

The research objective of this project is to formulate a systematic and
efficient computational approach for computer simulations to estimate the
vibrations on the train, track, free-field and nearby surface or embedded
structures generated by the high speed trains. The passage of high speed trains
over soft soil sites can create vibrations similar to a sonic boom with the
potential to affect the train and track, and cause damage to nonstructural
components in adjacent structures and annoyance to the occupants. This work
couples the well established Boundary Element Method and Finite Element Method
in the time domain. The approach developed here can accommodate arbitrary soil
profile, track and train configurations. All system components are equally
represented in sufficient detail in a fully integrated dynamic interaction model
for desired levels of computational accuracy. The approach will be tested and
verified on the field data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of
this project will provide a computational tool to analyze the complex behavior
of train-track-soil system and play an important role in future development of
the high speed trains in the United States. The outcomes of this project could
be used in future developments of design charts for rapid vibration assessment
of adjacent structures caused by high speed trains, in studies evaluating
effectiveness of vibration mitigation measures, in integrated cost-benefit
analysis and decision making processes related to train induced vibration
reduction, and to study train stability affected by the interaction between the
train, track and soil. This methodology can be expanded to problems involving
vibration studies on bridges due to passage of high speed trains. The findings
of this project will be disseminated to practicing engineers and designers, and
integrated in the existing graduate and undergraduate engineering courses to
provide the students the most recent information on the state of the art of the
high speed train induced vibrations and their mitigation.