* 0800948
* Research in Ring Theory and Noncommutative Algebraic Geometry
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Kenneth Goodearl, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,514.00

The Principal Investigator proposes to continue his investigations into the
structure of various classes of noncommutative rings, particularly quantum
coordinate rings (quantized algebras of functions) and related algebras, with a
focus on geometric aspects of noncommutative rings and ring-theoretic aspects of
noncommutative algebraic geometry. The proposed projects, located within
noncommutative algebra, will build up the infrastructure of and interconnections
among active parts of several related areas -- noncommutative algebraic
geometry, quantum groups, Poisson algebras, and ring theory. Roughly speaking,
the long-term goals framing many of these projects stem from noncommutative
algebraic geometry, and the basic examples come from quantum groups, while many
lines of approach are recruited from ring theory. A major new drive directing
the PI's research on the subject is the investigation of Poisson analogs in
semiclassical limits of phenomena known or expected to hold in quantum algebras.
The parallels that have arisen so far provide strong motivation for the strategy
of linking up the two sides of the coin; at this point, knowledge of one side
allows the formulation of more precise conjectures for the other. A major goal
is to tighten these connections.

A pervasive theme in the mathematical study of geometric objects is that the
properties of these objects are completely encoded in the functions on them, and
are often more accessible via these functions than directly. Within algebraic
geometry -- the study of geometric spaces defined by polynomial equations -- it
is the polynomial functions on a space that determine it. These functions form a
ring (a system endowed with compatible addition and multiplication operations)
which is, moreover, commutative (fg = gf always). In the 1980s, researchers in
the former Soviet Union, in the process of solving certain problems in
theoretical quantum physics, discovered rings which appear to enjoy all the
structure of rings of functions on geometric spaces, except that the
multiplication is noncommutative. In honor of their origins in quantum theory,
these rings are now called "quantized coordinate rings." It proved very useful
to treat them as if they were rings of functions (except for the
noncommutativity), and the guiding principle in their study became the search
for "noncommutative versions of the geometry." Sufficiently many common
phenomena (both geometric and algebraic) have been discovered in a wide range of
quantized coordinate rings to lead one to conjecture that general, axiomatizable
underpinnings within this class of rings are responsible for the parallels in
their behavior. The main long-term thrust of the PI's research is to uncover
such general structures and decode their geometric content. In the medium term,
the proposal aims to extend the range of known shared phenomena within this
class of rings, in order to gain better insight into their common base.