* 0800342
* Workshop: Systems Analysis Approach to Health and Wellbeing in the Changing Urban Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2008,06/30/2009
* Dov Jaron, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 06/30/2009
* USD 30,000.00

This award will partially support a workshop entitled "Towards a Systems
Analysis Approach to Health and Well-being in the Changing Urban Environment."
The aim of this workshop is to explore the requirements and determine an
implementation plan for developing a systems model for health and wellbeing in
the urban setting. Such a systems approach would build on the ongoing interests
and projects of numerous scientific and engineering disciplines. It should
reveal important issues regarding population health on which reliable scientific
understanding is lacking and thus make an important contribution to setting the
future global health research agenda. In addition to contributions to health
research, this workshop would promote exchange of scientific and engineering
information and enhance collaboration among scientists and engineers of varying
disciplines. The intellectual merit of the workshop is grounded in that for the
first time, scientists and engineers from many different disciplines will be
brought together to explore ways in which the complex urban setting can be
systematically and analytically studied, advancing new approaches and promoting
new research methodologies that can lead to improved health and wellbeing in the
changing urban environment. In addition to promoting exchange of scientific and
engineering information and collaboration among different disciplines, it is
expected that the broader impacts of this workshop will, in the long run, lead
to new intellectual foundation and robust approaches among scientific
disciplines that currently are either only peripherally involved in the health
area or that are using only qualitative approaches. It is also expected that
these disciplines will increase their participation in addressing health issues
in the future.