* 0800417
* Magnetic-Field-Dependent Dynamic Mechanical Behavior of Carbon Nanotube Reinforced Magnetostrictive Nanocomposites: An Integrated Experimental and Modeling Study
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Lizhi Sun, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 04/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Magneto-mechanical behavior of magnetostrictive composites is of great interest
to researchers and engineers in science and engineering disciplines. However,
the inferior mechanical response of the matrix severely impedes their wide
applications. The proposed research is aimed to develop a new type of
magnetostrictive elastomer nanocomposites reinforced with carbon nanotubes.
Specifically, a combined experimental and multi-scale modeling investigation is
proposed to study the effective magnetic-field-dependent dynamic mechanical
behavior of magnetostrictive nanocomposites embedded with mixed multi-walled
carbon nanotubes and magnetostrictive microparticles. This project will focus on
the fabrication process and property testing, multiscale modeling, and eddy
current-induced magneto-mechanical coupling of magnetostrictive nanocomposites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is among the first attempts to combine the
advantages of nanocomposites and magnetostrictive materials to produce novel
magnetostrictive nanocomposites. The success of this work is expected to lead to
significant advances in the development of smart composites with applications
such as adaptive vibration control and magnetoelastic sensors for civil
infrastructures monitoring. In addition, the project provides an opportunity for
performing interdisciplinary research and cross-disciplinary education. Two
graduate students will be supported and trained to carry out a significant
component of the research. Priority will be given to underrepresented minority
students in participation of related experiments and demonstrations. This
multidisciplinary nature of the project will attract and retain minority
students and expose them to the state-of-the-art research. &lt;br/&gt;