* 0800790
* Understanding Elastomer/Stiff Material Interfaces in Fluidic Environments for Bioanalytical Microdevices
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2008,03/31/2011
* Matthew Begley, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Glaucio H. Paulino
* 03/31/2011
* USD 349,735.00

Understanding Elastomer/Stiff Material Interfaces in Fluidic Environments for
Bioanalytical Microdevices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a combined
experimental and theoretical study of the stability of interfaces between
elastomers and stiff materials (such as glass and metals). The central objective
is to identify critical parameters (such as adhesion energy, pressures and
dimensions) that control thin film debonding in the presence of different
fluidic environments. The results will then be used to identify geometries and
surface treatments that improve reliability and performance in fluidic
bioanalytical microdevices. The approach is to create micropatterned channels
that are capped by elastomer films: interface stability will then be quantified
(using optical and interferometric measurements) as different fluids are
injected into the channels. This study will include the characterization of
interfaces in existing devices that perform DNA extraction, amplification and
detection.&lt;br/&gt;The insights generated by this program will provide
societal benefits by enabling the development microdevices that perform
biochemical manipulations for genomic and proteomic analysis. The ability to
control interface stability will not only improve device reliability, but also
enable simplified fluidic flow control using passive features that open and
close based on tailored interface behavior (as opposed to direct mechanical
actuation). This development will facilitate both scientific discovery (by
broadening the range of fluidic manipulations at the microscale) and the
targeted development of portable devices for clinical applications. The project
also bears direct relevance for flexible ?macroelectronics?, e.g. video displays
that are created by depositing electronic features on flexible elastomer
substrates. The project will integrate research and education by placing
research devices in undergraduate laboratories focusing on design, rapid
prototyping, material properties, dynamics and chemical separations. &lt;br/&gt;