* 0800415
* Novel Framework Materials and their Fundamental Properties at High Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2008,10/31/2011
* John Parise, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 10/31/2011
* USD 540,698.00

DMR-0800415 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to
discover novel materials as porous materials using hydrothermal techniques and
ionic solvents. Characterization of the atomic architectures, which impart the
selective properties unique to porous materials, will be accomplished by
studying their structures in situ, including at high pressures, and uncovering
general mechanisms responsible for storage and selectivity. The development of
sample cells at synchrotron X-ray and neutron facilities, where the penetrating
beams allow studies of materials under their operating conditions, will be
continued. These devices are available to the solid-state and materials
chemistry community. Transformational materials needed for energy storage and
waste clean up require a varied approach for their synthesis and for studies of
their structures. Solutions for gas storage and toxic ion sequestration may
include novel synthetic porous materials operating at high-pressures to increase
their capacity. Relatively few studies focus on in situ diffraction, leaving the
storage mechanism under the material's operating conditions largely unaddressed.
Graduate students will train in interdisciplinary settings at Stony Brook and at
the national laboratories. The PI and his group are active in bringing science
to a wider audience through well-attended annual lectures to the public and
Suffolk County high-school teachers. The research proposed bridges synthetic
chemistry and high-pressure research, a burgeoning field in condensed matter
research in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed
solutions to the energy challenges of the next half centaury include the
synthesis, manipulation and disposal of materials at extreme conditions,
including pressure. Examples of the use of extreme conditions include the
sequestration of carbon dioxide in deep reservoirs and the potential to store
hydrogen in porous materials at high pressure. While characterization of porous
materials at room pressure is convenient, the understanding of the pressure-
induced changes is pivotal to the development of real-world applications for new
classes of materials being synthesized. The graduate students involved will
explore a new world in "extreme conditions" research that requires new tools for
synthesis and characterization, including state-of-the-art synchrotron X-ray and
neutron scattering techniques capable of penetrating the cells we develop.
Outreach to a broad community will raise awareness of the need for
transformational materials to address global issues. These ideas are distilled
into a freshmen seminar "On being human" which emphasizes how scientists view
the world, into undergraduate courses on environmental chemistry and graduate
courses. These endeavors will be presented annually to the public as part of a
Friday-night lecture series, in a summer teacher training course and to high
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;