* 0800822
* Coupled Hydraulic-Structural Testing to Improve Highway Bridge Performance Under Extreme Hurricane Wave Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Daniel Cox, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 09/30/2011
* USD 100,009.00

The research objective of this project is to study the effect of hurricane
induced waves on highway bridge structures in coastal areas. For this, the
project we will (1) conduct a series of wave-bridge physical model tests under
the assumption of a completely rigid bridge, (2) conduct a second series of
wave-bridge physical model tests for a flexible structure, modeling the sway of
the bridge using two sets of springs of known stiffness, and (3) conduct a
preliminary numerical model investigation to evaluate the performance of an
existing fluid-structure model. The research combines expertise in coastal
engineering to analyze the wave forcing and structural engineering to analyze
the bridge response. Deliverables include developing a fundamental relationship
between the wave characteristics (significant wave height and period), geometry
(bridge deck, air gap, and water depth), and response (wave loads). A second
relationship will be developed to provide probabilities of the extreme wave
loads exceeding their certain values for given sea state and problem
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will provide new
insights into the failure mechanisms of highway bridges subjected to hurricane
wave loads, similar to the bridge failures along the US Gulf of Mexico coast
during hurricane Ivan in 2004 and Katrina in 2005. The new relationships between
wave characteristics and bridge response will provide tools for engineers to
evaluate the risk of failure for existing bridges to hurricanes and to design
new and retrofit existing bridges to withstand these loads. One graduate student
is trained on this project. The research results will be disseminated through
journal papers and conference presentations. The project is integrated in an
existing K-12 outreach program at the NSF NEES Tsunami Facility at Oregon State
University.&lt;br/&gt;