* 0800433
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:  Deformation Machining - A New Hybrid Process
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2011
* Bethany Woody, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 04/30/2011
* USD 256,063.00

The research objectives of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) collaborative project are (1) to provide fundamental
theoretical and experimental understanding of the newly proposed deformation
machining process, (2) to establish efficient numerical modeling and simulation
methodologies, and (3) to integrate the fundamental understanding and modeling
with pre-process and in-process strategies for process planning, part
repeatability, part accuracy, and design guidelines. The approach for the
simulation will be an adaptive finite element method that will significantly
reduce computation time, thereby allowing the study of various process
combinations and sequences. Particular emphasis will be placed determining
residual stresses and fatigue life through experiments and simulation. Numerical
and experimental analysis will be used to study material deformation behavior,
to predict fatigue life, and to design workable operational sequencing to
achieve process repeatability and accuracy.

If successful, the benefits and broader impacts of this research will come from
the greater reliability and improved design freedom. This new manufacturing
process will permit new structures, geometries, and products that are not
feasible using current manufacturing processes. The theoretical understanding,
experimental techniques, and new simulation methods will provide new insights.
As a result, enhanced product capability as well as new flexibility and
functionality in terms of manufacturability and product features will be
possible. Finally, in the academic and educational environment, the proposal of
a new hybrid process opens the door for collaboration between research
communities that traditionally do not interact. The education plan will
encourage students with diverse backgrounds to collaborate, and it will provide
them with new opportunities and mentoring from the team members. The close
interaction among students and faculty from each university, government
laboratory personnel, and industry personnel, will result in rich, cross-
disciplinary educational experience.