* 0800037
* Non-Contact Experimental Technique to Characterize Interfacial Crack Propagation in Nano-Scale and Micro-Scale Thin Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Suresh Sitaraman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Martin L. Dunn
* 05/31/2012
* USD 256,000.00

Thin film interfacial delamination is an important reliability concern in a wide
range of applications. Although a significant amount of interfacial delamination
is caused by fatigue loading, existing literature has not adequately addressed
this topic, especially for nano-scale thin films. This proposal aims to develop
an innovative fatigue delamination test that can be used to monitor and
characterize interfacial delamination propagation for nano-scale as well as
micro-scale thin films. The proposed test has several intellectual aspects: it
uses nano-scale metal traces to monitor the delamination propagation; it uses
electromagnetic actuation to provide the driving force needed for delamination
propagation, and thus the test method does not require any fixtures to apply
loads; using an array of cantilevers placed in an external magnetic field and
with in-situ crack propagation capabilities, the proposed test technique will be
a significant advancement in interfacial fatigue crack testing.

Nano-scale thin films are being increasingly used in a wide range of
applications such as solid-state devices, integrated electronic components,
sensors, MEMS/NEMS, antireflective optical films for better light transmission,
conductive films in display technologies, thin-film coating in solar cells,
magnetic coatings for media storage, and flexible and bendable lenses for space
exploration. The proposed research will have a strong impact on their
reliability. The research approach and the findings will be integrated in
graduate and undergraduate education. Also, students will get exposure to nano-
scale thin film fabrication and testing. The research methodology and results
will be published in technical journals and presented in conferences to reach a
wide-ranging audience.

