* 0800673
* Parabolic Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Giovanni Forni, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2012
* USD 394,917.00

We will study quantitative equidistribution and other ergodic properties, such
as weak mixing/mixing, for several examples of parabolic flows, in particular
billiard flows in polygons and reparametrizations of nilpotent flows. In the
past several years, we have developed a method to investigate the ergodic
theoretical properties of parabolic flows based on the study of invariant
distributions (distributional obstructions to the existence of solutions of
cohomological equations), on the Gottschalk-Hedlund theorem and on the
construction of a renormalization dynamics. We have succesfully applied our
ideas in several papers where we have proved bounds on the speed of ergodicity
in a few fundamental cases. We intend to test our method further in other more
challenging cases, which so far have been out of reach mainly beacuse no
renormalization scheme is available. The problems that we intend to attack
include longstanding open questions such as the question on weak mixing on
invariant surfaces for flows in rational polygons and the question on the speed
of (unique) ergodicity for nilflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our long term goal is
to contribute to develop a theory on a class of weakly chaotic dynamical
systems, called parabolic, which, despite some recent progress, are not yet
sufficiently well understood. Parabolic motion is characterized by a power-law
divergence (for instance linear, quadratic, etc.) of nearby trajectories with
time. It represents an intermediate situation between strongly chaotic motion
(exponentially fast divergence) and regular motion (no or extremely slow
divergence). Motions at the extreme ends of the spectrum are comparatevely much
better understood than parabolic motion. We will study specific questions on the
dynamics of specific classes of examples, chosen for their fundamental nature
and for their relevance in applications to physics, to geometry and to number
theory. For instance, certain parabolic systems are relevant in the study of
celestial mechanics, or as a testing ground for conjectures on the relation
between classical and quantum mechanics (quantum chaos), other systems have deep
connections to questions in number theory. Advances in our understanding of
these systems will improve our fundamental knowledge of dynamical phenomena
which are relevant for the natural sciences and for technological applications.