* 0800044
* Developing High Performance, Computationally Efficient Nonlinear Control Techniques for Polynomial Nonlinear Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Fen Wu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 05/31/2012
* USD 224,997.00

This proposal is aimed at developing a novel control approach to overcome
limitations and computational complexity of existing nonlinear control
techniques. By exploiting the polynomial nonlinear vector field through power
transformation, computationally efficient control techniques could be obtained
using non-quadratic Lyapunov functions and Sum-of-Squares programming
techniques. The systematic control design approach has the potential to solve
challenging nonlinear optimal and robust control problems for polynomial
nonlinear systems. The proposed research could also help automate the control
design process and verification of high performance nonlinear control laws, thus
significantly reducing the cost and design cycle of nonlinear control systems.
It is expected that the new nonlinear control approach will not only provide
effective control designs and computational tools for polynomial nonlinear
systems, it may also lead to the invention of competitive nonlinear control
theory.

The application of proposed nonlinear control approach to spacecraft control
could enhance its robustness and improve spacecraft operating performance by
optimizing its nonlinear control strategy. Because of its general nature, the
proposed research is also expected to have major impacts on other applications
including aircraft, robotic manipulators, automotive engines, and magnetic-
levitated rotary machines, etc. Through close collaboration with NASA Johnson
Space Center and out-reach activities, the research results will be disseminated
to aerospace industry/control community and will result in automated nonlinear
control design techniques. In addition, the development of an on-line controls
course and a virtual experiment testbed could provide a unique platform for
learning, and enhance the educational program at North Carolina State University
by attracting non-traditional students and providing students with hands-on
experience. These out-reach and educational activities will also strongly
promote human resource development and diversity.





