* 0800366
* Collaborative Research: Novel Boron-based One-Dimensional Nanostructures: Synthesis and Measurement of Transport Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2008,11/30/2011
* Terry Xu, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 11/30/2011
* USD 193,869.00

Thermoelectrics represents direct energy conversion between thermal and
electrical energy, which is an all solid state, environmentally benign
technology. Currently thermoelectric energy conversion suffers from low
efficiency, which is only about one third of other widely used energy conversion
technologies. Nanowires are one promising class of materials that can enhance
the thermoelectric energy conversion efficiency to be comparable to other energy
conversion technologies, which can revolutionize the energy conversion industry.
The objective of this proposal is to create novel boron-based (i.e., boron and
boride) nanowires, which have unique structures in favor of thermoelectric
energy conversion. We will integrate a proved-successful suspended microheater
device with a unique cryogenic four-probe scanning tunneling microscope to
experimentally measure the thermoelectric energy conversion performance of the
as-synthesized boron-based nanowires to understand the fundamental materials
behaviors and their potentials for thermoelectric energy conversion. The success
of this project will produce a new class of high performance materials for
thermoelectric power generation, which has extensive implications in portable
power supplies, waste heat recovery, and prevention of global warming crisis.
The project will promote close collaborations among the University of North
Carolina at Charlotte (UNC Charlotte), Vanderbilt University (VU) and Oak Ridge
National Lab (ORNL) to form a highly interdisciplinary team with synergetic
expertise in materials science, thermophysical property measurement, and ultra-
microscopy. The truly interdisciplinary nature of this research program will
help to achieve interdisciplinary training of graduate, undergraduate, and
minority students. The PIs will make the efforts of extending the research
impact to K-12 students by demonstrating thermoelectric energy conversion and
explaining the basic idea of thermoelectric energy conversion.

