* 0800533
* Micro- and Nano-Mechanics of Active Biopolymer Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Alexander Levine, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 06/30/2011
* USD 320,002.00

The research objective of this award is to develop new analytic and numerical
approaches to examine the complex relationship of filament mechanics and network
structure to the collective elastic properties of semiflexible networks.
Semiflexible networks are cross-linked aggregates of stiff polymers. They are
fundamentally different from the better understood polymeric materials that are
the usual products of modern synthetic chemistry. Under applied stress
semiflexible networks can store elastic energy in both the stretching and
bending of the constituent filaments, while traditional polymer networks, which
are composed of highly flexible polymer chains, store elastic energy only in
filament stretching. The most common example of a semiflexible network is found
in the cytoskeleton of living cells. There stiff protein filaments (F-actin) are
cross-linked to form a stress-bearing framework that gives the cell its
mechanical rigidity. Recent experiments have shown that small changes in network
architecture and in the action of molecular motors can lead to significant
changes the elasticity of these F-actin networks. This research will explore in
detail how these changes in network structure and non-equilibrium steady-state
(via the action of the molecular motors) leads to large mechanical changes of
the network.

Among the benefits of the successful completion of this work will be a deeper
understanding of the design principles for building a new class of light-weight,
mechanically tunable materials. The theory will also address new biomimetic
approaches to materials design that use the action of endogenous motors to tune
mechanical properties through the modification of the materials non-equilibrium
steady-state. Such research will enable the creation of new bio-compatible
materials whose mechanical properties can be precisely controlled. These
materials may find applications in the promotion of wound healing. Finally, this
research will assist the training of students/postdocs working at the interface
of the physics, biology, and engineering.