* 0800793
* Nonlinear Dynamics and Bifurcations in Cardiac Tissue
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Elizabeth Cherry, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2012
* USD 369,000.00

The heart utilizes electrical waves that normally spread in a coordinated manner
to initiate a mechanical contraction, but in pathologic states, electrical wave
propagation can be disrupted by pre-existing heterogeneous regions or by dynamic
heterogeneities that develop as a consequence of rapid pacing and the nonlinear
dynamics of the system. An important example of the latter that is often a
precursor to life-threatening arrhythmias is electrical alternans, in which two
successive paced beats elicit electrical responses (and thus mechanical
responses) of different amplitudes and durations. Despite much attention,
fundamental characteristics about alternans remain under-studied, and attempts
to use electrical interventions to control alternans have not been successful on
a global level. Our research aims to advance the understanding of cardiac
alternans at the most basic level and to use this knowledge to implement
improved schemes of electrical control using fundamental nonlinear dynamics
principles. In particular, we will characterize the type of period-doubling
bifurcation underlying electrical alternans, develop mathematical models to
investigate the dynamical and biophysical mechanisms underlying alternans, and
to implement and test novel control algorithms. Mathematical modeling and
computer simulations in single-and multi-processor environments will be used in
conjunction with experimental techniques, including microelectrodes, laser-
scanning confocal microscopy, and optical mapping using fluorescence signals
obtained with voltage-sensitive dyes in cardiac tissue. The proposed research
will elucidate the nature of the period-doubling bifurcation to electrical
alternans, quantify the roles of intracellular calcium dynamics and
transmembrane voltage in the origin of alternans, and improve the understanding
of global control algorithms in tissue. In the course of this project, graduate
and undergraduate students will participate in this research and will benefit
from an interdisciplinary environment. A key component of the project is to
promote broad dissemination of information. The mathematical models and
algorithms developed in this proposal will be made available free as stand alone
codes and interactive Java applets via web sites. Results will be presented as
well, with a special emphasis on interactive programs and animations for both
scientists and the general public. Ultimately, this research may lead to
improved treatments for life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias: by preventing
alternans, the lethal cardiac arrhythmias that alternans can trigger also can be
avoided. Furthermore, the improved understanding of electrical abnormalities and
novel methods for controlling complex dynamics may translate to other related
systems, including the brain and peripheral nervous system and other types of
muscle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;