* 0800151
* GOALI: Region Partitioning
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Yinyu Ye, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 06/30/2012
* USD 318,000.00

This grant funds the development of fast geometric algorithms for dividing a
given region into pieces. These algorithms will be developed for a variety of
situations where one seeks to partition a region, such as redistricting, drawing
organ transplant regions (matches for an organ are first sought within the same
region), drawing air traffic control regions (or dynamically adjusting them),
and dividing a region among a set of vehicles in order to better surveil/survey
the region or serve customers distributed in the region. In each of these
applications, the algorithms will seek to satisfy and/or optimize different
criteria. Redistricting has the criteria that each district contains the same
population and optimizes goals such as competitiveness or compactness. On the
other hand, the organ transplant regions should be drawn so that each contains a
transplant center and optimizes a combination of efficiency (few organs go to
waste) and fairness (people in different regions have roughly equal chances of
receiving an organ). In air traffic control we seek to balance and minimize the
work load of the air traffic control regions. The goal in the vehicle routing
problems is to minimize the time until the region is completely surveyed or all
the customers have been served. This grant also funds performance analyses of
the developed algorithms in both theory and practice (the algorithms developed
for the vehicle problems, for example, will not be optimal since these problems
are generalizations of the traveling salesman problem and are thus NP
hard).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will lead to fairer,
more compact legislative and congressional districts; more efficient and fair
organ transplant regions; more efficient and load-balanced air traffic control
regions; and improvements in logistics and vehicle routing. It will also extend
the reach of optimization from algebraic and combinatorial problems to geometric
ones. In addition, it will provide a framework and generalize a number of
existing problems in computational geometry.&lt;br/&gt;