* 0800769
* Engineering a localized pH switch at the solid-liquid interface
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Stefan Zauscher, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 05/31/2011
* USD 256,174.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a new class of surface
modification techniques that use programmable ferroelectric substrates to
control the local hydrogen ion concentration (pH) at the solid/liquid interface.
The key concept exploited in this work is that polarized ferroelectric films
produce intense electric fields which can substantially alter the counterion
concentration near the surface of the ferroelectric. By controlling the local
polarization state of the ferroelectric film, it will be possible to precisely
tune the local pH over a very large operating range (i.e. from as low as pH=0 to
as high as pH=14). The research approach will employ a combination of
characterization tools, including AFM, pH dyes, and self-assembled monolayers to
study the local pH above polarized ferroelectric films. Computational techniques
will also be developed to compare and interpret the experimental results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will provide
an opportunity to create a compact device for synthesizing polypeptide micro-
arrays via step and repeat synthesis using pH sensitive Fmoc protective blocking
chemistry. Additionally, this research may be used to modulate surface wetting
properties, providing an additional degree of control in microfluidic systems.
Due to the highly interdisciplinary nature of this work, graduate and
undergraduate students will have broad exposure to the fields of
electromagnetism, chemistry, biology and computer science. Minority studies from
Historically Black College and Universities (HBCU?s) or Historically Minority
Universities (HMU?s), will be included in this work for two summer months. In
addition, undergraduate students from Duke University will participate in this
research through the Duke University Pratt Fellows program. &lt;br/&gt;