* 0800735
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:  Design and Manufacturing of Bioactive Surgical Fixation Devices Using Injection Molding of Gradient Cellular Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Peter Lelkes, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 04/30/2012
* USD 372,506.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) Collaborative Research project is to investigate novel surgical
fixation devices (screw, anchor, plate, pin, staple, etc.) that not only secure
a graft in place, but incorporate bioactive materials such as growth factors,
drugs, and cells, intended to promote bone tissue growth. The new devices can
eliminate painful secondary operations, adverse effects of permanent implants,
and the lack of bioactive features in existing surgical fixation devices. The
research addresses challenges in biocompatible, biodegradable and bioactive
materials for surgical fixation devices and investigates a new delivery method
for bio-reagents through the surgical devices. The approach will be: 1. Identify
suitable structural and bioactive materials for a strong fixation device body
and efficient bone-tissue healing and growth. 2. Design a new bioactive
interference screw, as a specific example and application with required
mechanical integrity and bioactivity. 3. Explore a new technique, gradient
cellular structure (GCS), to create interconnective porous structure to control
screw mechanical strength and assist in bioactive materials delivery. 4. Through
testing to find, control, optimize and integrate all required functionalities
such as mechanical integrity, material degradation rate, and bioactive reagents
delivery rate.

If successful, the benefits and broader impacts of this research will be: to
replace current passive orthopedic surgery devices with active devices, i.e. the
surgical devices not only serve fixation and support purposes but also have
curing, healing and tissue-promoting biological functions; a long term research
and educational relationship with Arthrex, Inc. will be built for the new
technology development and transfer; three doctoral students and two senior
design teams will be trained; three project-based learning modules will be
created to strengthen the undergraduate mechanical and biomedical engineering
curricula, engaging students with design projects in bioactive fixation devices
and bio-reagents delivery. New findings from the research will be disseminated
in professional journals and at conferences. The project will also be used in
specially designed outreach workshops for local high school and community
college students, including many underrepresented minority students to showcase
high-tech mechanical and polymer engineering applications in biotechnology.