* 0800718
* Understanding Corrosion and Diffusion Behavior in Metal Particle Polymer Composites for Corrosion Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2008,03/31/2012
* Po-Hao Huang, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2012
* USD 265,269.00

This research focuses on the fundamental processes of corrosion and multi-phase
diffusion in metal particle polymer composites with functionalized nano
behavior. The knowledge attained by this research will enable a new type of
MEMS-based corrosion sensor technology that is small-size, tailorable and smart,
ultimately allowing the US to better focus financial investments earmarked for
infrastructure repair. Experiments will be carried out to (i) understand the
fundamental issues associated with the fabrication of polymers with micro- and
nano-particle inclusions and (ii) study material performance in simulated
corrosive environments. Atomistic simulation is used to study the nanoscale
details of diffusion and corrosion in particle polymer composites. The proposed
simulations will provide a detailed understanding of the role of the inclusions
on the structure of the polymer chains in the matrix and on the transport of
corrosive molecules through the composite. Fundamental aspects of diffusion and
particle reactions in the composites studied in this work potentially have broad
applicability to other sensing technologies. This project will integrate the NSF
REU site in the Department of Mechanical Engineering, NSF DUE site for Robert
Noyce Scholarships Program, and George Washington Carver program at the
University of Arkansas to recruit underrepresented students and interface with
STEM K-12 teachers in high-need areas.