* 0800168
* Scale-Dependent Crystal Plasticity and Nanoindentation-Induced Dislocation Microstructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* George Pharr, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Martin L. Dunn
* 04/30/2012
* USD 316,643.00

CMMI 0800168: Scale-Dependent Crystal Plasticity and Nanoindentation-Induced
Dislocation Microstructure Yanfei Gao (PI), George M. Pharr (Co-PI) University
of Tennessee, Knoxville

The objective of this research is directed to a mechanistic understanding of the
scale-dependent plastic behavior of single crystals by a quantitative comparison
of measured and simulated near-surface dislocation microstructure induced by
nanoindentation. Existing theoretical/experimental comparison has generally been
limited to macroscopic information such as hardness. Experimentally,
nanoindentation tests will be employed to achieve controlled defect
distributions by varying the material type, indenter shape, and crystallographic
orientations. Artifacts in continuous stiffness measurement and reliable
hardness extraction will be examined. The spatially resolved lattice-
misorientation measurements with sub-micron resolution will be performed using
microfocus x-ray technique. From modeling standpoint, the measured dislocation
microstructure will be used as input to examine the crystallographic nature of
the relationship between lattice rotation, incompatible lattice deformation, and
geometrically-necessary-dislocation distributions. Thus various gradient
plasticity theories can be validated and calibrated. The source limited behavior
will be investigated by applying various degrees of pre-strain prior to
indentation and qualitatively by utilizing a discrete dislocation model.

The research will lead to benefits and impacts for mechanics theorists in the
critical evaluation of scale-dependent constitutive models and for materials
scientists in advancing design capabilities of small scale material structures.
The multidisciplinary nature will be a disseminative example for undergraduate
and graduate education. New instructional materials and hands-on laboratory
demonstrations will be developed for incorporation into outreach and diversity
programs, which are designed to inspire interests of high school students and to
help recruit students from underrepresented groups in engineering sciences.

