* 0800538
* Ergodic Properties of Mathematical Billiards
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Nandor Simanyi, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2011
* USD 125,818.00

The theory of dynamical systems studies the time-evolution of complicated,
multi-component systems, like particle systems in statistical physics, reaction
kinetics from chemistry, the behavior of the atmosphere (hence the relevance in
weather forecasting), population dynamics, developments on the stock market,
etc. By nature, this theory is closely related to - and is partly arising from -
the theory of differential equations and stochastic processes. An interesting
feature of the theory of dynamical systems is that it helps us better understand
such crucial phenomena in the time evolution of the above mentioned systems, as
the high sensitivity of the solution to initial conditions, sometimes referred
to as chaos, or chaotic behavior. My present proposal targets the investigation
and better understanding of a popular and important class of mostly chaotically
behaving mathematical models, namely the so called mathematical billiards. They
got their name after the fact that they model the physical motion of ball shaped
particles interacting with each other via elastic collisions.

Due to the above said, this project is primarily devoted to a special class of
non-uniformly hyperbolic dynamical systems with singularities, namely
hyperbolic, or at least partially hyperbolic mathematical billiards. Such
systems have been playing an important role in the rigorous mathematical
foundation of statistical physics, so that studying them and establishing their
ergodic and statistical properties is getting more and more physical relevance.
The main part of the proposal focuses on a the final steps in proving a
fundamental conjecture regarding hard ball systems, namely the so called
"Boltzmann-Sinai Ergodic Hypothesis", which states that any finite system of
(totally elastic) hard spheres moving on a flat torus is fully hyperbolic and
ergodic, of course, on the level set of its trivial first integrals. The proof
of this conjecture (in its full generality) up until now has been notoriously
withstanding any attack against it. The hardest part in presenting an inductive
proof (induction on the number of interacting spheres) has been so far proving
the so called "Ansatz", a global dynamical-geometric condition, claiming the
almost sure hyperbolicity of singular orbits inside the realm of all singular
trajectories. Since by now I got extremely close to make the closing steps in
this big project that spanned over a couple decades of hard research work of
several people, I can now confidently include finishing the proof of this
hypothesis as the first major part of the recent proposal. Furthermore, this
plan also contains my promise to join efforts with my colleague N. I. Chernov to
publish a comprehensive book on the complete proof of the Boltzmann-Sinai
Ergodic Hypothesis. The goal of publishing such a volume is two-fold: First, it
would provide a comprehensive exposition of this theory with a unified system of
notations, references, etc. for easier reading. Secondly, it would more
thoroughly and clearly explain many involved technicalities of the theory, in
order to make it accessible for a wider group of researchers of dynamical
systems. The subsequent parts of the proposal contain blueprints for further
research in this direction by generalizing the original Boltzmann-Sinai
Hypothesis to cylindric billiards, and billiards in physically more relevant
containers, i. e. rectangular boxes, convex domains, etc. These sections also
address some further open problems in the theory of mathematical billiards that
still remain open after my attampts to prove them in my previous research
period. Their list can be found in the detailed description of the current
proposal.