* 0800208
* A Computational/Experimental Multiscale Approach to the Analysis of Structures Containing Mechanical Joints
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,10/31/2011
* Lawrence Bergman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Martin L. Dunn
* 10/31/2011
* USD 470,290.00

A Computational/Experimental Multiscale Approach to the Analysis of Structures
Containing Mechanical Joints&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical joints are integral
to structures, affecting performance and reliability. Joints provide coupling
forces and moments between substructures, and introduce localized compliance and
dissipation. Aspects of joint dynamics not fully understood include the nature
of the slipping process between contacting interfaces, local impacts at mating
surfaces away from the connecting elements, sensitivity of response to roughness
of mating surfaces, and contaminants and lubricants which introduce uncertainty
into the process of response prediction. The proposed research effort includes
new developments in scale representation, efficient fine-scale estimation, and
interscale coupling. A major contribution of the proposed work will be a
systematic spatial decomposition into large and small scales, where the latter
are mathematically injected into the calculations for the former. Another will
be the representation of the joint interface as a strong discontinuity, leading
to interfacial flux terms that provide a natural mechanism for embedding the
constitutive laws in a variationally consistent fashion, and novel experiments
yielding the required constitutive behavior of the interface.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results will be broadly disseminated, through course
materials, conference presentations, and publication in archival journals.
Integral with the research effort is a plan for education and outreach,
targeting middle school students quickly approaching the age where future career
decisions are formed, initially through partnership with Jefferson Middle School
in Champaign. Classroom demonstrations and experiments addressing fastener
technologies will be developed. Undergraduate and graduate students will be
recruited; ideally a broad demographic, for research, to construct
demonstrations and experiments, and to mentor middle school students during the
school year. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;