* 0800158
* Supply Risk Management and Asymmetric Information
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Damian Beil, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 08/31/2011
* USD 220,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant provides funding for the development and
analysis of game-theoretic models that will explicitly feature information
asymmetry about supply risk. These models will be used to study how traditional
risk-management policies and information-eliciting contracts interact. The
traditional risk management tools that will be included in the models are:
development of internal production capabilities by the manufacturer; investment
in backup production capacity by suppliers; adoption of multisourcing and robust
network design by the manufacturer; penalties for non-delivery; supplier
screening; and procurement delegation. The PIs will invoke concepts from
contracts and incentives theory, such as Bayesian equilibria, the revelation
principle, collusion, and decision-delegation, to derive the manufacturer's
optimal information-eliciting contracts. In order to identify the ramifications
of information asymmetry on risk management, the PIs will compare equilibrium
outcomes under asymmetric and symmetric information through both analytical and
numerical means. The results of the research will be incorporated in the
curriculum of graduate and undergraduate courses at the University of
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-disciplinary research, which lies at
the interface of operations, risk management, and information economics, will
address timely and important questions regarding design and management of
resilient supply chains. To the operations literature this research will
contribute a framework capturing information asymmetry about supply risk and
insights on the risk-mitigating role of procurement service providers. This
research will expand the boundaries of the enterprise risk management literature
by considering decentralized decision systems in the presence of information
asymmetry. This research will enrich the economics literature by including the
possibility of supply disruptions. The results of this research will help
decision makers to make better use of operational and risk-management tools to
deal with supply disruptions. This research project will foster continued
interactions and collaboration among industry researchers, engineering and
business faculty, and will perpetuate infrastructure for future joint
projects.&lt;br/&gt;