* 0800863
* A Configurable Platform for Multicantilever High-Throughput Nanoscale Metrology and Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Placid Ferreira, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2012
* USD 400,000.00

The core promise of this research is the design and development of a
comprehensive and scalable platform for multicantilever systems for nanoscale
manufacturing and metrology. This platform will enable new metrology and imaging
applications such as video-rate nanoscale imaging, high-throughput deposition-
based manufacturing and polishing of micro-optical components. New approaches
and architectures for the control of spatial arrays of dynamic systems with
local interaction are developed and applied to arrays of microcantilever
systems. Novel parallel kinematics micro-electromechanical (MEMS) positioners
are developed to enable individual lateral positioning of microcantilever array
elements. Robust control techniques, coupled with new approaches to simultaneous
actuation-sensing of MEMS capacitance drives allow new levels of bandwidth,
accuracy and robustness in positioning of the elements of such arrays. A
platform framework is developed to integrate and leverage these new capabilities
into a flexible system with the robustness to support a diverse set of operating
conditions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The results of this project enable basic
scientific investigation in combinatorial chemistry, combinatorial material
investigation, and biological scanning applications in genomics and
combinatorial drug discovery. Besides its direct impact on graduate education,
this project will use existing structures at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign to provide workshops that integrate micro-mechatronics,
fabrication and metrology for advanced graduate students and research engineers,
research experience for undergraduates, internet-based teleoperated access to
MEMS devices for high-school teachers and students. The proposed project also
fosters the synergistic transfer of know-how between the manufacturing,
instrumentation/physical instrument, and control and dynamic systems research
communities.