* 0801010
* Geometry and harmonic analysis related to symmetric spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Gestur Olafsson, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2012
* USD 269,884.00

The PI will work on several interrelated problems in harmonic analysis,
geometry, and representation theory. The main work will be on harmonic analysis
on symmetric spaces and the corresponding representation theory. This work
includes both Riemannian and non-Riemannian symmetric spaces, compact and non-
compact spaces as well as the infinite dimensional limits of those spaces. The
focus is on the interplay between geometry and harmonic analysis/representation
theory. The work combines methods and ideas from several areas of mathematics:
complex analysis, group action on real and complex manifolds, classical harmonic
analysis, and applied mathematics. Most parts of our projects will be carried
out in collaboration with specialists in the USA, Europe and Mexico. Other
problems involve participation of our graduate students. The first set of
problems centers about local Paley-Wiener type theorems for compact symmetric
spaces and their inductive limits. In short, the problem is to describe the
image of the space of smooth functions, supported in a sufficiently small
geodesic ball, as holomorphic functions of exponential growth. We will also
study the projective limit of those spaces to derive a Paley-Wiener type theorem
for inductive limit of symmetric spaces. Later we will also consider similar
problems for more general commutative spaces. A second class of problems is
related to the image of the heat semigroup in the space of holomorphic functions
on the crown. Here we will also consider infinite dimensional limit. Other
planned research directions involve geometric action of simple Lie groups on
compact manifolds and harmonic analysis on compactification of Riemannian and
non-Riemannian symmetric spaces as homogeneous spaces. This leads to questions
of decomposing restricitions of unitary representations to subgroups and
generalization of some will known results for complex bounded symmetric domains
to their real counterparts. Our work will also involve problems from harmonic
analysis on Euclidean space, in particular Radon transforms, reproducing kernel
Hilbert spaces, wavelet analysis, wavelet sets, harmonic analysis related to
finite Coxeter groups, and function spaces associated to representations of
topological groups (generalized Coorbit spaces) as well as function spaces
related to Schrodinger operators (Besov spaces). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harmonic
analysis and geometry are two subjects closely related to physics and applied
sciences. Those two topics include wide spectrum of deep and wide-ranging
problems in pure and applied mathematics as well as basic sciences. Our research
is centered around fundamental questions in harmonic analysis on symmetric
spaces. Those spaces can serve as models or approximation for the real world
that we live in. Other problems that we plan to work on involve questions
arising in engineering and sciences, in particular wavelet analysis and Radon
transforms. One of our planned projects includes the use of symmetries to
construct function spaces as well as constructing minimal wavelets in higher
dimension. The proposed research involves the graduate student of the PI and
helps educate them in research and mathematical reasoning.