* 0801991
* MO: Collaborative Research:  Transitions in the Surface Layer and the Role of Vertically Stratified Microbial Communities in the Carbon Cycle- An Oceanic Microbial Observatory
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2008,09/30/2014
* Craig Carlson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2014
* USD 803,765.00

The focus of this proposal is the role of bacterioplankton microbial community
stratification in the ocean carbon cycle. Complex biological, chemical and
physical processes control the efficiency of carbon transfer from the euphotic
zone ocean to the deep sea, where sequestration is a possibility. Most organic
carbon exported from the euphotic zone never leaves the surface 500 m, with
approximately ninety percent of the exported organic matter being remineralized
in the mesopelagic zone (140 - 1000 m). Microbial communities are vertically
stratified in the oceans, particularly in the surface layer (0-300 m), which
spans the region of deep mixing events and transition from the euphotic zone to
the upper mesopelagic - the region of highest carbon remineralization activity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The premise of this proposal is that stratified
bacterioplankton clades engage in specialized biogeochemical activities that can
be identified by integrated oceanographic and microbiological approaches.
Specifically, the objective of this proposal is to assess if the mesopelagic
microbial community rely on diagenetically altered organic matter and
subcellular fragments that are produced by microbial processes in the euphotic
zone and delivered into the upper mesopelagic by sinking or mixing. In past
efforts this microbial observatory had greater success cultivating members of
the euphotic zone microbial community, and revealed an unanticipated growth
requirement for reduced sulfur compounds in alphaproteobacteria of the SAR11
clade. Genomic information showed that intense competition for substrates
imposes trade-offs on bacterioplankton - there are regions of N dimensional
nutrient space where specialists win. We postulate that specific growth
requirements may explain some the regular spatial and temporal patterns that
have been observed in upper mesopelagic bacterioplankton communities, and the
difficulties of culturing some of these organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific objectives of this project are: 1) to produce 13C and 15N labeled
subcellular (e.g., soluble, cell wall, and membrane) and DOM fractions from
photosynthetic plankton cultures and use stable isotope probing to identify
specific clades in the surface and upper mesopelagic microbial community that
assimilate fractions of varying composition and lability. 2) to use fluorescence
in situ hybridization approaches to monitor temporal and spatial variability of
specific microbial populations identified from the SIP and HTC experiments. To
increase resolution we will use CARD-FISH protocols. 3) to measure the proteomes
of bacterioplankton communities to identify highly translated genes in the
surface layer and upper mesopelagic, and community responses to seasonal
nutrient limitation. 4) and, to cultivate these organisms via high throughput
culturing (HTC) by pursuing the hypothesis that they require specific nutrient
factors and/or diagenetically altered organic substrates. Complete genome
sequences from key organisms will be sought and used as queries to study
patterns of natural variation in genes and populations that have been associated
with biogeochemically important functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will make cultures of novel bacterioplankton and genome sequences available to
the scientific community. Findings from this research may be used directly in
foodweb and ocean carbon cycle models. The educational component of this
research brings microbial oceanography training to students from many
disciplines, through a summer course, and specialized training to graduate and
undergraduate students involved directly in research.