* 0801056
* Function Theory of Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Xiaojun Huang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2011
* USD 195,198.00

In this project the principal investigator will work on several problems in
multivariate complex analysis that are related to research in nonlinear
analysis, partial differential equations, and classical dynamics. More
specifically, the principal investigator wishes to continue his research into
various rigidity problems in several complex variables, as well as their
applications and interactions with super-rigidity problems in the theory of
complex singularities and complex geometry. He will study the equivalence
problem for real submanifolds in complex spaces and further the present
understanding of the local hull of holomorphy for a real submanifold in a
complex manifold. He also intends to investigate the simultaneous embedding and
filling problem for a CR family of embeddable compact, strongly pseudoconvex,
three-dimensional CR manifolds and to explore the Grauert-Siu-Ling direct image
theory through an approach that makes use of the d-bar equation. Various
geometric and analytic properties for CR mappings will be pursued, as
well.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Complex numbers and functions of complex variables
have become, since the nineteenth century, indispensable tools in many areas of
mathematics and its application to other areas of science and engineering. The
solutions of many problems in the applied sciences could ultimately depend on
improvements in these complex analytic tools and a deeper understanding of their
basic properties. For example, in materials science, the standard method for
treating multidirectional stresses in a uniform way is to represent them as
complex numbers or, in more complicated situations, as complex functions. It
then turns out that, among other things, the direction of the propagation of
cracks in materials is related to the properties of certain equations associated
with these complex numbers or functions. Results of the research to be carried
out in this project may lead to the discovery of new properties of solutions of
these equations. The project has significant educational and training aspects:
several graduate students will be actively involved in this project. Finally,
the principal investigator is planning to coorganize conferences on several
complex variables and partial differential equations, bringing together
mathematicians (including young people and members of underrepresented groups)
to discuss their research and teaching.&lt;br/&gt;