* 0801798
* Development of Environmentally-Friendly Paper-Based Technology Platforms for RFID's and Sensors with
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Joy Laskar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 12/31/2012
* USD 368,447.00

Objective &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this effort is to demonstrate the
utilization of common-paper substrates for inkjet-printed increased-
functionality cognitive and autonomous inexpensive radio frequency tags and
wireless nodes. The approach will use a characterization of paper-based
materials and different inkjet-metallization schemes to help integrate
components (antennas, transmission lines, matching networks, batteries and
energy scavengers), with for compatibility of IC-interconnects with paper.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this proposal is the development of the first paper-based inkjet-printed
technology platform to integrate RF, antenna, material and battery technologies
and develop the first-generation of enhanced-range communication/sensor nodes
able to operate in various environments. The scavenging-antenna approach will
facilitate the research in autonomous rugged wireless modules and will allow for
the first true mapping of potentially harvested energy in commercial bands.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt; The broader impact of this
effort would lead to the reconfigurable autonomous sensor networks of the
future, addressing various societal challenges (chemical/explosive-detection,
crack/stress detection, secure emergency communications, smart logistics,
surveillance sensors, biomonitoring). In addition, this effort could
revolutionize high-frequency electronics? education offering the opportunity to
students to inkjet-print electronic prototypes in minutes with near-to-zero cost
without the need of expensive and time-consuming masks introducing them for the
first time to the principles of environmentally-friendly electronics. A new
senior-level course is planned, along with a dissemination effort in major
conferences and through a new textbook in the proposed area. The project is
expected to involve a number of minority students.