* 0801764
* Position-Dependent Properties of Novel Electronic Materials: Tunneling, Infrared, and Electromechanical Measurements
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Kwok-Wai Ng, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 12/31/2012
* USD 410,000.00

Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The two principal investigators of this award have
developed probes to measure the infrared reflectance, tunneling spectra, and
mechanical properties of small crystalline and thin film samples as functions of
position. These probes, an infrared microscope with tunable diode lasers as
light source, scanning tunneling microsocsope with long-distance scanner, and a
helical resonator motion detector, will be used to study changes in electronic,
molecular, and piezoelectric properties as functions of voltage, frequency, and
distance from electrical contacts. The materials to be studied include organic
semiconductors based on pentacene derivatives, being developed for applications
in field-effect-transistors, and charge-density-wave materials, being studied as
nano-torsional actuators, with the goals of improving our understanding of their
conducting and piezoelectric mechanisms. Graduate students will gain experience
in a wide range of characterizational and synthetic techniques. Undergraduate
education majors (pre-service teachers) will work in summers not only to improve
their appreciation of scientific techniques but to develop teaching tools for
their future careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical:&lt;br/&gt;In recent decades, there has been an explosion of interest
in using new electronic materials to replace conventional semiconductors in
devices ranging from flexible displays to electromechanical actuators. The
application of many of these materials faces not only large technical hurdles
but questions in our understanding of their basic conducting and mechanical
properties, including the effects of charge on the constituent molecules located
near electrical contacts. The two principal investigators of this award have
developed new optical, tunneling, and electromechanical probes that will be used
to study the electronic, molecular, and mechanical properties as functions of
distance from contacts. Materials to be studied are new organic semiconductors,
to be utilized in transistors, and non-uniform charge distribution materials,
with possible applications as mechanical actuators. Graduate students working on
the project will gain broad experience in different characterizational and
synthetic techniques that will prepare them for careers in industry, academia,
and research laboratories. In addition, pre-service teachers will assist in the
labs in summers to gain appreciation of scientific laboratory work and also
prepare future teaching materials.&lt;br/&gt;