* 0801576
* Experimental Particle Cosmology at Case
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2008,10/31/2010
* Thomas Shutt, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 10/31/2010
* USD 520,000.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER: 0801576 INSTITUTION: Case Western Reserve NSF PROGRAM: PHY -
PARTICLE ASTROPHYSICS PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Shutt, Thomas A.

TITLE: Experimental particle cosmology at Case

ABSTRACT

A wealth of observations shows that the universe is composed of >96% invisible
matter and energy. The nature of these missing components is one of the most
fundamental mysteries in physics. The leading candidate for the invisible ?dark
matter? is a subatomic particle left over from the big bang known as the Weakly
Interacting Massive Particle (WIMP). Such particles are also predicted by
supersymmetry, a favored class of new particle models. If WIMPs exist, they are
also the dominant mass in our own Milky Way. Although they only rarely interact
with conventional matter, they should nonetheless be detectable by sufficiently
sensitive detectors on Earth through their direct interaction with, and the
ensuing recoil of, nuclei in a target material. The primary challenge in
detecting them is reducing natural and cosmogenic radioactivity by up to 10
orders of magnitude.

The Large Underground Xenon (LUX) collaboration has assembled a team to carry
out an ambitious program of constructing and operating a 300 kg total, 100 kg
fiducial mass, dual-phase xenon detector. A large detector is required to not
only set an improved sensitivity limit, but also to accumulate WIMP statistics
in a reasonable time if a signal is detected. The LUX design emphasizes using
simple technologies, in particular for the design of the cryostat and the use of
a water shield, to scale to large size as rapidly as possible. Thus the LUX
program will develop the technologies required for 1-10 ton dark matter
detectors.

This award provides support for the Case group to carry out its responsibilities
in the LUX program. The group has a crucial role in LUX, being responsible for
the cryostat and cryogenics, coordinating the integration and surface test
program at Case, removing Kr from Xe, and screening parts for Rn emanation. They
also have a small but active R&D program, aimed at technologies needed for a
next-phase, very large-scale experiment.

Among the broader impacts, the techniques themselves can be further scaled up
and applied to other fundamental experiments such as double beta decay and solar
neutrinos. As with other particle detection techniques, new methods of position
sensitivity and particle discrimination may give rise to new medical diagnostic
techniques, or applications to Homeland Security and nuclear control.