* 0801424
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Investigation of Groundwater Flow Heterogeneity in Fractured Aquifers Using Stochastic Modeling, A Case Study of Fractured Limestone in Sinai
* O/D,OISE
* 08/16/2007,08/31/2008
* Dongxiao Zhang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 24,967.00

0511496&lt;br/&gt;Zhang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports
a collaborative research between Dr. Dongxiao Zhang, Department of Petroleum and
Geological Engineering, University of Oklahoma, Norman and Dr. Mahmoud Bakr,
National Water Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. They plan to investigate
groundwater flow heterogeneity in fractured aquifers using stochastic modeling
techniques with a case study of fractured limestone in
Sinai.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The main focus of the work is
to investigate how our conceptualization of the fractured limestone can be
improved through an integrated fieldwork and modeling program. Detailed studies
of flow properties using fracture analyses, pumping and tracer techniques and
geophysics will be used to develop a revised model of groundwater flow in
fractured limestone. The fieldwork will be taken in phased manner, thereby
allowing the modeling program to directly interact with and provide direction on
the planning and interpretation of the field experiments. Thus, the whole
program development will be undertaken in an iterative
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will support graduate
students and junior scientists in both countries. New experiments will be
developed in the field site run by Egypt NWRC and it is very likely that the new
experiment sites will enhance infrastructure for research and education. The
research will result in publications in refereed journals. The results can be
used for water resource management in the arid environment of Egypt. The two
teams will build up their experience jointly through the collaboration, where
the US team will utilize the field data obtained by Egyptian team, while the
latter will use the numerical and theoretical expertise of the former. Two US
graduate students will participate in the research project. This project is
being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities. &lt;br/&gt;