* 0801522
* IGERT:  C-CHANGE:  Climate Change, Humans, and Nature in the Global Environment
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2015
* Joane Nagel, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Tankersley
* 07/31/2015
* USD 3,028,815.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
the development of an interdisciplinary climate change studies program at the
University of Kansas, in collaboration with Haskell Indian Nations University.
The Climate Change, Humans &amp; Nature in the Global Environment award
addresses one of the National Academy of Sciences? "grand challenges" of the
21st century: climate change and its impact on the planet?s ecological and
social systems. The program will provide Ph.D. students in the social and
natural sciences and engineering access to the advanced scientific
infrastructure at the University of Kansas?s remote Sensing of Ice Sheets,
Biodiversity Institute, and Institute for Policy &amp; Social Research, and the
Haskell Environmental Studies Research Center. Trainees will acquire the
conceptual and technical toolkit, including remote sensing, modeling, and
scaling across disciplines, needed to study the human and natural dimensions of
climate change, strategies for mitigating its trajectory and effects, and the
role of policy in shaping the drivers of and responses to climate change.
Broader impacts include multidisciplinary research training, collaboration with
students and faculty at Haskell and a network of tribal colleges to assess the
impacts of climate change in indigenous communities; participation in a climate
policy internship; establishing a graduate certificate in climate change
studies; developing a portable curriculum for interdisciplinary integrative
research and education; and for trainees, learning the collaborative skills,
problem-centered interdisciplinary training, and understanding of science policy
needed by future leaders in climate change science, engineering, and policy.
IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep
knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.