* 0801438
* A Framework for Mobile Data Gathering in Wireless Sensor-Actuator Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,05/31/2013
* Yuanyuan Yang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 05/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Integrative, Hybrid and Complex Systems&lt;br/&gt;SUNY at Stony
Brook&lt;br/&gt;Yuanyuan Yang&lt;br/&gt;A Framework for Mobile Data Gathering in
Wireless Sensor-Actuator Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this research is to develop an integrated data gathering mechanism that
utilizes new physical layer techniques and a non-conventional energy model for
data gathering in wireless sensor-actuator networks. The project combines
protocol and algorithm design with test bed implementation and
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research addresses
several closely coupled issues in data gathering in wireless sensor-actuator
networks. First, the research considers how to plan the moving path of a mobile
actuator based on the distribution of sensors and load balancing among sensors
to prolong network lifetime. Second, the research considers how to utilize
special properties of sensor node batteries to improve energy-efficiency. Third,
the research considers how the new physical layer techniques, in particular
multiple packet transmission, can be applied to improve data throughput and
reduce energy consumption in sensor-actuator networks. The project seeks to
develop novel cross-layer algorithms that have the potential to greatly increase
data throughput and network lifetime. A wireless sensor test bed is used to
further validate feasibility and performance of the algorithms that are
developed. The research hopes to impact fundamental design principles and
infrastructure considerations for future sensor-actuator
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The outcome of this research has
the potential to be applicable to a wide spectrum of applications, including
environmental, military, space, health care, home and other commercial areas. A
project goal is to promote the participation of female engineering students. The
test bed developed as part of the project is an important facility for related
projects. The important findings of this project are to be disseminated to the
research community via conference and journal publications, a web site, and
industry-university partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;