* 0801012
* Materials World Network: Fabrication of Polymer Composites and Sensors using Doped Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Pulickel Ajayan, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 07/31/2011
* USD 288,000.00

This Materials World Network project builds up on already established successful
interaction between the research laboratories of Prof. Pulickel M. Ajayan
(Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute; RPI) and Prof. Mauricio Terrones (Instituto
Potosino de Investigacin Cientfica y Tecnolgica; IPICyT, Mexico) and aims
towards the fabrication of new materials and devices using nitrogen doped carbon
nanotubes (CNx) and other hybrid structures based on nanotubes. In addition to
CNx material, the investigators explore the synthesis of novel nanotubes doped
with other elements, for example, phosphorous. The research focuses on the
fabrication of new products and prototypes such as sensors and polymer
composites using CNx nanotubes and other doped nanotubes. During the previous
three years of this project, the researchers demonstrated that the presence of
nitrogen within CNx nanotubes plays an important role in the dispersion of CNx
nanotubes, prior to mixing with polymers. In addition, results showed that the
nitrogen containing surfaces are also easy to functionalize chemically. This
research addresses the composite fabrication and additionally, will examine CNx
nantubes as gas sensors. At IPICyT, there has been progress that allows
production of bulk quantities of CNx nanotubes. At RPI the focus is on the
fabrication and characterization of composite materials with CNx nanotubes. In
addition, this work explores techniques to assemble CNx nanotubes and produce
nanotube networks and junctions. Also, the work examines new structures of
nanotubes with dopants such as phosphorous and explores the unique structural
and electrical properties of these materials.&lt;br/&gt;During the next three
years of continuation of this project, the researchers utilize the momentum
generated by the successful earlier collaboration to increase student and
personnel exchanges and the use of bilateral facilities in nanofabrication to
achieve further results in carbon nanotube research. Students from the two
countries have the opportunity to merge interdisciplinary expertise and
participate in research at the cutting edge of materials science and
nanotechnology. Mexican students and young scientists visit the US laboratory to
engage in nanofabrication, development of sensors and polymer composites, and
learn about the working environment in US laboratories in general. Similarly,
undergraduates and graduate students from the US visit IPICyT and collaborate
with Mexican scientists. The education efforts of the investigators include
curriculum development activities in addition to lectures and
seminars.&lt;br/&gt;