* 0801700
* IGERT:  Emergent Functions of Neural Systems
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2016
* Krishna Shenoy, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2016
* USD 3,192,894.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) grant supports
the creation of a new interdisciplinary graduate training program in Emergent
Functions of Neural Systems within the Center for Mind Brain and Computation at
Stanford University. The effort to understand human mental abilities such as
perception, decision making, learning and memory, and motor planning and action
as emergent consequences of brain activity remains a major challenge of science,
and meeting this challenge requires scientists who combine both quantitative and
experimental research methods. Quantitative methods include computational
modeling, applied mathematics, and statistics; experimental methods involve
recording brain activity while the brain is engaged in mental activity. This
program will train the next generation of scientists who will address this
challenge by combining quantitative and experimental methods. Trainees may come
from Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Neuroscience, or Psychology at
Stanford. Each trainee will formulate an individualized training plan that
complements the home department doctoral program, and will pursue research
combining quantitative and experimental methods. The program will develop new
courses in quantitative and computational neuroscience, and will provide
opportunities to bridge across disciplinary boundaries. This IGERT will
strengthen the use of quantitative and computational methods that are crucial
for breakthrough progress in research aimed at understanding how mental
abilities arise from neural processes, and it will strengthen bridges between
the disciplines of psychology and neuroscience and the disciplines of computer
science, mathematics, and engineering. Trainees will go on to careers in which
they will enhance expertise in quantitative and computational methods in the
behavioral and neural sciences and pass their expertise on to others. The
program will recruit women and underrepresented groups through a variety of
outreach and networking activities to pursue careers combining quantitative and
computational approaches to understand the relationship between mental and
neural processes. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges
of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary
background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries.