* 0801753
* Collaborative Research: High Density Metal and Semiconductor Nanoparticles for Memory and Photonic Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Maruf Hossain, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2012
* USD 324,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Research Objectives and Approaches: The objective of this
research is to study and optimize the interactions of nanoparticles in memory
and photonic devices. Activities carried out under this project will include the
formation and thermal stability of nanocrystals of the right size, size
distribution and spacing by three viable methods, understanding electron
injection into the metallic and semiconductor nanoparticles, understanding
electron transfer between nanoparticles and the adjacent dielectric material and
integrating nanoparticles in emerging memory and photonic devices such as
FinFLASH and FinLight. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit The success of
the proposed activity will result in high performance memory and photonics
devices which are fully compatible with CMOS. This will be accompanied by
gaining fundamental insight into the interface between nanocrystals and its
surrounding dielectrics. The collaboration with industry leaders in memory area
will further solidify the approaches used in this work and transition them into
viable manufacturable processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
successful implementation of robust nanoparticle based devices will open up new
opportunities not only in electronics but also in emerging areas such as
biosensors and energy efficiency. PIs at both institutions will develop
educational programs such as undergraduate nanolab course, development of a a
nanocamp for high school students, an engineer?s week for even younger students,
and career fairs for minorities for graduate schools which will enrich the
student experience and also increase diversity of the education workforce. In
addition, industrial internships provided to the graduate students will foster
communication of industry needs to the university, while providing a highly
trained workforce for industry in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;