* 0801908
* Dynamics of Capillary Force Actuators
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Carl Knospe, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2012
* USD 354,000.00

Dynamics of Capillary Force
Actuators&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research
is to investigate a fundamentally new and innovative technology for generating
actuation forces in microelectromechanical systems. The approach is to exploit
the change in capillary pressure of a liquid bridge when electrowetting occurs.
Capillary force actuators are capable of delivering ten to one hundred times
greater force than currently-favored technologies and have the potential to
revolutionize the development of microsystems. In this research, instrumented
capillary force actuators will be microfabricated, experimentally characterized,
and compared to electrohydrodynamic models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: This research will advance capillary force actuation technology along
several fronts essential to its adoption in microelectromechanical applications.
The understanding gained will result in accurate models of capillary force
actuators that relate dynamic behavior to design choices. The experimental
results obtained will confirm the dynamic models and provide demonstration of
the potential of this technology for microelectromechanical systems. Finally,
the fabrication and testing of several prototype devices will provide knowledge
critical to the development of practical, manufacturable actuators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The effort will provide both
undergraduate and graduate students a highly interdisciplinary research
opportunity, ideal for the development of broad fundamental knowledge and
practical know-how. The undergraduate students will produce podcasts for
outreach to underrepresented high school students that bring the research
experience to life. Through the involvement of undergraduates from
underrepresented groups, this effort will directly impact the training of a
diverse engineering workforce. The effort will enable the development of new
microdevices that were previously unachievable and result in products that
benefit society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;