* 0801076
* SGER:  Coming Home: Exploratory Research on the Reintegration of National Guard Troops to Rural Native Alaskan Communities
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Linda Green, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 06/30/2009
* USD 21,260.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research, Linda Green, proposes to do
exploratory investigation of the social and cultural reintegration of Alaska
Native troops, serving in Iraq and Afghanistan, into their communities in
southwestern Alaska. Green notes that of the approximately 2000 Alaska Army
National Guard troops serving outside of the United States, most of them are
from rural communities, 10% of whom are serving on the Kuwait-Iraq border and
are from 25 Yup'ik villages located in the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta region of
Alaska. Green points out that there is a growing body of research that shows an
"alarming rise in mental and behavioral health issues affecting active duty
soldiers, reservists, National Guard troops, and veterans returning from the
Middle East war theater." Examining the statistics, it is possible to predict
that rural Alaska Native communities will be disproportionately affected by the
anticipated increases in suicide, depression, alcohol and drug abuse, and an
increase in domestic violence that has been reported for returning veterans. In
small rural villages, where populations frequently number under 100 occupants,
the affect of one individual's experience is dramatically
magnified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Green proposes this SGER as an exploratory
project to build a community collaborative project for research on how
communities are affected by the reintegration of returning veterans; how the
veterans' experiences affect their own social and cultural integration; and how
to explore these issues in the historic framework of experiences previous
veterans. The PI correctly states that a subject of such political and ethical
considerations could only occur by building strong community and individual
collaborations that include active participation, input, exchange and
cooperation between the people of the region and the researcher.