* 0801415
* Equation-Free Approach to System-Level Dynamic Modeling in Electric Energy Processing
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Aleksandar Stankovic, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Lawrence S. Goldberg
* 07/31/2011
* USD 300,000.00

Power, Control and Adaptive Networks Northeastern University Aleksandar M.
Stankovic Equation-Free Approach to System-Level Dynamic Modeling in Electric
Energy Processing

The objective of this research is to develop a new class of modeling and
analysis tools for energy processing systems. The approach is based on a two-
level structure in which lower-level (component) models in the form of computer
code, lookup data or equations are used to directly answer questions about the
higher system level without requiring explicit models in the form of equations.

Intellectual Merit: The project develops an overall framework and specific tools
for multi-scale robust modeling, analysis and simulation of energy processing
systems. Specifically, the framework allows for models specified as computer
code, enables multi-level analysis and simulation that is "equation-assisted" at
the system level for numerical performance, and enables hybrid simulators by
allowing for run-time measurement inputs.

Broader Impact: The project contributes to unification of knowledge in the areas
of system and energy engineering, controls, and applied mathematics. The long-
term goal is to improve the understanding and containment of complex system-wide
events such as blackouts. The underlying ideas are to be presented at the
undergraduate level to illuminate the complementary roles of simulations and
measurements in understanding complex systems and to prepare students for
leadership roles in technical fields and in public policy. Educational aspects
include training of two graduate students, who will attend professional meetings
and participate in undergraduate and graduate teaching. New teaching modules for
undergraduate, graduate, and professional development courses in energy
engineering and a new graduate class on multi-scale simulation and analysis of
large-scale energy systems are to be developed.