* 0801018
* CAREER:    Sustainable Water Infrastructure Management System (SWIMS)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2007,09/30/2012
* Sunil Sinha, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2012
* USD 429,992.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
project is to enrich the state of decision-making as it applies to pipe
infrastructure asset management and renewal programs. Developing an efficient
infrastructure management system can provide fast and reliable decision-making
tools that are needed to handle the large volume of deteriorating buried
pipeline infrastructure systems, particularly drinking water and wastewater
pipelines, which pose serious threats to the environment if they fail. The
multidisciplinary initiative integrates research and education while unifying
the activities associated with sustainable water infrastructure management
systems. The SWIMS research investigates how an innovative evaluation system,
renewal engineering, and visualization system can be integrated for efficient
water and wastewater pipeline management, and evaluates this approach in a real-
world project. SWIMS, an engineered management system, is equipping engineers
with the decision support tools needed to decide, when, where and how to best
maintain pipeline systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education is critically needed
in the areas of civil infrastructure failure, sensor technology and
rehabilitation to give both students and the engineering workforce the skills
needed to revitalize and preserve our nations civil infrastructure system. This
research program benefits the overall education of undergraduate, graduate and
extension students in a number of ways, including research infrastructure
developments, incorporation of new knowledge in teaching and research,
continuous training and education of professional engineers and scientists, and
public education in sustainable resource development and operations. Strong
emphasis is placed on the recruiting, mentoring and retention of students from
minority institutions. K-12 students and their parents are educated about the
challenges of civil infrastructure renewal and the opportunities that co-exist
in allied engineering disciplines through a hands-on educational experience. The
SWIMS program is envisioned as a model system that can be implemented by
municipalities and institutions across the country, and possibly worldwide.