* 0801774
* Collaborative:Development of a Hydrogen Discriminating Low Temperature 1-D Nanocomposite Micro-Sensor
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2014
* Sudipta Seal, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2014
* USD 322,000.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this collaborative
proposal is to realize fast, sensitive and discriminating detection of hydrogen
detection at room temperature using a novel nanomaterial integrated microsensor.
The approach is based on one dimensional porous nanostructures and array
architectures of conducting oxides. The nanostructures will be prepared by sol-
gel processing, electrospinning and fast laser induced self-organization while
the sensor platform will be prepared by lithographic approaches.&lt;br/&gt; The
intellectual merit of this work will come from the application of fundamental
scientific and engineering principles of nanofabrication, materials chemistry
and electronics to novel sensor design. Specifically, understanding the
relationships between one dimensional nanostructure, its architecture, oxide
chemistry, and electronic response will permit a quantitative basis for design
and fabrication of fast and sensitive metal oxide semiconductor sensors at the
nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt; The broader impact will come from cutting-edge
interdisciplinary research and education activities in science and engineering
across two institutions and neighboring schools involving underrepresented
undergraduates, graduates and K-12 students/teachers. This project will ensure
training of next-generation scientists and engineers in the areas of critical
national need. The training and educational programs will equip the students
with knowledge and skills for the integrated use of bottom-up nanomaterial
synthesis and top-down device design approaches. Considering the recent public
awareness on the need of clean alternative energy, the NSF support for this
hydrogen sensor research provide a novel scientific and engineering springboard
for the cost-effective design and fabrication of such sensors, that are crucial
for storage, transportation, and distribution of hydrogen as an energy
source.&lt;br/&gt;