* 0801520
* Travel Support for Students, Post-Docs, and Young Faculty to Attend the Symposium on "Controlling Cellular Behavior with Polymer Synthesis and Engineering" At the 235th ACS Meeting
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2007,05/31/2009
* Xinqiao Jia, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 05/31/2009
* USD 4,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0801520 PI: Jia, Xinqiao ORG: University of
Delaware&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Travel Support for Students, Post-Docs, and
Young Faculty to Attend the Symposium on "Controlling Cellular Behavior with
Polymer Synthesis and Engineering" at the 235th ACS
Meeting&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This American Chemical Society
(ACS) symposium will cover recent advances in the design, synthesis, and
engineering of polymeric biomaterials that are capable of eliciting desired
cellular responses and fostering functional tissue regeneration. The objectives
of the symposium are: (1) to highlight recent advances in the design, synthesis,
and application of tailored polymeric materials for fundamental understanding of
cell biology and practical application to tissue engineering, (2) to provide a
platform for polymer scientists, bioengineers, and biologists to establish
connections and exchange ideas, and (3) to facilitate opportunities for minority
and junior faculty, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students to present their
most recent research results. Over recent years there have been many
biomaterials-related symposia at the ACS, Materials Research Society, and
Society for Biomaterials meetings and at Gordon Conferences. None, however, has
systematically explored the cell-guiding capability of polymeric materials. This
symposium, summarizing the polymer synthesis and engineering methodologies that
have been utilized to induce cellular behavior and tissue function, will be of
interest to a broad spectrum of scientists and engineers. A total of 16
internationally respected speakers have been invited and have confirmed their
intention to participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The organizers
have made significant efforts to enhance the involvement of women, minorities,
and disabled persons in this symposium. Approximately 25% of the invited
speakers are women as is one of the organizers. The organizers have presented a
strategy for identifying laboratories with significant minority representation,
and these laboratories will be solicited to attend and to make contributed
talks. The funds requested from NSF will be used to provide approximately 10
travel awards to support the attendance of graduate students, post-docs, and
young faculty at the symposium. Priority will be given to graduate students who
would be attending their first national meeting, to young faculty who will be
making oral presentations, and to underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;