* 0801581
* The Continent of International Law: Theoretical Development, Data Collection, and Empirical Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Barbara Koremenos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 138,456.00

For the past twenty years, the theoretical literature on international
cooperation has focused on overarching questions about whether cooperation is
possible and how important it is. Now, this literature must address more focused
questions about how the institutions of cooperation work and how they change
state behavior. Moreover, after over fifty years of intense realist-antirealist
debate in international relations (much of which turns on the question of the
value and function of international agreements), no one has systematically
collected data on important dimensions of international agreements. Hence, it is
also time to collect such data to use them to confront both old and new
theories. &lt;br/&gt;The first aspect of my research program develops a
theoretical framework that explains international agreement design in terms of a
set of logically derived and empirically testable hypotheses. The framework is
based on a rational choice perspective in which actors purposefully design
agreement and institutions to advance their joint interests. The theoretical
aspect continues the line of work already established by Koremenos and others.
&lt;br/&gt;The second aspect consists of collecting data on the characteristics
of a large sample of international agreements drawn from the United Nations
Treaty Series. The principal investigator focuses on four types of provisions:
flexibility provisions, such as planned renegotiations and escape clauses,
monitoring and compliance provisions, agreement scope (the number of issues
covered), and references to other international agreements. These dimensions are
motivated by important (and interesting) theoretical questions in the existing
literature. &lt;br/&gt;The datasheet allows reseachers who study international
cooperation to test their theories in much the same way as the Correlates of War
and Militarized International Disputes datasets enable researchers who study
international conflict to test their ideas. The data are available to the
research community once assembled. As such, the project represents an important
contribution to the research infrastructure of international relations. The
feasibility of the proposed project is demonstrated by a successful test sample
already drawn by the principal investigator. This sample reveals systematic
variation in agreement provisions across issue areas. &lt;br/&gt;The third
aspect consists of statistical analyses of the collected data. Given that this
is the first data collection effort of its kind, this basic descriptive work
represents an important contribution to the literature. Furthermore, and in
contrast to the existing literature, which mainly illustrates theories of how
states cooperate with case studies., these data allow researchers to test
theories. &lt;br/&gt;The proposal also contains a substantial undergraduate and
graduate teaching component. Several graduate students will use the datset in
their dissertations. Undergraduate and graduate courses are to be developed
based on the research design, with a particular focus on how to collect data
that can be used to test empirically predictions from formal theory. These
courses cover all aspects of the problem, with a special focus on the challenge
of operationalizing theoretical variables. &lt;br/&gt;