* 0801996
* Engineering Crystalline Oxides on Wide Band Gap Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Jane Chang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 04/30/2012
* USD 306,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;ECCS-0801996&lt;br/&gt;J.Chang, UCLA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to engineer multifunctional dielectric thin films
on wide band gap semiconductors for power devices and radio frequency devices,
as they have great potential in many national security and civilian
applications. The approach is to develop an effective atomic layer deposition
process to synthesize epitaxial dielectric thin films on wide band gap
semiconductor with improved interfacial and electrical properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed research is on
materials selection, synthesis, interface engineering, and device integration
that would enable the design and fabrication of future generations of improved
electronic devices. By combining experimental studies using state-of-the-art
analytical techniques with theoretical analysis using density functional theory,
ultra thin and lattice matched metal oxide thin films will be designed and
synthesized on wide band gap semiconductors to enhance the functionalities of
power electronics and radio frequency integrated circuits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed research is on the
education and training of graduate, undergraduate, and high school summer intern
students through engineering courses and hands-on research. Research outcome
will be integrated into two courses developed by the principal investigator to
maximize the impact of the research. Two graduate students will be supported
under this program to pursue their doctoral studies. Senior research projects
and summer internship positions will be offered to undergraduate and high school
students, especially women and underrepresented minority students, to work on
materials characterization and spectroscopic analysis outlined in the proposed
research and to help their long term career development in academia and
industry. &lt;br/&gt;