* 0801985
* Control of ultrafast plasmonic structures by a metal-insulator transition
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Richard Haglund, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 05/31/2011
* USD 330,000.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;ECCS- 0801985&lt;br/&gt;R. Haglund, Vanderbilt
University&lt;br/&gt;Objective: The objective of this project is to show how
plasmon dynamics in composite metal-vanadium dioxide (VO2) nanostructures can be
modulated by the reversible semiconductor-to-metal transition (SMT) in VO2.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The SMT will be initiated by
localized adiabatic heating using a scanning-probe tip, and by ultrafast laser
excitation using standard prism coupling schemes. Plasmon dynamics will be
tracked using femtosecond pump-probe spectroscopy, plasmon microscopy and a
novel, dual apertureless scanning-probe tip scheme for detecting plasmon
propagation. During the first year, we will measure the ultrafast localized
surface-plasmon resonance (LSPR) response and surface plasmon-polariton (SPP)
propagation on nanohole arrays comprising bi-layer films (Ag or Au on VO2) and
on VO2-covered nanoparticle arrays (Ag or Au). In the sec-ond year, we will
fabricate various VO2:metal composite nanostructures such as non-spheroidal
nanoparticles, nanospirals and nanoholes surrounded by grooved diffractive
structures. We will investigate the effects of local curvature, size and
morphology, and of excitation by linearly and circularly polarized light, on
LSPR and SPP dynamics. In the third year, we will fabricate SPP waveguides such
as nanoparticle chains (Au-VO2-Au ? ellipsoidal chains and Au-Au ? chains capped
with VO2) and nanowire or nanochannel geometries. These SPP-guiding structures
are expected to exhibit interesting effects due to induced magnetization,
polarization and dispersion that will be tracked via their signatures in the
visible optical spectrum. These experiments will point the way to modulating SPP
propagation in nanostructures that could serve as prototypes for a variety of
plasmonic devices. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The technology will be
a demonstration of an ultrafast broadband switch in the near-infrared
communications spectral bands. The fundamental understanding of plasmon-photon
coupling and plasmon dynamics is expected to result in industrial "spin-off"
benefits. Ad-ditionally, the project will result in the dissemination of new
knowledge through the training of junior scientists in an international, cross-
institutional collaborative environment and a web-based graduate seminar course
in nanoplasmonics that will be available to the scientific com-
munity.&lt;br/&gt;