* 0801440
* Multi-Agent System Based Intelligent Distributed Control System for Power Plants
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Robert Marks, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* George Maracas
* 05/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

Multi-Agent System Based Intelligent Distributed Control System for Power
Plants&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
development of an Intelligent Distributed Control System (IDCS) for a large-
scale power plant. The complex network of sensor/actuators and distributed
systems inherent in modern large-scale power plants immediately suggests a
Multi-Agent System (MAS) as a viable solution. To operate a large-scale power
plant, the monitoring and control systems are distributed and automated for each
subsystem in the power plant. The approach is to use MAS, which allows
implementation of significantly more sophisticated measures to compensate for
the unsecure and nonrobust properties plaguing traditional control
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research is that
MAS is well suited for distributed control of power plants since the resulting
cooperative and negotiated solutions provide the ability for distributed
autonomy, robust control, and flexible auto configuration. Current power plants
use only centralized or loosely decentralized control schemes and require
continuous intervention by the operator, while MAS can manage the power plant
operation by itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research
includes creation of a powerful unified tool for monitoring and control of power
plants; an operational environment that is secure, fuel efficient, and provides
practical and realistic infrastructure; and application in a broad range of
engineering problems including nuclear plants, fuel cell plants, and power
grids. With over 32.4% of current generation coming from coal alone, it is
important to burn these fuels as efficiently and cleanly as possible. MAS paints
a coherent picture for operators and will be useful as a training tool for
workforces in energy systems. The MAS-IDCS facility will be utilized in
developing courses in Power Systems Control and Computational Intelligence, and
will be attractive in recruiting diversified groups of students. &lt;br/&gt;