* 0801922
* Ultra-Small, All-Optical Plasmonic Switches Based on Light-Driven Molecular Shuttles
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2011
* Tony Jun Huang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 04/30/2011
* USD 270,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;ECCS-0801922&lt;br/&gt;T. Huang, PA ST U University Park
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective: The proposal focuses on developing a new class
of ultra-small, all-optical plasmonic switches using photoactive rotaxanes as
active components. The proposed photoactive rotaxane-based all-optical plasmonic
switches could achieve unprecedented performance (size: molecular level; energy
consumption: 1-2 eV; excellent reversibility and flexibility) and be integral
components for the future ultra-small, ultra-fast plasmonic circuits and very
large scale electronics and photonics integration (VLSEPI).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: This project introduces light-driven
molecular machines into optical device settings. Molecular machines driven by
light have several advantages: they can be switched much faster; they do not
produce any waste; light can be used for dual purposes¡Vinducing (writing) as
well as detecting (reading) molecular motions. Experimental and numerical
investigations will shed some light on the fundamental understanding of
controlling plasmonics at molecular level. More importantly, with molecular
machines¡¦ advantages in their size, energy consumption, speed, and
controllability at molecular level, we expect that once established, the
proposed rotaxane-based plasmonic switches will be welcomed in many applications
such as optical communication.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The PI will
partner with the Penn State Center for Nanoscale Science and develop outreach
activities around the theme of ¡¥from molecular shuttles to nanomechanics,
nanoelectronics, and nanophotonics¡¦. A suite of demonstrations will imitate
molecular machines¡¦ mechanical motions, broadly constructed and idealized in
their operation by macroscopic models. The results developed in the past as well
as from this proposal will be used to illustrate what molecular machines can
achieve, and they will be delivered to museums, high-schools, and summer
programs.