* 0801965
* Novel Capabilities and Devices Using Plasmonic Lattices in Conventional and Exotic Metals
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Zeev Valy Vardeny, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2011
* USD 330,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Objective: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed
research is to elucidate the underlying properties of the phenomenon, and use
this knowledge to develop unique and useful device capabilities for the THz
spectral range. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Over the
last decade, interest in the field Plasmonics has increased dramatically,
because of the striking new physics that can be explored and the potential for
new and unique applications associated with many of the discovered phenomena.
One particular phenomenon that has elicited significant attention is that of
enhanced optical transmission through arrays of subwavelength apertures (also
known as plasmonic lattices). During the research program period, we will
examine the transmission properties of plasmonic lattices at THz frequencies
using time-domain spectroscopy, which offers several unique advantages over
existing studies performed at optical frequencies: (i) Unlike at optical
frequencies, where only gold and silver are able to support relatively low loss
propagation of surface plasmon-polaritons, a broad range of metals including
aluminum, stainless steel, as well as more exotic metals such as heavily doped
conducting polymers and metallic single walled carbon nanotubes, work well at
THz frequencies (ii) the transmission resonances at THz frequencies exhibit a
higher quality factor than similar resonances at optical frequencies (iii) THz
time-domain spectroscopy allows for a direct measurement of the THz electric
field transmitted through the structures, yielding both amplitude and phase
information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;Potential
applications include sensing for biomedical and homeland security applications,
short range free-space communications, and imaging. The strong interdisciplinary
nature of the proposed research will serve to educate graduate and undergraduate
students from multiple departments, who will be involved in all aspects of the
research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;