* 0801071
* Square-integrable automorphic forms, local Langlands correspondence and Gross-Prasad conjecture
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Wee Teck Gan, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2012
* USD 234,975.00

The PI proposes to study various basic questions in representation theory and
the theory of automorphic forms arising from the Langlands program, and their
applications to questions of arithmetic interest. For a number of years, the PI
has been pursuing the construction and classification of square-integrable
automorphic forms as predicted by Arthur's conjecture, especially in the context
of the exceptional groups. The PI hopes to complete this study in the next
3-year period.&lt;br/&gt;He also intends to study the local Langlands
correspondence for certain classical and exceptional groups. In another
direction, the PI hopes to establish certain cases of the Gross-Prasad
conjecture regarding the restriction of representations of an orthogonal or
unitary group to a smaller one, which has applications to special values of
L-functions. Finally, the PI proposes to establish the second term identity for
the regularized Siegel-Weil formula in the context of the theory of theta
correspondences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Langlands program is an integral part
of modern number theoretic research. Its initial goal is to understand certain
groups which arise naturally in number theory and representation theory. In
recent years, it has expanded beyond its traditional boundaries to connect with
areas such as algebraic geometry and mathematical physics. It has already found
unexpected applications in real life. Indeed, the Jacquet-Langlands
correspondence, which is one of the first major results in the Langlands
program, has been exploited to give a construction of the so-called Ramanujan
graphs.&lt;br/&gt;These graphs are highly connected and serve as efficient
networks.&lt;br/&gt;They have turned out to be very useful in communications
theory. It is hoped that the questions investigated in this proposal can help to
unearth more applications of this type.&lt;br/&gt;