* 0801191
* Algebraic cycles, L-functions and rational points on elliptic curves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Kartik Prasanna, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 02/28/2010
* USD 125,993.00

This proposal aims to investigate relations between special values of
L-functions, cycles and periods with important applications to some open
conjectures about L-functions such as those of Birch-Swinnerton-Dyer and Bloch-
Kato-Beilinson. Specifically, the investigator and his collaborators will (i)
Study the algebraic cycles associated to Rankin-Selberg L-functions and their
images under Abel-Jacobi maps, and apply these results to give new constructions
of rational points on CM elliptic curves; (ii) Study p-adic L-functions and the
Iwasawa main conjecture for CM Hida deformations; (iii) Explore methods to prove
a conjecture of his relating periods of quaternionic modular forms to adjoint
L-values, with applications to some cases of the Bloch-Kato conjecture (iv)
Study the problem of constructing and counting invariant linear forms on a
triple product of representations of the metaplectic group, thus generalizing
results on triple product L-functions associated to modular forms of integral
weight to the setting of modular forms of half-integral weight.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general focus of this proposal is the area of number
theory. Number theory has to do with such objects as prime numbers and
diophantine equations. Other than being perhaps the oldest branch of
mathematics, it is of great significance in today's world, since many
cryptographic protocols (needed for secure transmissions over the internet) and
error correcting codes (needed for compact discs, hard discs and the like) are
based on number theoretic methods. These practical applications in fact involve
rather sophisticated geometrical objects such as elliptic curves. Over the last
half-century, we have realized that one can gain a better understanding of these
geometric objects by studying certain functions, called L-functions.
Conjecturally one expects that very interesting information about the geometric
object is encoded in the behavior of the associated L-function at certain
special points. The investigator hopes to deepen our understanding of this
connection through the work to be done in the current proposal. One of the
concrete consequences of this project will be a new method to find solutions in
rational numbers to certain cubic equations, a central problem in number
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;