* 0801362
* Asynchronous Nanowire Reconfigurable Crossbar Architecture for Manufacturability, Scalability, Robustness and Defect & Fault-Tolerance
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Minsu Choi, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 04/30/2012
* USD 265,705.00

The objective of this research is to develop novel asynchronous nanowire
crossbar architecture to address various design and manufacturing issues with
conventional clocked counterpart. The approach is based on a delay-insensitive
encoding and handshaking technique known as Null Convention Logic (NCL).

Intellectual Merit: By enabling separation between control and data
representations, the proposed architecture provides self-synchronization
throughout the design. No clock distribution network needs to be fabricated
along with nanowire crossbars. Also numerous timing-related failure modes and
parametric variations caused by nondeterministic nanoscale assembly can be
intrinsically tolerated. Since all timing information is embedded in the
encoding and locally handled, the timing complexity remains the same even though
the size of the circuit to be programmed increases. Therefore, potential
benefits from the proposed clock-free nanowire crossbar architecture include
improved manufacturability, scalability, modularity and robustness.

Broader Impact: Results and findings from the proposed research will be helpful
to break the photolithographic limit; high-density nanowire crossbar-based
computing systems, which are more manufacturable, scalable and robust, can be
easily realized by the proposed asynchronous architecture. The results of the
project will be actively disseminated by scientific papers, software and online
demos, which can be accessed from the project website and NANOHUB.ORG. This
project will also include a major component of research and education activities
for undergraduates and under-represented minorities and interdisciplinary
research collaboration with industrial partner.