* 0801158
* Scattering Theory and Semi-Classical Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,02/28/2011
* Ivana Alexandrova, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 02/28/2011
* USD 149,417.00

Scattering theory is the study of interacting systems on scales of time and/or
distance much larger than those of the interaction region itself. Scattering
experiments are widely used in the natural sciences to determine the structure
of objects which are far away, like the stars, very small, like the atom, or
difficult to reach, like the Earth's core. In a famous experiment of 1909, for
example, by studying the scattering pattern of alpha particles passing through
gold foil Rutherford determined that the atom consisted of a nucleus surrounded
by electrons. Semi-classical analysis is a type of phase space analysis which
investigates the dependence of operators and related objects on a small
parameter. Originally motivated by Bohr's, or the quantum-classical,
correspondence principle, which asserts that classical mechanics is the limit of
quantum mechanics as Planck's constant tends to 0, semi-classical analysis has
found, however, many applications in diverse areas of science. The role of the
small parameter in these fields can be played by the inverse of the square root
of the nuclear mass in the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, the magnetic field
strength in solid-state physics, the adiabatic parameter in adiabatic theory,
the inverse of the square root of the energy in high-energy spectral problems,
and others. By building upon recent advances in semi-classical analysis and
scattering theory the research supported by this grant aims to contribute to the
following aspects of these fields. First, it seeks to establish new instances of
the quantum-classical correspondence by relating quantum scattering objects to
classical ones in the semi-classical limit. Second, it aims to investigate
mainly scattering in the presence of particles or signals which never leave the
interaction region. Such configurations are by now recognized to have a
significant impact on the behavior of scattering systems but very few of them
have been completed elucidated in the literature. Lastly, to achieve these goals
this research will further the theory of semi-classical Fourier integral
operators. The interesting and important properties of these operators have made
them a strong tool not only in semi-classical analysis but also in related
fields. All of these developments have the potential to contribute to the
solutions of inverse problems as well as to the advancement of the fields of
science mentioned above.

