* 0801200
* Partial Differential Equations in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Mei-Chi Shaw, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2012
* USD 172,455.00

Since the pioneering work of Kohn and Hormander several decades ago, partial
differential equations have been among the main tools for studying several
complex variables. Morever, advances in one of these fields has frequently
triggered advances in the other. Two of the most important examples of such
equations are the Cauchy-Riemann equations and the tangential Cauchy-Riemann
equations. The problems under consideration in this project include: the Cauchy-
Riemann equations and the tangential Cauchy-Riemann equations on complex
projective spaces, the geometric aspects of these equations with curvature
terms, and their relationship to function theory in complex manifolds. The
behavior of these equations under the curvature condition has not been explored
systematically earlier, and an understanding of them in this context holds
promise for impact on algebraic and complex geometry. New applications of these
equations to complex foliation theory also yield important results in topology,
geometry, and dynamics. For example, the principal investigator's recent work on
the nonexistence of Levi-flat hypersurfaces in complex projective spaces is a
holomorphic version of the classical Poincare-Bendixson theorem in dynamical
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important aspect of the research that will be
done in this project rests in the fact that these problems are central to
several different areas, namely, complex variables, complex geometry, and
partial differential equations. These classical fields in mathematical analysis
have contributed to our understanding of many important phenomena in physics.
Since physical problems quite often involve variations in both time and space,
the equations that govern them often need to be expressed in the language of
complex variables. Many such equations involving several complex variables in a
geometric setting have yet to be thoroughly analyzed, and many of the associated
physical phenomena, such at the existence of a conic drop in an alternating-
current electric field, have yet to be satisfactorily explained. The principal
investigator hopes to tackle such remaining and new problems in geometry and
topology. She interacts with mathematicians from many different areas in
different parts of the world. She has taught courses on the subjects to students
and researchers alike in many countries. Such interdisciplinary and
international approaches bring new perspective and greater depth to each of the
fields involved. In particular, recent progress in the so-called Dirichlet and
Neumann problem on nonsmooth domains has found application in other disciplines,
for instance, in physics and engineering.