* 0801065
* Food insecurity in recently resettled African refugee communities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2007,02/28/2010
* Craig Hadley, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2010
* USD 57,778.00

The United Nations estimates that that there are currently 10 million refugees
in the world. A small number of these individuals are eligible for resettlement
in the USA, but little is known about the health and well being of these
individuals once they are resettled into developed countries. Theorists
hypothesize that while freed from the violence and war that characterize refugee
situations, refugees will face poverty and concomitant shifts in dietary
practice and health seeking behavior, which may negatively affect health. This
study will focus on one particularly important aspect of public health: food
insecurity. Food insecurity is a good indicator of poor dietary practice and is
associated with a range of health outcomes including excess body weight. The aim
is to quantify the magnitude of food insecurity in two refugee communities,
examine the cultural, social, and economic correlates of food insecurity (and
its sequelae), and assess the validity of current food insecurity measurement
tools. The project utilizes a two site, two ethnic group longitudinal study
design. Methods of data collection include focus groups, participant
observation, a survey, and anthropometric measures of weight and height. It will
be the largest longitudinal study to date of these populations, and one of the
few measuring the health impact of resettlement among African refugees living in
the USA. Such data is imperative to addressing concerns about the costs and
burdens of hosting refugees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Concern over the well-being of refugees and the costs of
hosting refugees are widespread, and there is growing interest in the social
determinants of health and well-being. This project will add significantly to
our understanding in each of these areas. The project will help fill a huge gap
in knowledge about public health nutrition among resettled refugees, as it aims
to not only identify who is most at risk of food insecurity but why, and in
doing so would offer useful programmatic insights. This information will be
particularly important for designing interventions and health-education
programs. The research would also address the pressing issue of how to best
measure food insecurity among newly arrived refugees. Ensuring that a food
security scale is a valid indicator of deprivation is of enormous importance for
monitoring and advocacy and for identifying determinants of food insecurity.
Several refugees will also be hired as interviewers. The results that come from
the project will be distributed to both professional groups that represent
refugees and to resettlement agencies; the information can be used by these
groups for advocacy and to monitor trends in several health outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;