* 0801999
* MIP:  Addressing the Role of Community Ecological Interactions in Population Niche Evolution along Hot Spring Thermal Gradients
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Scott Miller, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2013
* USD 502,370.00

Developing an understanding of the factors that determine the origins and
distribution of biological diversity on the planet is a fundamental goal of
ecology and evolution. Whereas the potential distribution of a group of
organisms is determined solely by its evolved limits of environmental tolerance,
its actual realized distribution also depends upon the outcome of its
interactions with other community members. A grant has been awarded to Dr. Scott
R. Miller of The University of Montana to investigate how interactions among
competing photosynthetic microorganisms (cyanobacteria and green non-sulfur
bacteria) have shaped their realized distribution patterns along two well-
characterized hot spring environmental gradients (White Creek, Rabbit Creek) in
Yellowstone NP. Project 1 integrates environmental gene expression analyses with
laboratory physiology experiments to address the central tenet of evolutionary
theory that competing species evolve to reduce competition by testing whether
green non-sulfur bacteria exhibit a genetically-programmed shift in resource
utilization in regions of strong distribution overlap with competing
cyanobacteria. Project 2 combines genetic and physiological approaches to
address why the different springs differ in the abundance of the cyanobacterium
Synechococcus B: the realized distribution of this cyanobacterium is twice as
broad at Rabbit Creek compared with White Creek. It will be determined whether
these differences in realized distribution are the result of different amounts
of genetically-determined variation in temperature performance among
Synechococcus B between springs, and whether either limitations in the ability
of organisms to migrate between springs or exclusion by competitors contribute
to these differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The questions of how ecological
variation is distributed within and between communities, and how ecological
interactions themselves contribute to the evolved traits of competing organisms,
are longstanding in ecology and evolution, but progress on these questions has
been historically hampered for microorganisms by technological limitations.
Addressing them has major implications for our understanding of how microbial
communities are assembled and function, and of how they may respond to
environmental change. Together, these projects promise fresh insights into these
questions from a novel microbial perspective. The research plan thereby
addresses key program goals of integrating microbial physiology and genomic
diversity with environmental processes to determine the mechanistic basis of
biotic interactions within communities and to reveal the patterns of microbial
distribution in time and space. The award enables the integration of research
and education through support for both graduate and undergraduate student
training, as well as through the PI?s Biology of Yellowstone Hot Springs course,
a sophomore-level offering which uses these hot springs as a natural teaching
laboratory to provide a hands-on microbiological research experience. Outreach
components include a continued focus on these microbial communities in the PI?s
annual field-based course for college and high school instructors on the biology
of Yellowstone hot springs through the NSF National Chautauqua Workshop summer
program. &lt;br/&gt;