* 0801530
* IGERT: Optical techniques for actuation, sensing, and imaging of biological systems
* EHR,DGE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2016
* Tony Heinz, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2016
* USD 3,000,000.00

Progress in the biological sciences and medicine relies increasingly on methods,
approaches, and strategies derived from synergistic interactions with the
physical sciences and engineering. One notable example of this is the use of
optical methods for biosensing and bioimaging. Furthermore, the tremendous
nanoscale device fabrication capabilities built up in microelectronics and
photonics furnish unparalleled opportunities for leveraging highly integrated
platforms for on-chip biological sensor systems. By their nature, these
applications cross through multiple disciplines and require a team with diverse
expertise in the fundamental light/tissue interaction, complex optical
instrumentation and imaging tools, and relevant biological systems. In this
Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) program a new
generation of scientists and engineers will be trained through a set of five
research thrusts that cross three fundamental core competency areas: optics,
photonics, and sensor electronics; biomolecular detection and cellular-level
analysis; and applications to medicine and public health. Each IGERT trainee
will be empowered to work at the boundaries between the disciplines and will be
uniquely capable of contributing to advancements in this important emerging
field. With 19 faculty members representing academic departments across Columbia
University's School of Engineering and Applied Science, School of Arts and
Sciences, Mailman School of Public Health, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
and Teachers College, and incorporating strong interaction with City College,
Queens College, and The Cooper Union in New York City, the IGERT trainees will
experience a truly diverse community sharing in the integrated educational and
research activities and will be exposed to a wide spectrum of cutting-edge
applications. An external advisory board including industrial and government
labs will provide additional connections between the IGERT and outside partners.
Educationally, this IGERT program fulfills a compelling need to train a diverse
workforce of U. S. scientists and engineers trained in an area of large and
growing competitive importance to the United States. The proposed enrichment
program provides IGERT fellows with enhanced training through experience in
industry and government laboratories, seminars on professional development,
career guidance, entrepreneurship, and discussion of ethical issues. Significant
resources are committed to ensuring recruitment and retention of fellows from
underrepresented groups. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.