* 0801833
* Collaborative Research: Development and Evaluation of Reflective THz Medical Imaging for Skin Burns
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Hua Lee, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2011
* USD 213,987.00

&lt;br/&gt;Objective&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this work is to develop a
medical imaging system for skin burns. Preliminary results indicate that a
reflective terahertz (THz) imaging system can be used to image burns on porcine
skin with high resolution and high tissue-condition contrast.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system approach
is based on conventional radar technology and significantly simplifies the
system components and enables near real-time THz imaging. A pulsed
photoconductive switch is used as the broadband, free-space-coupled THz
transmitter, and an antenna-coupled, zero-bias Schottky diode rectifier is used
in the front-end of a time-gated receiver. Both in-vitro data and in-vivo data
taken over the course of the proposed work will establish the capabilities of
THz imaging of skin burns, and provide a large set of imagery data for future
work and for dissemination to the scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the direct
engineering and medical benefits, the proposed research will also promote
student learning and teaching by creating a variety of opportunities, such as
intercampus seminars, for meaningful interaction between faculty, clinicians,
postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and undergraduate students on both
campuses. For example, a new course on THz Science and Technology will be
offered on the UCSB campus Fall of 2008 and will bring in students from
Electrical Engineering, Physics, Chemistry, and Biology to a truly
interdisciplinary learning environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;