* 0801035
* Collaborative Research:  VORTEX2--Multi-Scale and Multi-Platform Study of Tornadoes, Supercell Thunderstorms, and Their Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2013
* Paul Markowski, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 05/31/2013
* USD 1,014,259.00

The Principal Investigators (PIs) will conduct a multi-institution, integrated
study encompassing several core science foci of the second Verification of the
Origin of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment (VORTEX2) to be held in 2009. In
support of this research, and in support of the overall VORTEX2 program, the PIs
will field several core VORTEX2 instrumentation systems. The field-project and
analysis effort will permit the coordinated collection of multi-platform
measurements and their integrated analysis. The diverse data sets will result
from fixed and mobile radars, mobile mesonets, and in situ instrumentation with
the goal of developing a more comprehensive scientific understanding of the
genesis, maintenance, and structure of tornadoes and supercells and their
relationship to the environment. This study will combine integrated analyses
with those of less comprehensive data from over 130 tornadoes obtained during
the Radar Observations of Thunderstorms And Tornadoes Experiment (ROTATE)
program (1996-2007). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Motivation and
Intellectual Merit: Current level of understanding in several areas of tornado
science fails to provide answers to fundamental questions including the true
range of sizes, intensities, and structures of tornadoes. The factors governing
the occurrence and timing of tornado genesis, growth, intensification,
maintenance, and dissipation, as well as the modes of genesis, are hypothesized
from previous work, but remain largely unvalidated observationally, as do
details concerning vertical wind field profiles, and the evolution and structure
of damaging winds near the ground. The specific role of downdrafts in
tornadogenesis and the sensitivity of the tornadogenesis process to
microphysical and thermodynamic characteristics are not known. Thus, while
significant advances have been made in addressing many of these questions using
data from the original VORTEX and from ROTATE; these results have been limited.
Specifically, VORTEX2 will provide an integration of multiple-Doppler mobile
radar data with comprehensive in situ thermodynamic data that has not been
achieved previously. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Improved
understanding of tornado genesis, maintenance, structure, and environmental
dependencies will have a broad impact on the ability to detect, warn, and
forecast these severe events and to reduce subsequent casualties. The fielding
of mobile Doppler radars, mobile mesonets, and in situ thermodynamic probes will
be led by the PIs. These datasets will be available to the scientific community
for both scientific and educational purposes and are likely to be extensively
used by a large number of investigators and educators. &lt;br/&gt;