* 0801408
* QMHP: Exploring the Limits of Energy Scavenging - from Microwave to Nanoscale
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2013
* Robert Trew, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 03/31/2013
* USD 327,843.00

Proposal Number: 0801408

Proposal Title: QMHP: Exploring the Limits of Energy Scavenging - from Microwave
to Nanoscale

PI Name: Trew, Robert J.

PI Institution: North Carolina State University

Starting from the recent seminal work of Popovic, the microwave electronics
community has proven that we can extract small but useful amounts of electricity
by harvesting the energy of ambient, disorganized microwave energy in the
environment. That new but well-established technology uses antennas with micro-
sized features, in order to extract energy from microwaves. The goal of this new
project is to discover how much can be extracted from higher frequencies of
ambient radiation, by using nano-scaled structures tuned to extract energy from
terahertz frequencies of radiation. The project will proceed from theoretical
modeling and analysis, to design, fabrication and testing of systems designed to
extract as much energy as possible from the thermal surface excitation of an
optimized polar semiconductor.

Intellectual Merit

Using current theoretical tools, it is difficult to predict what will actually
happen as one moves this kind of technology to the nanoscale. For example, it is
well known how to calculate the free energy component of chemical materials at
room temperatures, as a share of total enthalpy, but a similar decomposition is
not available for general sources of electromagnetic radiation. Also, quantum
effects come into play at the nanoscale. This project will start from the best
available state-of-the-art modeling of what to expect, accounting for quantum
effects to some degree; however, the greatest benefit to science will be the
opportunity to compare the most interesting theoretical predictions with highly
replicable empirical results.

Broader Benefits

If this project should actually result in a useful new source of small-scale
electricity for use in portable devices like sensors and small communications
nodes, the transformative benefits would be enormous. Benefits are expected in
any case to local solid-state spectroscopy and near field microscopy,
technologies of growing importance as enablers for nanotechnology. This research
will be performed in collaboration with the new NSF-supported site for Research
Experiences for Undergraduates at NCSU. Undergraduates will be recruited to work
on the project and gain experience in advanced simulation techniques and
laboratory measurement procedures.



