* 0801389
* A Structurally-Based Approach to Nonlinear Analysis and Design of Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Murat Arcak, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2008
* USD 316,461.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamic behavior of various natural and
technological networks is dictated by the structure of interactions between the
components rather than by detailed properties of the components. This project
will develop a new approach that exploits the network structure while broadly
characterizing the components by their essential properties, such as passivity
and time scales, that are relevant to the ensemble behavior. This structurally
based approach will bridge the gap between nonlinear systems techniques and high
order, complex network models. The search for important network structures will
be guided by biochemical reaction networks which have evolved into several
efficient circuit patterns in gene regulation, cell signaling, and biosynthetic
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first part of this project will pursue a passivity based approach to biochemical
reaction networks that encompass and significantly strengthen an existing
stability criterion in mathematical biology for cyclic interconnection
structures. Because passivity is at the core of this stability criterion, we
will be able to obtain generalized criteria for other network topologies, such
as branched pathways in metabolic networks. The next research topic is
verification of passivity properties in network models and modification of the
proposed stability criteria to account for time delays. The final topic is the
use of passivity properties to ensure robustness against diffusive instabilities
in spatially distributed models. The second part of the project will develop a
novel model reduction technique that exploits a clustered structure inherent in
numerous biological and engineering networks. This technique relies on a
timescale separation induced by the structure rather than by the specific
parameters of the network, and is particularly promising for order reduction of
Markov chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will introduce an undergraduate level course entitled Nonlinear Phenomena in
Engineering and Biology¡± and a graduate level course entitled Networks of
Dynamic Systems, both of which will be highly interdisciplinary and research
oriented. He will continue to recruit graduate students from underrepresented
groups and to work with high school students in the New Visions Program a joint
research and education program of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and local
school districts that aims to attract talented students to careers in science
and technology.