* 0801799
* Student Travel Support for CoNEXT 2007 Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2008,01/31/2009
* Suman Banerjee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 01/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

The 3rd International Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and
Technologies (CoNEXT) will be held December 10-13, 2007 at the Columbia
University campus in New York. CoNEXT 2007 is sponsored by ACM SIGCOMM, which is
ACM's Special Interest Group on Data Communications. This award will assist
approximately 12 United States-based graduate students in attending this
conference. Participation in conferences such as CoNEXT is an extremely
important part of the graduate school experience, providing students an
opportunity to interact with more senior researchers and to be exposed to
leading edge research in the field. There is also a special student workshop
that will be organized with CoNEXT that is especially oriented to: (i) further
such opportunities, (ii) allow students to get targeted feedback on their work,
(iii) inform them about good strategies for conducting effective research, and
(iv) educate them about different career paths past their degrees. The support
requested in this proposal will enable students to participate in this workshop
and to attend the CoNEXT 2007 conference, who would be other-wise unable to do
either. The travel grant chairs are committed to encouraging the participation
of women and under-represented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This project proposes to provide travel support for graduate students to
attend CoNEXT 2007 and the associated workshops, which includes the student
workshop and a workshop on future Internet design. This rich program will expose
them to new ideas and allow for interaction with other researchers. In
particular, the student workshop is geared to provide students an opportunity to
present their current work, to receive explicit verbal as well as documented
feedback on their work and their oral presentations, and to expose them to
important issues such as how technical papers should be written to improve
dissemination of results and how research problems should be judged for
relevance and potential for impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
project integrates research and education of students through exposure to a
premier technical meeting in computer networks and communications. Students will
have the opportunity to observe high-quality presentations and interact with
senior researchers in the field both in the main conference and the associated
workshops. The proposed student participation will have a positive impact on
students' interest and the quality of their research. Women and other minorities
will be encouraged to participate. Among the papers submitted to the conference,
the US has the single largest number of authors (approximately one-third).
However, the remaining authors of submitted papers span 28 other countries. This
diversity is also in evidence from the composition of the technical program
committee of the conference. This truly international flavor of CoNEXT 2007,
therefore, presents a tremendous opportunity to students to increase their
breadth of ideas, research approaches, and technical perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;