* 0801330
* Adaptive Dynamic Programming for Continuous-Time Systems and Networked Agents on Graphs
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Frank Lewis, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 06/30/2011
* USD 249,999.00

Proposal Number: ECCS-0801330&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Adaptive
Dynamic Programming for Continuous-Time Systems and Networked Agents on
Graphs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Lewis, Frank L.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI
Institution: University of Texas at Arlington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective and
Approach&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to improve the performance
of human engineered systems by designing better high performance automatic
feedback control structures using techniques from the Computational Intelligence
field. The approach is to use adaptive dynamic programming (ADP) methods for
systems working in continuous-time, a technique not yet fully developed or
exploited for control systems design. The PI?s prior work shows that ADP for
continuous-time systems provides a novel framework for high-performance control
system design from which emerges a multi-timescale separation of control
functionality mirroring natural multi-timescale structures in the human
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.&lt;br/&gt;Regulation systems in
biological structures are both optimal and adaptive in real-time, allowing on-
line learning to achieve the best performance. However, manmade control systems
are either optimal off-line designs or real-time adaptive methods. This research
will use ADP to develop unified automatic control design methods that are both
optimal and adaptive in real-time. Mathematically rigorous proofs of performance
will be provided. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.&lt;br/&gt;This work
will develop better feedback control structures that will facilitate better
performance for aircraft, engines, industrial processes, etc. It will contribute
to theoretical foundations bringing together the Computational Intelligence and
Control Systems communities. Comprehensive comparisons between ADP-based
techniques and standard adaptive &amp; robust control techniques will be made
through implementations on electro-mechanical laboratory equipment and on a
three-area power network testbed.&lt;br/&gt;Development of cooperative ADP
algorithms for systems on communication graphs will allow more effective control
of networks of electric power systems and vehicle formations.&lt;br/&gt;Ongoing
activities in research curriculum development will facilitate transferring
research results to education and training at UTA. This grant will allow
extension of existing Automation and Robotics Research Institute (ARRI) programs
supporting women in engineering, US undergraduate student research, and K-12
outreach. &lt;br/&gt;The award-winning SBIR program will facilitate technology
transfer to US industry. &lt;br/&gt;