* 0801920
* Planning for a National Transportation, Distribution, and Logistics Education Center
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Dennis Sweeney, ARKANSAS STATE UNIVERSITY MID-SOUTH
* Standard Grant
* V. Celeste  Carter
* 07/31/2010
* USD 69,610.00

Because the rapidly evolving global supply-chain system is creating a historic
demand for a technological workforce to support all components of this system,
academic and industry partners from across the nation are leveraging existing
resources to develop the framework for an ATE National Center of Excellence in
Transportation, Distribution, and Logistics (TDL). The educational implications
of this revolution are profound. Implementation of the technologies needed to
support the U.S. component of the global supply-chain system requires workers
who have skills not only in TDL principles, but also in systems related to
Global Positioning Systems (GPS), Geographic Information Systems (GIS),
relational database management systems, and Radio Frequency Identification
(RFID) technologies.

Intellectual Merit: Technical and community colleges across the country require
assistance in creating programs to develop technicians for this critical and
rapidly emerging field. The Center is being designed to support development of
technicians throughout the educational continuum, maintain a national database
of skill standards in the TDL field aligned with the full spectrum of employer-
needed skills, and support an educational continuum extending from high school
graduation through the baccalaureate degree. A major activity of the Center is
professional development of faculty in the use of case studies, problem-based
learning, and curriculum design.

Broader Impact: To help the United States remain competitive in the global
supply chain system, the Center is being planned to foster development of the
technological workforce required by the TDL industry. Because of the
international scope of the global supply chain system, the Center has both a
national and international impact. A model that includes best practices in the
compilation and validation of skill standards that are aligned with third-party
certifications, job categories, and educational credentialing levels is being
disseminated through workshops and conferences so that other community colleges
can utilize new knowledge in development of TDL programs.