* 0801329
* Organic Functional Groups in Templated Solid-State Reactions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Leonard MacGillivray, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 07/31/2011
* USD 329,921.00

This award to University of Iowa by the Solid State Materials Chemistry program
in the Division of Materials Research is to incorporate organic groups into
templated reactions, which are carried out using organic solid state
photochemistry. Major goal is to develop methods to incorporate small (e.g.
vinyl) and large (e.g. t-butyl) groups, as well as carboxylic acids into the
templated reactions, and to construct decorated targets such as cyclophanes and
ladderanes. Other aims of the project are to exploit and elaborate to direct
these photoreactions using organic templates to make: a) tunable changes in
fluorescence emission; and b) non-covalent functionalization of metal-organic
polyhedra via anion exchange. This project represents a first attempt to
systematically integrate organic functionalities into a dependable method to
control bimolecular reactivity in the crystalline state. Success of this project
can lead to the designed, solvent-free synthesis of complex molecules and
materials with tunable properties. In addition, structure-property relationships
developed in this project could also be applied to additional solid-state
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed educational activities will involve
integration of the proposed research activities into the undergraduate
curriculum by developing an inorganic laboratory experiment course that focuses
upon single-crystal-to-single-crystal transformations. As part of outreach
educational activities, ?Working Weekends? workshops on X-ray crystallography
and powder diffraction will be expanded to include both lectures and
experiments. This outreach activity will be extended via cyberinfrastructure and
through the development of a mobile X-ray unit. A published organic laboratory
experiment, as well as a new inorganic experiment course will be disseminated
electronically to students and faculty members of the local area colleges via
the internet on the educational website. This website is being further developed
by the PI to make it available for laboratory experiments in supramolecular
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;