* 0801661
* Travel Support for the U.S. Participants to Attend the International Workshop on Prevention of Total Collapse of Existing Structures; held at the Istanbul Technical University
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2007,10/31/2008
* Oral Buyukozturk, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 10/31/2008
* USD 13,740.00

This award will support the travel of 6 invited US researchers to attend and
present lectures at the workshop on Measures for the Prevention of Total
Collapse of Existing Low-Rise Structures, to be held at the Istanbul Technical
University (ITU) in Turkey, November 17-20, 2007. The workshop has been
organized by the European Laboratory for Structural Assessment (ELSA) and the
Structural and Earthquake Engineering Laboratory (STEEL) in Istanbul, Turkey.
The purpose of this workshop is to have the leading researchers from several
counties discuss innovative techniques and share knowledge and experience
related to mitigating the potential catastrophic consequences of strong
earthquakes in large urban areas. Six researchers from the US were invited to
attend this workshop and present lectures on the workshop topic. The workshop
offers the possibility that new, innovative ideas would be developed that could,
if validated by research, result in improvements in the safety of existing
structures during seismic events.

The integrity of existing urban structures, especially low and mid-rise
reinforced concrete buildings, is a major concern in many older cities in the
world. The development of relatively inexpensive expedient methods of seismic
retrofit has the potential to significantly reduce loss of life and economic
consequences of major earthquakes.