* 0801214
* Problems in number theory and representation theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Paul Gunnells, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,001.00

Gunnells proposes to work on problems in number theory and representation theory
in three broad areas. First, he will focus on topics related to cohomology of
arithmetic groups and allied areas, such as geometry of locally symmetric spaces
and connections with arithmetic geometry. Second, he will study multiple
Dirichlet series attached to Weyl groups and affine Weyl groups and their
connections to combinatorics, representation theory, and automorphic forms.
Third, he will investigate the geometry of Kazhdan-Lusztig cells in Coxeter
groups and their connections with combinatorics and representation theory. As a
major writing project, he will continue to work with Hirzebruch and Zagier on
the updating of their book "The Atiyah-Singer theorem and elementary number
theory."

This proposal deals with number theory and representation theory. Number theory
is the study of the properties of the whole numbers, and is the oldest branch of
mathematics. Representation theory is the systematic study of symmetry, through
the development of simple mathematical objects that encode the fundamental
irreducible pieces of symmetry. A principal aim of the proposal is to explore
relationships between these two subjects in the spirit of the "Langlands
philosophy," which predicts deep connections between number theory and
representation theory. Today the questions and phenomena addressed by these
subjects serve as driving forces in much of contemporary mathematics research.
Moreover, the subjects have contributed many applications in such diverse areas
as codes and data transmission, chemistry, physics, and theoretical computer
science.

