* 0801577
* IGERT:  Natural-Human Systems in the Urbanizing Tropics
* EHR,DGE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2015
* Nicholas Brokaw, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Tankersley
* 06/30/2015
* USD 2,960,066.00

The goal of this Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT)
program is to train Ph.D. students to apply an interdisciplinary and
collaborative approach to environmental problems in urbanizing, tropical
landscapes. Puerto Rico has a dynamic environmental history, suffering nearly
complete deforestation, then enjoying forest recovery, and then experiencing
urban sprawl as the economy modernized. This last shift produced environmental
problems, overlaid by changes in climate and vulnerability to catastrophic
storms. Set against these environmental problems are researchers from different
disciplines at the University of Puerto Rico-Río Piedras (UPR-RP), all of whom
study these problems, and who will improve communication among themselves and
with researchers at other UPR campuses to achieve effective research and
solutions. The IGERT program will bring these faculty and students together in
an interdisciplinary and collaborative framework. Reflecting the strong
interaction between natural and human systems, both research theme and training
in the IGERT program will be based on an iterative model of human-environment
interactions, addressing the question of how human activity alters ecosystems,
and, in turn, how do altered ecosystem services change human activity in an
urbanizing tropical environment. Dissertations will focus on these interactions
and thus will have both natural and social science components. Students will be
co-advised by faculty in natural and social sciences and other disciplines. A
new, integrative core for the program is also aimed at the interactions between
human and natural systems, and will include the development of six new courses.
IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep
knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.