* 0801165
* Eighth Algorithmic Number Theory Symposium ANTS-VIII
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Jonathan Sorenson, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Sagan
* 04/30/2009
* USD 10,600.00

The first Algorithmic Number Theory Symposium took place in May 1994 at Cornell
University. In the preface to its proceedings, the organizers expressed the hope
that the meeting would be "the first in a long series of international
conferences on the algorithmic, computational, and complexity theoretic aspects
of number theory." Since then, ANTS has been held bi-annually at varying
locations all around the globe. The present meeting, ANTS-VIII, is scheduled to
be held May 17-22, 2008 at the Banff Centre in Banff Alberta, Canada.

The ANTS meetings are devoted to algorithmic and computational aspects of number
theory, including elementary, algebraic, and analytic number theory, geometry of
numbers, algebraic geometry, finite fields, and cryptography. There has been a
surge of activity in number theory over the last 10-15 years, with major results
in the areas of algebraic, arithmetic and analytic number theory. Many of these
have additional significance due to their applications in areas such as coding
theory and cryptography. The algorithmic side of number theory in particular has
seen a great deal of progress in the last decade, including advances in such
deep problems as integer factorization, the discrete logarithm problem in
various settings, point counting on algebraic curves, and the computation of
invariants of global fields.

These and other related questions represent the subject of intense ongoing
research, much of which is published in the ANTS proceedings. The aim of ANTS is
to bring together leading experts in the field as well as young researchers and
graduate students for the purpose of exchanging ideas and presenting their work.
Research presented at ANTS meetings and appearing in ANTS proceedings has
spawned important advances in algorithmic number theory. ANTS conferences,
including ANTS-VIII in 2008, will continue to have a major positive impact and
lead to significant progress in the field. The conference is geared toward
researchers with some expertise in algorithmic number theory. Participants
include senior and junior academics, members of government and corporate
research facilities, and graduate students. The conference program will consist
of five invited plenary talks and an expected 30-35 presentations by those
researchers whose papers have been accepted for publication in the proceedings.

This proposal seeks funds to support the travel and local expenses of about 7
conference participants who are US citizens or permanent residents. It is
expected that participants who apply for NSF funding will give a presentation (a
talk or poster) at the conference. Participants supported by this grant have not
yet been chosen, but will be selected by the organizing committee based on
applications which will be solicited as part of the registration process.
Selection criteria will favor postdocs, graduate students, and faculty
(especially junior faculty) without grant support, in essentially that order.

