* 0801491
* Advanced Nanoscaled Nonvolatile Semiconductor Memory (NVSM) Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Marvin White, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 10/31/2010
* USD 309,340.00



Advanced Nanoscaled Nonvolatile Semiconductor Memory (NVSM) Devices

The objective of this research is to conduct fundamental research on charge
transport and storage in ultra-thin, oxide-nitride-oxide (ONO) hetero-insulator
nanostructures used in high density, low-power, low voltage, nonvolatile
semiconductor memories (NVSMs). The approach is to fabricate, electrically
characterize, and model new NVSM device structures: (1) an NROMTM device in an
NOR-type architecture programmed (written) with hot electron injection and 2 bit
spatial storage, and (2) a MANOS device in a NAND-type architecture programmed
and erased with quantum mechanical tunneling and multiple level charge storage.
This structure uses a high-K aluminum oxide (A) dielectric to form an ANO
hetero-insulator nanostructure. These NVSMs will find wide applications in ultra
high density, low power semiconductor memories with replacement of hard-drive
storage in computers, and portable electronics ? cell phones and PDAs. This
research is essential for U.S. leadership and economic benefits in the global
semiconductor industry.

The intellectual merit of our program rests in a vision where future
advancements in silicon-based, nonvolatile semiconductor memory storage will
play a central role in nanoscaled science and engineering. Our program
integrates research and education to explore high-density NVSMs with unique
hetero-insulator nanostructures. The research will generate new knowledge in the
study of charge transport (write/erase) and storage (retention) in advanced
nanoscaled NVSM devices.

The broader aspects in our program will advance diversity in the nanoelectronics
work-force through intellectual technology transfer, integration of research and
education and promotion of partnerships with the industrial sector of the
economy. Our educational and outreach programs will increase diversity through
scholarships at the university and interim summer positions with industry in
nanoelectronics, especially the area of semiconductor devices. This research
program provides an excellent vehicle for student research and education,
minority student outreach and partnerships with industry.

