* 0801869
* Picosecond Pulse Generation by Transverse Mode-Locking of Monolithic Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* David Snoke, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* john zavada
* 05/31/2012
* USD 300,001.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;ECCS-0801869&lt;br/&gt;A. Heberle, University of
Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;Objective: Mode-locking of lasers is an important technique
for generation of frequency combs and trains of picosecond or femtosecond
optical pulses. So far, only longitudinal modes have been locked reliably,
leading to pulses traveling around the laser cavity in direction of to the light
beam.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The goal of this experimental
research program is the investigation of a new process, lateral two-dimensional
mode-locking in monolithic vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSEL?s),
and the fabrication/exploration of novel devices for picoseconds or even
femtosecond pulse and frequency comb generation. The project aims to demonstrate
that lateral mode-locking of round VCSEL?s produces solitons that move in
circles around the emission aperture. This work will not only provide
understanding of ultrafast dynamics and soliton propagation in VCSEL?s, but it
will add ultrafast mode-locking and frequency comb generation to this
increasingly important class of lasers. It is expected, for example, that
laterally mode-locked VCSEL?s will provide two orders of magnitude better
control of the pulse repetition rate than conventional, longitudinally mode-
locked monolithic semiconductor lasers, in which the repetition rate can be
tuned by only about 0.5%. Mode-locked VCSEL?s could have significant
applications for optical communication, sensing, and displays in which the blue
and green colors are generated by frequency
doubling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project gives graduate and
undergraduate students hands-on experience in several important fields:
femtosecond technology, photonics, nanoscience, and semiconductor technology. It
also supports the interdisciplinary photonics course program and the early lab
experience program that involves underrepresented minorities at the University
of Pittsburgh &lt;br/&gt;