* 0801050
* Homotopy, Complexity and O-Minimality
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Andrei Gabrielov, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2012
* USD 219,000.00

Andrei Gabrielov proposes to investigate homotopy types of definable sets in
o-minimal expansions of real closed fields, and the algorithmic complexity of
operations with such sets and their families. The fundamental question is to
estimate the topological complexity of a definable set in terms of the
structural complexity of its defining formula. Recent developments in
algorithmic real algebraic geometry and topological o-minimality suggest that an
answer to that question can be obtained for a wide class of sets definable in
o-minimal structures with the Bezout-type finiteness property. Notably, a
combinatorial-geometric construction suggested by A. Gabrielov and N. Vorobjov
allows one to approximate arbitrary definable sets by homotopy equivalent
definably compact sets, simplifying considerably the study of their topology.
Furthermore, homotopy colimit construction allows one to approximate a set
defined by a formula with existential quantifiers by a homotopy equivalent
simplicial object defined by a quantifier-free formula, and to employ the
descent spectral sequence to compute topological invariants of the original set.
The proposed research will advance our understanding of the topological
properties of the sets definable in o-minimal structures, and of the algorithmic
complexity of operations with such sets and their families. It will provide new
tools for the o-minimal algebraic topology.

The goal of the proposed research is to develop new upper bounds on the
topological complexity of semialgebraic sets (defined by formulas with equations
and inequalities between polynomials in several real variables)and their
generalizations known as definable sets in o-minimal structures. Given an
appropriate measure of complexity, such as Bezout theorem bounding the number of
zeros of a polynomial, the topological complexity of a definable set depends on
the structural complexity of its defining formula. Recently A. Gabrielov and N.
Vorobjov suggested a construction replacing a general definable set with a
homotopy equivalent compact set, applying a simple combinatorial procedure to
the defining formula of the original set. Thus the problem of the topological
complexity of the general definable sets can be reduced to the more tractable
problem for the compact sets. The proposed research will establish new
connections between o-minimal theory, topology, combinatorics, and real
algebraic geometry. It will provide new combinatorial and topological tools for
development of faster computational algorithms in real algebraic and analytic
geometry and its applications in control theory, visualization, and computer-
aided design.