* 0801593
* Gene Transfer Agents in the Oceans-What are they doing?
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Lauren McDaniel, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2012
* USD 500,000.00

Marine microorganisms are abundant and diverse. What drives this diversity?
Mutation and natural selection appear to account for only a portion of it. The
ability to sequence genomes is demonstrating that lateral gene transfer (LGT),
the indiscriminant movement of genes between unrelated microbes, plays a
significant role in generating diversity, and it is now recognized as a major
driving force in microbial evolution. In this project, Paul and McDaniel of the
University of South Florida argue that the three known mechanisms of prokaryotic
gene transfer (transduction, transformation, and conjugation) appear to be
unable and unlikely to occur with sufficient frequency in the marine environment
to be significant drivers of microbial diversity. In order to examine other
factors contributing to microbial diversity, these investigators will be
evaluating the significance of a novel form of LGT which involves little-
understood particles called Gene Transfer Agents (GTAs). GTAs are phage-like
particles encoded in the genomes of particular groups of bacteria (alpha-
proteobacteria) that package random fragments of host genomic DNA. These
particles do not lyse their host, but rather inject their prior host's DNA into
a new host, and the transferred DNA then integrates into the new host's genome.
Genomic sequencing has recently revealed the prevalence of GTAs in alpha-
proteobacterial genomes, and a survey of 102 marine bacterial genomes indicated
twenty (20%) contained putative GTAs. The abundance of GTAs in the Roseobacter
lineage, an alpha-proteobacteria group that can comprise up to 25% of the
bacteria in coastal environments, may make GTAs the most important mechanism of
LGT in the marine environment. These researchers want to know: if GTAs are
abundant in bacterial genomes, what are they doing? These investigators will be
examining the gene transfer capability of marine GTAs by using known hosts and
known genetic tracers, like plasmids. They will also determine the occurrence of
GTA-containing bacteria in marine coastal populations by using marker genes
diagnostic for specific GTAs. Finally, the investigators will evaluate the
potential for GTAs to transfer genes within indigenous populations of marine
bacteria. In these experiments, these investigators will track the movement of
DNA between lab strains and indigenous bacteria and then between populations of
indigenous bacteria to estimate the natural rate of gene transfer by GTAs in the
ocean. The longterm goal of this research by Paul and McDaniel is to elucidate
the role of a little understood form of LGT in the marine environment, setting
the stage for follow on studies on the flux of genes via GTAs and on what
controls microbial diversity in the oceans. The PIs will carry out a number of
outreach activities as a part of this project. They will be developing high
school lab modules on GTA indicators and will be using them in classes from
ethnically and racially diverse schools in Pinellas County, FL. They will
continue their participation in the Oceanography Camp for Girls, a three week
day camp each summer, hosted by the USF College of Marine Science, for students
entering the 9th grade. THe PIs plan to add a GTAs detector component to these
lab activities.