* 0801680
* IGERT:  Interdisciplinary Graduate Education in  Computational Optical Sensing and Imaging
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2015
* Margaret Murnane, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Tankersley
* 07/31/2015
* USD 3,200,000.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) program
award supports an interdisciplinary graduate education program in Computational
Optical Sensing and Imaging (COSI) at the University of Colorado at Boulder. The
goal is to educate the future workforce in this fast-developing area and in its
technological and societal implications. The program brings together graduate
students with diverse backgrounds in mathematics, biology, physics, and
electrical and computer engineering. The common scientific theme is integrated
COSI systems. The design of COSI systems simultaneously incorporates optics,
optoelectronics, signal processing, and advanced mathematical algorithms. The
system performance is controlled by joint optimization of these elements, as
opposed to an independent optimization of each separately. COSI's greatest
potential is in realizing capabilities and performance that are otherwise
impossible to obtain using classical methods. This fast-growing research area
covers various imaging modalities, including optical tomography, synthetic
aperture, metamaterials architectures, as well as wavefront coded imaging. High
impact applications encompass ultra-violet lithography, nano-manufacturing
inspection, super-resolution microscopy for biological sciences, environmental
sensing, and imaging systems for consumer electronics. The COSI program promotes
a diverse graduate student enrollment and retention with a flexible and
interdisciplinary approach to science and engineering education that includes
economical, social, and ethical components. The extensive ties with industry and
national labs advance the transfer of university technologies to industrial
applications. Graduates with a background in integrated optical sensing are
expected to occupy key positions in industry, government, education, and
research labs, thus helping develop new technologies for the economic well being
of society. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of
educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary
background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;