* 0801544
* IGERT:  Spatial Ecology and Evolution: Quantitative Training in Biology, Statistics, and Mathematics
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2015
* Craig Osenberg, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Tankersley
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,876,455.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
supports the interdisciplinary training of doctoral students in ecology and
evolution, mathematics and statistics in order to address research questions
that have an important spatial dimension. Most environmental issues are
inherently spatial: for example, emerging pathogens and invasive species appear
in one place and disperse to others; toxicants released from many point sources
create a mosaic of exposure regimes; populations respond to environmental change
by evolving and migrating. Understanding ecological systems in a spatial context
provides deeper understanding and helps to predict and manage environmental
change of all kinds, but it requires both new biological ideas and new
quantitative tools. Thus in this award trainees will learn to cross the
boundaries between biology, statistics, and mathematics, and to apply basic
knowledge to environmental challenges. After learning common disciplinary
concepts, trainees will participate in a novel year-long interdisciplinary
workshop to tackle applied spatial problems in ecology and evolution defined by
clients from government agencies and non-governmental organizations. The
workshops will require students to learn new tools, apply theory to real-world
challenges, and disseminate tools and knowledge (to other scientists, to
stakeholders, and to non-scientists). A weekly ?spatial dynamics? colloquium
will provide cohesion and breadth, and an annual symposium will provide further
avenues for learning and communication. Students will be prepared to and given
the opportunity to teach interdisciplinary topics in undergraduate and graduate
courses throughout the university. The program will also broaden the training of
other graduate students in this area, and break down institutional barriers that
isolate scientists in their home disciplines. IGERT is an NSF-wide program
intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers
with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline,
and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career
demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in
graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education
and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;