* 0801173
* Operator Algebras and K-theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Marius Dadarlat, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2012
* USD 295,748.00

Continuous fields of C*-algebras were discovered as natural structures that
underline C*-algebras with Hausdorff primitive spectrum. &lt;br/&gt;But more
importantly, they have become effective tools of noncommutative geometry in a
large array of contexts: E-theory, strict deformation quantization, the Novikov
and the Baum-Connes conjectures, representation theory and index theory. We will
study approximation techniques of continuous fields by continuous fields with
controlled complexity. In many instances, the approximating fields can be
analyzed by homological methods (sheaf theory, parametrized KK-theory), leading
to far-reaching generalizations of the classical work of Dixmier and Douady on
fields with fibres the compact operators. We will pursue this direction of
research in collaboration with Jim McClure. In a different direction we propose
an approach for proving that large classes of C*-algebras absorb tensorially the
Jiang-Su algebra. The goal of this research in collaboration with Andrew Toms
and Chris Phillips is to give classification results for C*-algebras associated
with smooth minimal dynamical systems, based on results of Phillips and Q. Lin
and very recent results of Winter and Huaxin Lin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Quantization arises in the process of relating classic mechanics to quantum
mechanics. In this process, the commutative algebra of classical observables is
deformed into a noncommutative algebra of quantum observables.&lt;br/&gt;The
theory of continuous fields provides one possible mathematical context for the
study of these deformations. Much of the versatility of continuous fields comes
from the fact that while they are bundles of operator algebras in the sense of
general topology, they are not necessarily locally trivial and hence they allow
for just the right amount of continuity necessary for deformations that capture
and propagate interesting topological invariants. The proposed project aims to
contribute to the extensive effort of a community of researchers to extend
classical ideas of mathematics to noncommutative contexts.&lt;br/&gt;