* 0801549
* Control over Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Dimitri Bertsekas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Eccs-0801549 Mitter

Objective:

The proposed research is to develop a universal framework for the analysis and
design of Network Embedded Feedback Systems (NEFS). Any such theoretical
development requires a theory of distributed control where sensors and actuators
are linked to distributed controllers through communication links, such as a
wireless network. Two key ingredients of such a theory are a unified view of
communication control and a systematic view of distributed algorithms for
problems of optimization and control under uncertainty. Over the last few
decades, there are extraordinary advances in microelectronics, in software (as
reflected by modern object-oriented systems, design patterns and middleware) and
in communication networks (including protocols, wired and wire-less networking).
Today, everything is getting sensed: vehicles, roads, buildings, airspaces, and
the environment. Sensors are getting smaller, cheaper, more pervasive and
powerful. The benefits of pervasive networked sensing are compelling.
Applications include monitoring wildlife habitats for conservation programs,
waterways to understand long-term environmental effects, urban areas for
intruder detection, and various components of automobiles for integrated safety
and warning systems.

Intellectual Merit:

The rapid convergence of sensing, computing and communication technologies on
cost effective, low power, miniature devices will enable a revolution in NEFS.
These are distributed control/estimation systems with large numbers of sensors,
actuators, and computing nodes that communicate over wire-line or ad hoc
wireless networks. Enabling NEFS across this extremely diverse application set
requires a unified analysis and design methodology. The feedback nature of NEFS
demands extra-ordinary reliability. For this, they need to adaptively respond to
unpredictable events such as node failures, communication link failures, and
network conditions such as latencies and packet losses. These are the core
problems that are addressed in the proposal.

Broader Impacts:

The scientific impact of the proposed research will stem from efforts at
developing fundamental system-theoretic analysis and modeling methods for NEFS.
This fundamental theoretical development is vital to enable subsequent design
and analysis research for NEFS. The technological impact of the proposed
research is that it will provide insight into the systematic, cost-effective
design of NEFS in a variety of applications. This research is linked to a
layered architecture approach which permits design tradeoffs such as
computational resource allocation, communication protocol choice, and
power/reliability compromises to be readily navigated. The aim is to link this
research to a doctoral program by developing a graduate course on Distributed
Control over Networks.

