* 0801333
* PFI:  2008 NSF Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) Grantees Workshop
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2007,02/28/2009
* Frank Calzonetti, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/2009
* USD 206,798.00

The University of Toledo proposes to organize and manage the 2008 NSF
Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) Grantees Workshop at the Westin Hotel,
Arlington, VA, March 30-April 1, 2008. This workshop is the first of its kind
for PFI. Its purpose is to provide a forum for a comprehensive gathering of NSF-
sponsored researchers on both active and graduated awards supported by the
Partnership for Innovation (PFI) Program. In addition, for each award, the forum
should include a representative from among the non-academic partners and, for
currently ongoing PFI awards only, a representative from among the students
involved in the project. The objectives of the workshop are to share ideas,
experiences, lessons learned, best practices, and results that have come out of
the NSF-sponsored PFI awards; to discuss strategies and achievements with
respect to sustainability of innovation once the PFI grant performance period
has ended; and to provide input for the design and anatomy of future
partnerships projects. It is expected that this interchange will facilitate the
exploration of next steps to be taken on ongoing projects and that it will
promote future collaborations, thus addressing several goals: catalyzing or
enhancing the enabling infrastructure necessary to foster and sustain innovation
in the long-term; providing guidance to regions and organizations in promoting
innovation economies; and contributing to the America Creating Opportunities to
Meaningfully Promote Excellence in Technology, Education and Science (America
COMPETES) Act. The intellectual merit of this project lies in the generation of
new ideas about the formation and ongoing development of innovation partnerships
from the collective wisdom of the leadership of a diverse set of funded
partnership projects in the context of an opportunity to mingle in a variety of
ways. The workshop will provide the NSF with additional information on ways that
the discovery process can be translated to learning and innovation to create
wealth and improve the human condition. The generation of ideas can result from
discussions during poster sessions, breakout sessions, and plenary sessions and
indeed throughout the opportunity to be present in the context of the rich
resource of the PFI community. The synergy among grantees will also be
facilitated by providing very brief but key project highlights via the
conference website.

The broader impact of this project includes the identification of factors that
encourage long-term value creation and innovation through partnerships. Because
a portion of the PFI awards have as their primary focus workforce education and
training, there will be ample sharing of the impact of PFI partnerships as they
relate to curriculum development; STEM education and education contributing to
knowledge of the entrepreneurial enterprise; and the career paths of students.
The project will also provide information on how innovation can be promoted
across different geographic locales given regional differences in R&D spending,
university research, culture and other factors.