* 0801893
* National Geospatial Technology Center (NGT Center)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Vincent DiNoto, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 5,087,057.00

The National Geospatial Technology Center (NGT Center) is a partnership of seven
community colleges, a community and technical college system, and a four-year
university in collaboration with industry and state and local governments
representing all regions of the country. In order to better prepare America's
21st century workforce, the vision of the NGT Center is to provide leadership to
community and technical colleges in all aspects of emerging geospatial
technology. To help increase the number, diversity, and quality of geospatial
technology professionals, the mission of the NGT Center is to improve geospatial
technology education at the community and technical college level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The NGT Center has the potential to
transform the preparation and continuing education of geospatial technicians to
meet national workforce demand through its goals to: &lt;br/&gt;(1) create a
national clearinghouse of exemplary geospatial curriculum materials, resources,
and national geodatabase web services; &lt;br/&gt;(2) provide a unified voice
for two-year colleges and increase their capacity to educate geospatial
technicians through new partnerships and collaborations; &lt;br/&gt;(3) increase
the quantity, quality and diversity of geospatial technicians to meet U.S.
workforce needs; &lt;br/&gt;(4) increase the number of community and technical
college geospatial faculty and secondary school teachers participating in
geospatial professional development; and &lt;br/&gt;(5) create a self-sustaining
center for geospatial technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
institutional partners of NGT serve a diverse student population and include two
Hispanic Serving Colleges and two in the Southeast with significant African
American enrollment. These partners continue to expand their networks for
Hispanic and African American students throughout their service regions and
beyond. Individuals with disabilities, especially disabled veterans, provide an
untapped resource for geospatial technology workers. The NGT Center is working
with various disability agencies to better meet the needs of this population,
including the integration of assistive technology devices. The NGT Center
partners are actively presenting at a variety of events to increase awareness of
resources available to educators, maintain ties to industry workforce
instruction needs, and become a unifying voice for two-year programs. The team
is dedicated to reaching not only the traditional outlets, but also to new and
nontraditional groups such as the League for Innovation, the Association for
Career and Technology Education, the National Association of Counties, the
Geological Society of America, the American Geological Union, the National
Center for American Indian Enterprise Development, the National Institute for
Women in Trades, Technology and Science, and the United States Department of
Veterans Affairs.