* 0801827
* Collective motion of ultracold atoms strongly coupled to an optical resonator
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Dan Stamper-Kurn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Wendell Talbot Hill
* 06/30/2011
* USD 432,203.00

The theory of quantum mechanics famously places restrictions on the amount of
information we can ever gather about some physical system. One route for
exploring the limits of quantum metrology is the measurement of motion of
macroscopic mechanical oscillators, for example nanofabricated cantilevers or
membranes of various types. While these systems have yet to reach quantum limits
of sensitivity and state-preparation, they hold promise for addressing the
intriguing question of whether quantum mechanics retains its validity for
describing ever-larger objects. This project represents a novel approach to
micro-mechanics and quantum measurement. In it the collective motion of a
macroscopic ensemble of ultracold atoms takes the place of the nanofabricated
mechanical resonator. The advantages of using this system are that the resonator
can be cooled directly to its quantum-mechanical ground state and that the
mechanisms for actuating and measuring the resonator are founded solidly on
quantum optics. In this work, the PI and his students will investigate quantum
limited measurements, classical and quantum aspects of bistable motion, and,
ultimately, the effects of strong coupling between the quantum fluctuations of a
mechanical object and a single-mode light field.

This work will inform the development of quantum technologies of various types,
including superconducting quantum-interference (SQUID) amplifiers and
nanomechanical resonators, by giving clear guidelines for approaching quantum
limited performance. Achieving quantum limits for detecting the motion of cold
atoms is also directly applicable to cold-atom-based interferometric sensors
that are being presently developed and deployed. Finally, in training graduate
students at the intersection of quantum optics, atomic physics, and condensed-
matter physics, the project will help to develop the quantum scientists and
engineers who will realize the benefits of nascent quantum technologies.