* 0801096
* Combinatorics and Number Theory IV
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Wen-Ching Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2012
* USD 170,000.00

This proposal contains three projects, in number theory and
its&lt;br/&gt;applications to combinatorics. The first project concerns
the&lt;br/&gt;arithmetic of modular forms for noncongruence subgroups.
For&lt;br/&gt;noncongruence subgroups whose associated modular curves have a
model&lt;br/&gt;over the rationals, Atkin and Swinnerton-Dyer suggested
very&lt;br/&gt;interesting congruence relations on the Fourier coefficients of
cusp&lt;br/&gt;forms which are meant to replace the Hecke operators. On the
other&lt;br/&gt;hand, Scholl has attached Galois representations to the space
of&lt;br/&gt;noncongruence cusp forms. The ASD congruences together with
the&lt;br/&gt;modularity of Scholl representations yield extremely
interesting&lt;br/&gt;congruence relations between the Fourier coefficients of
congruence&lt;br/&gt;and noncongruence forms. Some examples were constructed by
the PI&lt;br/&gt;and her coauthors. Continuing her joint work with coauthors,
the PI&lt;br/&gt;plans to apply the modularity lifting theorems to investigate
when&lt;br/&gt;Scholl representations arise from Hilbert modular forms, and to
use&lt;br/&gt;the modularity result and ASD congruence relations to establish
the&lt;br/&gt;conjecture which says that the Fourier coefficients of
genuinely&lt;br/&gt;algebraic noncongruence forms have unbounded denominators.
The&lt;br/&gt;second project is to construct zeta functions of complexes
arising&lt;br/&gt;from finite quotients of the Bruhat-Tits buildings. Such
zeta&lt;br/&gt;function should be a rational function which encodes topological
and&lt;br/&gt;spectral information of the complex, and which satisfies the
Riemann&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis if and only if the complex is Ramanujan. When
dimension&lt;br/&gt;is one, this is the Ihara zeta function attached to a graph.
In a&lt;br/&gt;very recent work, the PI and a PhD student did the
2-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;case. The PI proposes to explore the general case. The
third project&lt;br/&gt;concerns low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The LDPC
codes are&lt;br/&gt;equipped with very efficient decoding algorithms, which make
them&lt;br/&gt;highly desirable in real world applications. The source of
decoding&lt;br/&gt;errors is the pseudo-codewords. One way to understand
these&lt;br/&gt;pseudo-codewords is to construct a suitable infinite series,
called&lt;br/&gt;a zeta function, with each term corresponding to a pseudo-
codeword.&lt;br/&gt;Such zeta function should be a rational function with
good&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial property. This was done indirectly in a joint paper
of&lt;br/&gt;the PI. The PI proposes to pursue a more direct
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been the PI's long
term research goal to do fundamental&lt;br/&gt;research in number theory and to
seek applications of number theory&lt;br/&gt;to combinatorics and coding theory,
especially to solve real world&lt;br/&gt;problems. The study of interplay
between these areas has turned out&lt;br/&gt;to be quite fruitful. This proposal
is a continuation of&lt;br/&gt; the PI's effort to pursue the same general
theme. Part of the research&lt;br/&gt; will be carried out by the PI's Ph
D&lt;br/&gt;students. The results from this proposal will be
disseminated&lt;br/&gt;broadly through the talks given by the PI in seminars,
colloquia,&lt;br/&gt;conferences, short courses, and workshops. They will also
be&lt;br/&gt;incorporated in the graduate courses taught by the PI.
Weekly&lt;br/&gt;informal seminars will be conducted to integrate research
with&lt;br/&gt;education and teaching. A conference is planned in 2010
to&lt;br/&gt;disseminate results from this project.