* 0801406
* Collaborative Research:  Coherent Spin Control in Microfabricated Semiconductor Geometries
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,10/31/2013
* Nitin Samarth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 10/31/2013
* USD 595,000.00

Technical &lt;br/&gt;The past decade has witnessed rapid advances in the
development of "semiconductor spintronics," an area of research that broadly
aims to exploit electron spin for qualitatively new semiconductor device
functionality of both semi-classical and quantum character. This collaborative
project is aimed at harnessing recent fundamental discoveries in semiconductor
spintronics (such as the spin Hall effect and the enhancement of spin coherence
in micro-resonators) for the systematic control of coherent spin phenomena in
micro-patterned semiconductor devices. We will develop static and dynamical
electrical measurements of the spin Hall effect as well seek pathways for
enhancing the magnitude of this phenomenon. We also intend to pursue
investigations that explore the entanglement and coherent manipulation of spins
in coupled optical microcavities, with the ultimate goal of coherently
controlling a single spin. Finally, we will conduct experiments that exploit the
exchange interaction across interfaces for coherent spin control in both
paramagnetic and ferromagnetic semiconductor heterostructures. Methods of
investigation include spatially-resolved femtosecond optical spectroscopies,
variable-temperature magnetotransport, direct magnetization, scanning probe
microscopies, molecular beam epitaxial growth, and submicron fabrication
techniques. The project is an integrated effort between the two principal
investigators, emphasizing fundamental discovery in condensed matter physics,
but with a clear eye on phenomena that could be of potential importance for
future information technologies. The project combines sophisticated measurement
techniques with advanced materials engineering, thus providing cutting edge
training in both fundamental physics and materials science for undergraduate and
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical &lt;br/&gt;Contemporary
information technology relies on the charge of electrons for computation (logic)
and the magnetic properties called spin of electrons for permanent storage. The
past decade has witnessed rapid advances in the development of "semiconductor
spintronics," an area of research that broadly aims to integrate these
traditionally separate functionalities. This proposal is aimed at the
fundamental frontiers of semiconductor spintronics, where we seek to control the
behavior of electron spin in microscopically patterned semiconductor chips. By
exploiting the consequences of special relativity in solid state crystals, we
will develop electrical means of probing and harnessing the "spin Hall effect,"
a contemporary spin analog of the classical Hall effect discovered over a
century ago. Enhancing our fundamental understanding of the spin Hall effect may
allow us to envision new classes of spintronic devices that exploit the non-
intuitive laws of quantum physics for new types of logic without the need for
magnetic fields or magnetic materials. We also intend to develop experiments
that explore the quantum control of spins in finely tuned "micro-resonators,"
micron sized "boxes" that trap light and thus enhance its interaction with the
spin of electrons. Our ultimate goal is the quantum mechanical control of a
single electron spin in such boxes, enabling both computation and optical
communication in a single device. Finally, we will develop experiments that
exploit the interaction between magnetic ions and itinerant electrons across
exquisitely designed interfaces. The project is an integrated effort between the
two principal investigators, emphasizing fundamental discovery but with a clear
eye on phenomena that could be of potential importance for future information
technologies. The project combines sophisticated measurement techniques with
advanced materials engineering, thus providing cutting edge training in both
fundamental physics and materials science for undergraduate and graduate
students.