* 0801007
* Prompt optical observations of gamma-ray bursts and other energetic transients with ROTSE-III
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2013
* Carl Akerlof, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 05/31/2013
* USD 364,993.00

This award will provide funds for the Robotic Optical Transient Search
Experiment (ROTSE) to observe gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) and other energetic
transients, concentrating on the prompt observations of GRBs detected by the
Swift BAT and GLAST LAT detectors and the detection of supernovae (SNe) at early
stages of their rising lightcurves. The next few years will be a period of
unique opportunity with these two gamma-ray missions operating in space. Data
from GLAST is likely to illuminate a significant puzzle of GRBs: the emission of
photons of very high energies. The wide field of view of the ROTSE instruments
will enable localization of a large fraction of the detected events, a task
exceedingly difficult for more conventional ground-based instruments. The
response time of the ROTSE telescopes is short enough to begin observations
while many bursts are still emitting gamma-rays or X-rays.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past few years, ROTSE has collected data that, in
conjunction with contemporaneous X-ray data, indicate that previous assumptions
about the dynamics of GRB afterglows are inadequate to explain the combined
measurements. ROTSE data analyses have identified 30 SNe, most spectacularly
SN2005ap, SN2006gy and SN2007if. These remarkable events exhibit a peak
brightness 10 times greater than type-IA SNe, thus pointing to a new class of
explosions. Although the aperture of the telescopes is modest, their wide field
of view enables the discovery of SNe shortly after the initial explosion and
thus enables more a complete exploration of the dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ROTSE has been a rich source of data for the study of
astrophysical transient phenomena. Recently, an educational outreach program in
Thailand has signed an agreement to provide ?sky patrol? data to a consortium of
high schools throughout that country. The ROTSE project spans 4 continents
bringing research in optical astronomy to Namibia for the first time and
considerably augmenting the facilities in Turkey. &lt;br/&gt;