* 0801343
* Electron Correlations and the Properties of Metals and Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* David Langreth, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 390,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education in
developing and improving methods for predicting the electronic and geometrical
structure of both bulk materials and molecular complexes. Research extends
Density functional theory (DFT) which has been a successful method for much of
such matter. The primary extension improves the treatment of electron
correlations at a distance which lead to the van der Waals interaction. This
enhancement expands the use of DFT beyond dense condensed matter and isolated
molecules, which can already be treated accurately, and provides capabilities
for improved treatment of sparse matter, including biological matter, as well as
van der Waals molecular complexes. The research expands on previous enhancements
embodied in the non-empirical van der Waals density functional developed by this
principal investigator and others. The work being undertaken widens the
applicability of the van der Waals density functional to a broad range of system
types, and increases its accuracy. Key applications will be addressed in the
course of the research that cannot be handled by other methods and which
demonstrate the efficacy of the enhancements. The result of this development
will include a robust computer codes to be distributed, thus putting the method
within easy access of the greater community. The goal of the work is to increase
our limited understanding on how the van der Waals interaction merges with the
short-range phenomena associated with density overlap, especially in systems too
large to be feasibly treated with wave-function methods. Accordingly this allows
treatment of of much larger systems than possible at present and increases our
understanding of how certain large systems function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
effort undertaken has broader impacts with both scientific and educational
consequences. Though the computational effectiveness of Density Functional
Theory has already had a broad impact on materials science and engineering, the
work proposed here will extend the usefulness of DFT to a wide range of
previously impossible systems which are prevalent and important in many
different fields. Early examples include the first calculation from first
principles that predicts the twist of DNA. There will be capabilities added that
will help with complex materials of the sort needed to study the the hydrogen
storage problem for the possible future hydrogen fueled vehicles. Included in
the plans are a study of molecular configurations that are relevant to
understanding drug action and drug design. This work is shared widely in the
scientific literature and conferences and the computer codes developed are
shared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
research and education in developing and improving methods for predicting the
electronic and geometrical structure of both bulk matter and individual
molecules. Research extends Density functional theory which has been a
successful method for many types of materials. The primary extension improves
the treatment of forces between molecules that are separated by modest to large
distances. This enhancement provides capabilities for improved treatment of
sparse matter, including biological matter, as well as weak molecular complexes.
The work being undertaken widens the applicability of the theoretical and
computational methods and increases accuracy. Key applications will be addressed
in the course of the research that cannot be handled by other methods and which
demonstrate the efficacy of the enhancements. The result of this development
will include a robust computer codes to be distributed, thus putting the method
within easy access of the greater community. This allows treatment of of much
larger systems than possible at present and increases our understanding of how
certain large systems function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort undertaken has
broader impacts with both scientific and educational consequences. Though the
computational effectiveness of Density Functional Theory has already had a broad
impact on materials science and engineering, the work proposed here will extend
the usefulness of the theory to a wide range of previously impossible systems
which are prevalent and important in many different fields. Early examples
include the first calculation that predicts the twist of DNA. There will be
capabilities added that will help with complex materials of the sort needed to
study the the hydrogen storage problem for the possible future hydrogen fueled
vehicles. Included in the plans are a study of molecular configurations that are
relevant to understanding drug action and drug design. This work is shared
widely in the scientific literature and conferences and the computer programs
are made freely available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;