* 0801614
* Cycloidal Propeller Wave Energy Converter
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Stefan Siegel, United States Air Force Academy
* Interagency Agreement
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2011
* USD 285,619.00

The objective of this research is the development of a novel wave power device
that addresses many shortcomings of currently considered wave energy converters.
State of the art converters need mooring to the ocean floor, which increases
cost of the device, as well as susceptibility to damage from storms. Also,
energy conversion efficiency and scalability are problematic.

Intellectual Merit

The proposed approach is based on Cycloidal Propellers. Their main advantage is
the ability to extract energy from any flow perpendicular to the propeller
shaft; employing lift based instead of drag based energy conversion to shaft
power and thus increasing efficiency. A cluster of Cycloidal Propellers can be
used to cancel reactive forces eliminating the need for mooring. Numerical
simulations and water and wave tunnel experiments will be performed.

Broader Impact

The broader impact pertains to the ability to utilize ocean wave power at a
large scale. The co-location of the wave power energy source and the main urban
consumers of energy favor wave power over other alternative energy, since no
real estate is required for its use. Large off-shore wave power farms in deep
water waves may be used to produce hydrogen, for use in transportation and areas
remote to the shores. This research will involve Air Force Academy Cadets,
performing research as part of the Aeronautics 471 class. For outreach, the PIs
will introduce high school students participating in the Teen Aviation Camp at
the US Air Force Academy to wave power.