* 0801275
* The Blessing of High Dimension: Asymptotic Geometric Analysis and Its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2016
* Stanislaw Szarek, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2016
* USD 574,183.00

This project involves research on the geometric, probabilistic and combinatorial
aspects of functional analysis and convexity theory, the loosely defined area
that has been lately referred to as ?asymptotic geometric analysis.? Particular
attention will be paid to non-commutative objects and phenomena, and to links
with other areas of mathematics and other mathematical sciences, which motivate
most of the problems that are being studied. Sample research topics include:
structural properties of high-dimensional convex bodies and of high-dimensional
normed spaces, metric entropy (of convex sets or of linear operators) and
duality of such entropy, derandomization of various probabilistic constructions
appearing in functional analysis, some geometric questions related to quantum
information theory and quantum computing, and problems motivated by links to
mathematical programming. Typically, the questions are (or can be) expressed in
the language of geometry of Banach spaces (of high, but finite dimension) and
are to be analyzed using the diverse methods that originated or were developed
in that context. The approach depends on identifying and exploiting approximate
symmetries of various problems that escaped the earlier "too qualitative" or
"too rigid" methods of classical functional analysis and classical geometry.
Finally, to explain our emphasis on non-commutativity, we point out that it
simply reflects the fact that the final outcome of a process may depend on the
order of operations involved; the best known, but by far not the only
manifestation of that principle is quantum mechanics. On the elementary level,
Analysis is a study of functions, or relationships between quantities and the
parameters on which they depend. Since very many naturally appearing
relationships are linear or at least convex, a good understanding of convex
functions and, consequently, of convex sets is a prerequisite for understanding
those relationships. The number of free parameters in the underlying problem can
often be related to the dimension of objects in the corresponding mathematical
model. Since real-life systems or processes (say, physical, biological or
economic) usually exhibit very many degrees of freedom, the high-dimensional
setting is of particular interest. This is exactly the domain of asymptotic
geometric analysis, which studies quantitative properties of various geometric
structures as the dimension goes to infinity. While investigation of high-
dimensional phenomena often suffers from the curse of dimensionality (the
complexity of the problem exploding with the increase in dimension and resulting
in intractability), we may say that the asymptotic approach exploits the
blessing of dimensionality, with symmetries of the problem becoming apparent
only when the dimension is large. While this is a project in pure mathematics,
many of the research topics arose in, or were motivated by, other fields such as
mathematical physics, operations research, control theory, computer science or
probability and statistics. Accordingly, any progress has a potential impact
cutting across disciplines. On the one hand, this research may help to advance
the applied areas by providing a new perspective and ? conceivably ? leading to
breakthroughs. On the other hand, the problems and ideas arising in those areas
will feed back into the fundamental research, contribute to maintaining the
vitality of mathematics and potentially open completely new directions of
inquiry. Additionally, the project will involve graduate and undergraduate
students in intensive research, thus contributing to the development of
scientific base and infrastructure.