* 0801434
* 2008 Oceans and Human Health GRC-Sponsored Conference &amp; Graduate Research Seminar
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* John Stegeman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2009
* USD 20,000.00

NSF funding under this grant will provide partial funding for a new Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) on Oceans and Human Health (OHH), including an
associated Graduate Research Seminar (GRS). The subject of OHH concerns science
at the intersection of medical, genomic and oceanographic disciplines, and the
implications for and effects on human health and wellbeing. The purpose and
scope of the GRC and GRS are to provide a multidisciplinary platform for
discussing the current state of knowledge of the rapidly evolving, highly
interdisciplinary fields that comprise Oceans and Human Health, to identify and
debate unresolved questions, and to discuss new research directions. These
activities will bring together experts and students with diverse backgrounds
including algal and microbial biology, physical and biological oceanography,
epidemiology and public health, genomics and proteomics, toxicology,
pharmacology, and economics. An important motivation is the fact that as a new
scientific discipline, OHH as a professional enterprise does not currently have
a forum to facilitate interactions and dialogue among its practitioners. The
significance of the field is reflected by the support of four new Centers for
Oceans and Human Health by the National Science Foundation and the National
Institute for Environmental Health Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference will have two practical objectives: (1) to assemble the highest
caliber of academic, government and industrial scientists and students to
examine recent developments in the subdisciplines of OHH and review the latest
pertinent research in algal and microbial biology, physical and biological
oceanography, epidemiology and public health, genomics and proteomics,
toxicology, pharmacology, and economics; and (2) to foster the open exchange of
information and ideas among scientists at the cutting edge of OHH research by
providing opportunities for participants to interact in a relaxed and friendly
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, the conference
is expected to contribute in a substantial way to education, learning, and
increasing the involvement of underrepresented groups in addressing important
societal issues. The conference will engage female, minority and junior faculty
and students (postdoctoral and graduate) active in OHH research through
participation in formal sessions, poster presentations and informal
interactions. The GRS is targeted specifically at mentoring students in this new
emerging discipline. Information concerning these meetings will be broadly
disseminated through professional societies and by personal contact. Minority
participants will be sought by advertising and personal contact at minority and
other institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;