* 0801425
* CMG Collaborative Research: Stochastic Multiscale Modeling of Subsurface Flow and Reactive Transport
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2007,08/31/2010
* Dongxiao Zhang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2010
* USD 239,874.00

The overarching objective of this CMG project is to develop mathematical models
and efficient and accurate numerical algorithms for solving large-scale problems
of flow and reactive transport in highly heterogeneous porous media. The present
project involves three interdisciplinary geosystems modeling research groups:
The University of Oklahoma (OU), University of Pittsburgh (UPitt), and The
University of Texas at Austin (UT-Austin). The assembled research team proposes
to advance the mathematical and geoscience foundations necessary to enhance the
predictive capabilities of simulators through an improved understanding of the
physical processes that govern subsurface phenomena on multiple spatial and
temporal scales. Target applications include reliable and efficient modeling of
complex geosystems, uncertainty assessment and the effective coupling of
stochastic and deterministic models. The project aims to achieve the following
results: (1) development and analysis of novel discretization methods for
estimating physical characteristics and statistics of stochastic systems; (2)
modeling of multiscale stochastic problems for quantifying large-scale
uncertainty in heterogeneity and small-scale uncertainty in subdomain system
parameters; (3) investigation of iterative coupling and time stepping for
improving accuracy and efficiency of stochastic reactive transport; and (4)
numerical implementation of large-scale solution methods for stochastic problems
involving efficient alternative methods to both Monte Carlo simulations and
traditional moment expansions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humankind interacts with a
broad range of natural and engineered geosystems, including landfills,
contaminated sites, aquifers and fossil fuel reservoirs. Therefore,
understanding and simulation of complex geosystems are essential in managing and
optimizing environmental cleanup and energy production activities. This CMG
effort offers the possibility of academic, governmental, and industrial
collaboration in the area of large-scale geosystems uncertainty assessment with
the potential of driving software commercialization. Moreover, the predictive
and computational tools developed under this project will impact current
scientific understanding of a diverse array of systems, including biological
tissues, the atmosphere, porous composite materials, and smart materials. The
proposed research will involve the training of undergraduates, graduate students
and post-doctoral fellows at OU, UPitt and UT-Austin, in an interdisciplinary
environment. &lt;br/&gt;