* 0801929
* Multiple biomarker sensor for early detection of ovarian cancer
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2013
* Patricia Kruk, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2013
* USD 335,558.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop a sensor for the detection of multiple biomarkers with specific
application to early detection and monitoring of ovarian cancer. The approach is
based on a surface acoustic wave (SAW) transducer that integrates two critical
functions, namely, removal of interfering proteins, and sensing of multiple
biomarkers, on a single device. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project is the first to propose and demonstrate removal of
non-specifically bound (NSB) proteins from sensor surfaces using SAWs. NSB is a
confounding factor for sensor response utilizing any sensing principle, optical,
electrochemical or mass change. The proposed sensor is the first to integrate
this removal function with the sensing function of any device. This is the first
attempt at differential removal of bound proteins, one at a time, to achieve
detection and quantification of multiple moieties on a single device surface.
Many diseases, such as ovarian cancer, are characterized by elevated levels of
select proteins in bodily fluids. Hence, this sensor will have wide
applicability in medical diagnostics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;This work will allow for more wide-spread and easy testing than
current practice and is also applicable to detection of multiple moieties for
environmental and chemical detection applications. The proposed pilot testing of
an interdisciplinary senior design project can lead to a sustainable model for
engineering education. Proposed hands-on sensor units and associated experiments
will lead to awareness of basic sensor principles and concepts among the
participating school children. The proposed minority mentoring program can lead
to recruitment into science and engineering programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;