* 0801430
* IGERT:REsponding to RApid Environmental CHange (REACH): From genes to ecosystems, science to society
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Kevin Rice, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Tankersley
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,171,475.00

While shifting global climate and concomitant biological responses have always
been part of Earth's history, the rapidity of current human-mediated
environmental change is unprecedented. The most important of such changes
include global warming, habitat loss and the introduction of species to novel
geographic areas. Biologically, species may respond to rapidly changing
environments through altered morphology, behavior or physiology. Humans uniquely
adapt to environmental change by learning from the past, forecasting the future,
and by using public policies to shape behavior. The goal of this Integrative
Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) renewal award is to develop
a multidisciplinary understanding of the biological and social mechanisms needed
to respond to rapid environmental change. The dynamism of environmental problems
means that solutions must be on-going accomplishments, requiring continuing
commitment to monitoring, management, and adaptation. Graduate students, trained
through coursework, research collaborations, and internships, will become
proficient in the fundamental scientific and social issues involved in
responding to rapid environmental change. Students will also organize workshops
that bring together citizens, agency representatives, policymakers, non-
governmental organizations and industry. New collaborations with Howard
University and California State University-Fullerton will expand efforts to
broaden participation. Because environmental change is global in scope, students
will have opportunities to develop international collaborations through
internships and research activities. All of the activities of the past and
proposed IGERT make direct contributions to solving society's most pressing
environmental problems. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.