* 0801474
* Extratropical Control of Gulf Surges:  The Role of Rossby Wave Breaking and Associated Mesoscale Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2013
* Michael Kaplan, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2013
* USD 502,983.00

Monsoonal surges are plumes of moisture that move from the tropics and trigger
thunderstorms over the poleward fringes of the North American monsoon.
Predicting the onset and evolution of these surges is challenging. Previous
research on the mechanisms of surges has focused on the tropical forcing. This
work is based on an alternative hypothesize that breaking Rossby waves amplify
the monsoonal upper-tropospheric high and cause an abrupt poleward shift in the
"barrier" between the extratropics and tropics. This provides a conduit for
poleward surges of moisture into the desert southwest.

It is hypothesized that Rossby wave breaking leads to mesoscale forcing that
drives Gulf surges in two ways. First, the rapid poleward shift in the jet
mountain-valley heating contrasts to gain dynamical control over the interior
western United States. This creates a favorable environment to flux warm air
near the surface into the Great Basin. Surface heating increases the lower-
middle tropospheric thermal contrasts and leads to the development of a thermal
low. Secondly, wave breaking injects filaments of extratropical cyclonic air
into the subtropics leading to the formation of an inverted trough. The inverted
trough is consequently wrapped westward around the ridge toward the Gulf of
California. As this inverted trough propagates anticyclonically around the
upper-level high, moist lower tropospheric air is forced poleward toward the
surface low associated with the heated plateaus over the Great Basin. The
confluence of these responses to wave breaking opens the midlatitude interior
western North America to poleward intrusions of tropical moisture that cause
widespread storm activity.

These hypotheses will be tested through an observational diagnostic study and a
modeling study. The modeling study will employ simulations from an adaptive grid
numerical model, a framework suited to capture the nonlinearities of wave
breaking and the ensuing mesoscale response. A set of simulations will be
performed for case studies from the North American Monsoon Experiment (NAME).
Sensitivity runs will be conducted with and without extratropical dynamics, as
well as with and without tropical disturbances to examine the importance of the
extratropics in providing conditions favorable to Gulf surge events.

Broader impacts of the study derive from the importance of the North American
monsoon circulation for water resources, fire weather frequency, energy
availability, and land use. By making use of the predictable nature of the
midlatitude flow, this project could lead to improved operational predictions of
monsoonal surges in the southwestern United States.