* 0801288
* U.S.-Greece Workshop:  Past, Present, and Future of Materials and Processes for Load Bearing
* O/D,OISE
* 08/29/2007,08/31/2009
* James Seferis, F.R.E.E.D.O.M. Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2009
* USD 49,000.00

0738600 Kaler

This project provides support for a workshop in Greece in Fall 2007 to develop
future research collaborations between international materials experts from
academia, government and industry relating to processes used for load-bearing
structures. The U.S. lead investigators are Eric Kaler of the University of
Delaware and James Seferis from the Foundation for Research, Experiential
Educational Developmental Operational Management (FREEDOM). The Greek team leads
are George Papanicolaou from the University of Patras, Nikos Andreanopoulos from
National Technical University of Athens, and Danis Papadoupoulos from University
of Athens.

The topics to be addressed at this workshop include (1) transdisciplinary
research relating to materials and processes of load-bearing structures in
aviation, medicine, building construction, and ship building, (2) materials and
processes for ecological building construction, (3) the application of nano-
structures towards the development of larger megastructures. The workshop will
be organized as a series of discussions followed by break-out sessions to
facilitate collaborations and follow-on research activities. Several U.S. junior
researchers and students will be supported to attend.

This workshop will leverage the expertise of the U.S. and international
participants while strengthening research ties. Furthermore, the workshop
participants will explore the concept of using museums as incubators for new
businesses by analyzing an exhibited plane's tail fin to improve advanced
composite components.