* 0801375
* Travel Grant to Present the Proposal Writing Tutorial for the NSF Workshop at the AIChE Annual Meeting in Salt Lake City, Utah
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2007,10/31/2009
* James Lee, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/2009
* USD 4,889.00

CBET-0801375

Title: Travel Grant related to a Research Proposal Writing Tutorial for the NSF
Workshop at the November 2007 AIChE Annual Meeting

PI: James M Lee

Institution: Washington State University

This is an individual travel grant that provides funds for the principal
investigator (PI) to work with a NSF program officer, Dr. John Regalbuto, to
help prepare a presentation and participate in the "Proposal Writing Tutorial"
for the NSF Workshop to be held at the 2007 AIChE Annual Meeting in Salt Lake
City, Utah (November 4-9, 2007).

For over 25 years, the Division of Chemical, Biological, Environmental, and
Transport System (CBET) has held workshops at the AIChE Annual Meeting to
introduce individual programs and NSF-wide initiatives, explain organizational
changes, and provide opportunities for interactive communication between program
directors and faculty. This year, CBET has changed the workshop format to
include the "Proposal Writing Tutorial," and "Interactive Breakout Panels of NSF
Program Directors." The PI has been asked to work with a NSF program officer to
help prepare, present, and evaluate a "Proposal Writing Tutorial." The requested
budget includes travel expenses for the PI to attend the AIChE Annual Meeting
and travel to NSF for discussions leading to the preparation of the presentation
before the meeting and evaluation after the meeting. Since this is the first
time the "Proposal Writing Tutorial" is included in the workshop, extra effort
is required to prepare the tutorial, so that it can be used as a template for
the future presentations. The proposed topic of the tutorial is "Strategies for
Successful Grant Writing," which tentatively will be composed of three main
parts: (1) Learning more about funding agencies, program officers, competitors,
and the process, (2) Making a proposal competitive, and (3) The benefit of
employing interdisciplinary and transformative research. This travel funding
will also allow the PI to be available with Dr. John Regalbuto for individual
Workshop appointments with faculty at the NSF Hospitality Suit during the
meeting.