* 0801540
* IGERT: Scalable Computing and Leading Edge Innovative Technologies (SCALE-IT) for Biology
* EHR,DGE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2014
* Cynthia Peterson, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Boone
* 06/30/2014
* USD 2,982,348.00

This Integrated Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) Program on
Scalable Computing and Leading Edge Innovative Technologies (SCALE-IT) for
Biology will educate future biologists in a new way of approaching biology?a
seamless combination of computing expertise and research using emerging tools
that can attack the most challenging problems in biology spanning sub-cellular
to organismal scales. These activities will be coordinated by a team of
biologists and computational scientists at the University of Tennessee and Oak
Ridge National Laboratory. The goal is to endow future scientists with the
expertise to work at the interface of computational and biological sciences,
giving them the foundation to grasp important biological problems, understand
the scope of the data needed to address them, shrewdly design comprehensive
solutions, and implement them in a reasonable and efficient fashion. SCALE-IT
trainees will conduct research in an environment that includes state-of-the-art
instrumentation, high performance computing and worldwide distributed computing
via the Tera-grid. New curricula will provide trainees with the background to
work across computational and biological scales, including in-depth problem-
based learning with hands-on experiences. Opportunities will be available for
students to intern with major industries, institutes and other academic
programs. Other broader impacts of the program include summer research
experiences and curriculum development workshops for faculty and students from
partner institutions. Collaborations with Delaware State University and
Tennessee State University will provide pathways for underrepresented minorities
to participate in this doctoral program. Training in effective communication of
science will be fostered by establishing a Science Communication Center with
colleagues in journalism. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.