* 0801708
* Superconducting Electronics Readout Systems for WIMP Dark Matter Direct Detection Experiments (CDMS)
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2011
* Martin Huber, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 04/30/2011
* USD 120,000.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER: 0801708&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of Colorado
Denver&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: PHY - PARTICLE ASTROPHYSICS&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATOR: Huber, Martin E.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Superconducting
Electronics Readout Systems for WIMP Dark Matter Direct Detection Experiments
(CDMS)&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astronomical
observations tell us that approximately 85% of the matter in the universe is not
made of ordinary particles, but exists in some dark form. Deciphering the nature
of this dark matter is of fundamental importance to cosmology, astrophysics, and
high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis is that it is comprised of
Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that were produced moments after
the Big Bang. If so, then the presence of WIMPs in our Milky Way may be
detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei in a terrestrial detector. The
Cryogenic Dark Matter Search (CDMS) Collaboration has pioneered the use of low-
temperature phonon-mediated devices to search for the rare scattering of WIMPs
on nuclei and to distinguish them from background interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for the UCD group that, in
conjunction with the initial SuperCDMS project grants, will enable (a) the
completion of the CDMSII experiment, which is fully constructed and acquiring
science data at the Soudan Mine, (b) the testing and underground operation at
Soudan of two new ?SuperTowers,? each comprised of six next-generation detectors
and (c) a modest effort of long-range research and development to develop and
test new hardware and detectors for possible followup experiments. Specifically,
this proposal will support the PI's activities in the CDMS projects as well as
the group's long-term development and implementation of a two-stage
superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) pre-amplifier phonon-readout
system and development of a SQUID-based ionization-readout system for future
detector technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the Broader Impacts of
this program, the technical development will push the envelope of phonon-
mediated detectors, which have increasing utility in astrophysics, from optical
astronomy to x-rays and cosmic microwave backgrounds studies, as well as other
branches of physics such as quantum computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;