* 0801368
* Black Holes, Gravitational Waves and the Early Universe: Quantum Fluctuations, Backreaction, Information and Structures
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Bei-Lok Hu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2012
* USD 120,000.00

This award supports a program of theoretical research on consequences of quantum
field processes both at the late stage of the evolution of black holes and at
the initial stage of the early universe. A framework called stochastic gravity
is used to study these issues because it is especially well suited for treating
quantum field fluctuations that have not been included in previous work on these
topics. Quantitative results may be obtained from the Einstein-Langevin equation
defining this framework. Techniques and concepts from
quantum&lt;br/&gt;information theory are also used to address the black hole
information issue. These methods may also be used to calculate the gravitational
wave form and emitted energy from binary systems potentially detectable by LIGO
and LISA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determination of the magnitude of metric
fluctuations near the black hole horizon due to quantum fields is essential to
finding a solution to the backreaction problem: how Hawking radiation affects
the state and dynamics of a black hole, both under quasi-equilibrium (in a box)
and non-equilibrium (evaporating) conditions. Stochastic gravity provides an
easier to implement route towards structure formation from second order metric
perturbations needed in inflationary cosmologies based on higher order curvature
theories. A new formulation of gravitational wave dynamics for binary masses
with radiation reaction is useful for treating the self force on the small mass
and backreaction of it on the motion of the large mass self-consistently without
making the slow motion or the weak field assumptions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;