* 0801802
* GOALI: Statistically Parsimonious Adaptive Dynamic Programming for Minimizing the Environmental Impact of Airport Deicing Activities
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Li Zeng, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 05/31/2012
* USD 301,967.00

NSF Proposal 0801802&lt;br/&gt;PI: Chen, Victoria&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GOALI:
Statistically Parsimonious Adaptive Dynamic Programming for Minimizing the
Environmental Impact of Airport Deicing Activities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to enable computationally-efficient numerical
solutions to extremely high-dimensional, nonstationary approximate dynamic
programming. This project's Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport deicing
activities application involves over 7000 dimensions, while the largest solved
to-date is Dr. Chen's air quality application with 524 dimensions. The approach
develops a novel and challenging integration of perspectives from statistics,
optimization, and reinforcement learning to create efficient new hybrid
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This research's
statistical perspective is unique within the approximate dynamic programming
community and is the key to parsimony. This project's integrated approach will
yield new algorithms for exploration of state and decision spaces, critical for
the popular reinforcement learning approach; simultaneous adaptive design and
modeling, beneficial to the larger modeling community; and nonconvex
optimization of statistical models, useful for general global optimization. The
success of this integration will potentially transform the way researchers
conduct exploration and modeling in approximate dynamic
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This research is
important because it can yield practical methods for complex, uncertain, and
dynamic decision-making systems, including environmental policy, health care and
medicine, energy distribution and diversity, homeland security, and disaster
mitigation. Current solutions use oversimplifications that typically compromise
social benefits to satisfy economic constraints, while this project seeks to
efficiently represent the true system via an intelligent and parsimonious
approach. As a major gateway, the airport must address issues involving many of
the above systems, and a long-term collaboration with the airport will yield
motivating applications benefiting education, such as dissertations, seminars,
and course material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;