* 0801470
* IGERT:  STAIR:  Sustainable Technology through Advanced Interdisciplinary Research
* EHR,DGE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Bamin Khomami, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Boone
* 07/31/2014
* USD 2,941,396.00

Given the impending global energy/climate crisis, engineering practice must
undergo a paradigm shift from a traditional design process that had little
regard to energy and/or environmental costs to a new process that must address a
broader set of parameters that include the ultimate sustainability of the design
alternatives. This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship
(IGERT) program will provide the resources for the University of Tennessee to
become a national curriculum and research leader in sustainable energy
technologies by developing the technological, scientific, and engineering
expertise required. The training of scientists and engineers must now change in
two important ways. First, engineers must now learn to work within the context
of sustainable production processes. Second, engineers must now learn to work
regularly on complex innovative production processes that require advanced
interdisciplinary expertise and collaboration of materials, computational and
biological sciences and engineering. This IGERT provides a highly integrated
engineering curriculum and training program with a coherent sequence of steps
toward the proficiency required to work effectively in the sustainable energy
arena. The program fosters the development of technological, scientific, and
engineering expertise required in exploring new, sustainable energy
technologies. The diverse trainees will have expertise in either biomolecular
engineering or materials science and engineering relevant to sustainable
production of energy; breadth in both the biomolecular and materials
disciplines; pervasive exposure to research performed within the context of
sustainability; and a commitment to outreach through workshops at the American
Museum of Science and Energy in Oak Ridge and Knoxville ASM Summer Materials
Camp. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating
U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep
knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.