* 0801090
* Analysis and Geometry of Nonlinear PDEs
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2014
* Donatella Danielli, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2014
* USD 237,750.00

In recent years, the analysis and geometry of sub-Riemannian spaces has received
increasing attention. The quintessential examples of sub-Riemannian settings are
the so-called Carnot groups, whose fundamental role in analysis was first
highlighted by E. M. Stein. They now occupy a central position not only in such
mathematical areas as hypoelliptic partial differential equations, harmonic
analysis, and CR geometric function theory, but also in the applied sciences
(e.g., mathematical finance, mechanical engineering, neurophysiology of the
brain). The most distinctive feature of sub-Riemannian spaces is that the metric
structure can be viewed as a constrained geometry, where motion is only possible
along a prescribed set of directions, changing from point to point. The
principal investigator has a long-term project aimed at exploring geometric and
analytic properties of these structures. More specifically, she proposes to
continue her study of the Bernstein problem and of the regularity of minimal
surfaces in Carnot groups, to investigate subelliptic boundary value problems,
and to develop a regularity theory for fully nonlinear equations of Monge-Ampere
type. Another area of interest in this project is the investigation of elliptic
and parabolic free boundary problems naturally arising in the theory of flame
propagation. The principal investigator also intends to study a class of
minimization problems, in which the relevant functional is modeled after the one
introduced by Alt and Caffarelli. One of the main objectives of the proposed
research is to prove regularity properties of the free boundary. The necessary
tools from harmonic analysis and partial differential equations for the study of
these problems will be developed concurrently. Finally, motivated by the
striking analogy between the theories of minimal surfaces and of free boundaries
in the Euclidean setting, the PI plans to merge her different lines of research
into a yet quite unexplored area, namely, the study of free boundary problems
(both of obstacle and Alt-Caffarelli type) in Carnot groups. The principal
investigator will integrate her research plan with several educational,
mentoring, and outreach activities.

This project will conduct research that lies at the interface of calculus of
variations, partial differential equations, and geometric measure theory. The
focus is on the study of analytic and geometric properties of solutions to
variational inequalities and partial differential equations involving a system
of noncommuting vector fields. The problems under consideration not only arise
in a variety of mathematical contexts (e.g., optimal control theory,
mathematical finance, and geometry), but also are of interest in other fields
such as mechanical engineering, robotics, and neurophysiology. Another proposed
research area concerns free boundary problems, which naturally arise in physics
and engineering when a conserved quantity or relation changes discontinuously
across some value of the variables under consideration. The free boundary
appears, for instance, as the interface between a fluid and the air, or between
water and ice. Part of the project aims at studying regularity properties of the
free boundary in burnt-unburnt mixtures. The results of this investigation will
lead to a better understanding of the models, to the improvement of simulation
methods, and ultimately to a precise description of how flames propagate in
nonhomogeneous media. Several elements of this project find their motivations in
the applied sciences. On the other hand, the solutions to these probelms involve
an interplay of ideas from different areas of analysis and geometry. It is
conceivable that all these different fields will benefit from this synergy. The
principal investigator is committed to the training of future generations of
mathematicians, and to increasing the representation of women in the scientific
community, via the organization of a variety of educational and mentoring
activities for graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students.