* 0801634
* IGERT: Dynamics of behavioral shifts in human evolution: brains, bodies and ecology
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2015
* Peter Lucas, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Tankersley
* 07/31/2015
* USD 3,199,183.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award focuses
on the evolution of the human brain, cognition, and related behavioral responses
to environmental change. The program integrates cross-disciplinary research
training in a unique mix of disciplines, namely archeology, biomechanics and
engineering, cognitive science, comparative and experimental functional
morphology, ecology, evolutionary and developmental biology, genetics,
geochemistry, morphometrics, life history, molecular biology, neuroscience, and
paleoclimatology. Innovative educational and training aspects include an
emphasis on collaboration via group problem-based learning approaches, required
laboratory rotations in two different disciplines, and seminars in ethics and
professional conduct. The program combines George Washington University?s PhD
program in Hominid Paleobiology with the Howard University PhD in Physiology and
Biophysics, together with faculty from the Smithsonian Institution and Johns
Hopkins University?s Center for Functional Anatomy and Evolution, The
collaboration with Howard University (an HBCU) and existing and planned
internship programs for undergraduates will increase the recruitment of
underrepresented minorities. Outreach activities include a required internship
in the public understanding of science, in conjunction with area institutions
such as the National Geographic Society, USA Today, NPR, the National Academy of
Sciences, American Anthropological Association, local schools and others. The
program offers research-training opportunities at major international
institutions in Europe (e.g., Max Planck Institut für evolutionäre Anthropologie
(MPIEA); Swedish Museum of Natural History; Università degli Studi di Firenze?s
Laboratori di Antropologia; University of Bordeaux), China and Africa. IGERT is
an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge
in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills
needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze
a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models
for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
research that transcends traditional disciplinary
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;