* 0801874
* Fundamental Performance Limitations of Networked Control Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Jie Chen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this program is to investigate and quantify the fundamental
constraints, limitations, and tradeoffs in the design of networked control
systems. We focus on the essential characteristics of communication channels
(capacity constraint, quantization effect, data rate limit, etc) and at-tempt to
develop intrinsic system measures, fundamental performance limits, and inherent
design limitations for multivariable, multi-channel systems. In particular, we
attempt to develop analytical expressions and bounds for the optimal tracking
and regulation performance, with respect to&lt;br/&gt;prevalent channel models
employed in the communications and control research. We also attempt to develop
multivariable Bode and Poisson integral relations in the networked control
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networked
control presents several fundamental differences and challenges unlike those
found in conventional control. These differences need to be addressed, and
should be exploited to advantage in the design of networked control systems.
This program seeks to address key challenges and has its goal in quantifying the
fundamental performance limitations and design tradeoffs in networked control.
The program brings together experts in communications and control, and seeks to
fuse ideas and advances in these fields. The proposed work, which is believed to
be theoretically significant and practically feasible, has the potential to lead
to the discovery of fundamental constraints and limits in networked control
design, and to improved design methods and
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
successful execution of this project will benefit researchers and practicing
engineers in the broad areas of communications and control. The program also
seeks to integrate a strong educational component in a concerted, systematic
way. The synergistic activities include the offerings of Freshmen Discovery
Seminars, development of instructional controls lab, projects for senior design
courses, and direct participation of graduate and undergraduate students in the
project. Outreach activities seek to provide local K-12 students' and teachers'
research exposure by hosting visits to the PI's lab and&lt;br/&gt;active
participation in open house activities such as Engineering Day, and to provide
high school students research experience by engaging the students in summer
internships and special engineering programs. Our educational initiatives
encourage especially participation from underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;