* 0801138
* SGER: Triassic-Jurassic Mass Extinction Caused By Volcanism? Carbon Isotopic Tests In Eastern North America And Morocco
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Jessica Whiteside, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2010
* USD 33,655.00

SGER: TRIASSIC-JURASSIC MASS EXTINCTION CAUSED BY VOLCANISM? CARBON ISOTOPIC
TESTS IN EASTERN NORTH AMERICA AND MOROCCO

Jessica Whiteside EAR-0801138, Brown University

ABSTRACT The Triassic-Jurassic (Tr-J) boundary, 200 million years ago, marks one
of the Earth's most severe mass extinctions, comparable in magnitude to that of
the famous Cretaceous-Tertiary (K-T) boundary. While apparently decimating at
least half of then-extant terrestrial diversity, it set the ecological stage for
the ascent of dinosaur-dominated ecosystems. As with the K-T and Permo-Triassic
mass extinctions, the Tr-J mass extinction is temporally linked to the Earth's
largest flood basalt event, the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province (CAMP).
Previous work on the Tr-J boundary in the Newark and Fundy rift basins of
eastern North America and work by others in marine and continental deposits
demonstrate additional parallels to the K-T boundary including a modest Ir
anomaly, a "fern spike," a stomatal (CO2) anomaly, and a pair of negative 13C
excursions. While these observations as condign with an extraterrestrial impact,
much if not all of this evidence is also consonant with the giant flood basalts
of the CAMP. However, data from eastern North America suggest that all CAMP
flows post-date the extinction level by tens of thousands of years, making
causation unlikely. However, there is some suggestion that some Moroccan CAMP
lavas do predate or were synchronous with the Tr-J boundary, making it pos-sible
that the CAMP was the cause of the extinctions. PI will use a two-pronged
approach to test this possibility. First, working with Moroccan colleagues and a
graduatate student, she proposes to establish the organic 13C chemostratigraphy
(including bulk and compound-specific n-alkanes from leaf cuticular waxes) of
strata directly surrounding and interbedded with the Mo-roccan CAMP basalts.
Second, to better characterize the pre-boundary variations in organic 13C in the
Newark basin, thus far poorly known, she will recover the organic 13C
stratigraphy in a core penetrating 125 m (~400 ky) below the boundary in the
Jacksonwald Syncline to be recov-ered as part of a SGER project led by P.E.
Olsen and D.V. Kent. These two approaches will al-low a definitive test of
whether any known basalt eruptions could have cause the Tr-J mass ex-tinction.
The project will also result in an much better understanding of the carbon iso-
topic signatures of ecological disruption accompanying a mass-extinction, which
in turn, will provide deeper insight into the long-term implications and
possible unex-pected or highly non-linear consequences of human-induced changes
and other mas-sive volcanic eruptions.

This award is co-funded by the Division of Earth Sciences and Office of
International Science and Engineering.