* 0801314
* MEMS Education Workshop. The Workshop will be held in Tucson, AR on January 13, 2008.
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/15/2007,06/30/2008
* Evelyn Wang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2008
* USD 8,000.00



Objective: The objective of this proposal is to request funding MEMS Education
Workshop. Which will be held in Tucson, AR on January 13, 2008? This workshop
will precede the International MEMS 2008 Conference, which provides an ideal and
convenient venue for broad international participation. The funding is to be
used for increasing the participation of students and junior faculty in this
workshop. In this workshop the attendees will share and discuss best MEMS
educational practices amongst an international group of academic and industrial
participants from the US, Europe, and Asia. Intellectual Merit The workshop will
disseminate MEMS educational practices at all levels, will discuss curricula
that effectively prepare students for the future workforce, and share
information across interdisciplinary and international barriers. While the
educational systems are fundamentally different internationally, US programs
need to train students to be competitive in the global workforce and the
perspectives gained from the diverse group of attendees will facilitate the
development of creative and effective ways to teach MEMS globally. Broader
Impact The workshop will have broad impact for the entire international MEMS
community and for engineering education. The knowledge gained and experiences
shared from the workshop will be captured electronically and broadly
disseminated via a website. Benefiting from the recommendations and improved
teaching and training, students will be better prepared for both MEMS research
and MEMS-focused careers. In addition, effective educational improvement will
help spawn innovations and create ground breaking MEMS technologies, and hence
benefit the society at large

