* 0801271
* Electronic Fluctuation and Localization at Point Defects
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Philip Collins, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 06/30/2011
* USD 337,000.00

Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This single investigator research program systematically
investigates transport phenomena associated with single point defects. The
electronic scattering, localization, and fluctuation associated with a point
defect ultimately limit what is practically achievable in electronics, and
industry's ability to design and build electronic circuits at ever smaller
scales is limited by control over these sites. While such topics have been
extensively treated theoretically, few experimental platforms are available for
making direct measurements. In this project, the experimental platform consists
of one-dimensional conduction through single-walled carbon nanotubes. In this
one-dimensional limit, the alteration of single bonds is sufficient to
dramatically alter electronic behavior, providing a window into the transport
regime where atomic-scale effects become measurable, distinguishable, and
reproducible. The measurement of nanotube circuits both before and after defect
creation very directly identifies the interplay between point defects and
electronic effects, in order to map out reproducible electronic features
associated with different chemical terminations. By using conductance
spectroscopy, local scanning probe techniques, noise spectroscopy, optical
spectroscopy, and in situ characterization during annealing, this project aims
to complete a controlled and systematic study relevant to nanoscale physics and
the semiconductor industry. Furthermore, all of the work will be completed by
graduate and undergraduate students in a training environment designed to expose
junior researchers to problems and techniques relevant to future careers in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Modern
transistors, memory elements, and all of the wiring that connects them continue
to shrink from one generation of products to the next. In extreme cases, the
films of material that make up these circuit elements are already only a few
atoms thick. The semiconductor industry anticipates that, in the near future,
more and more devices will cross into this limit where success or failure can
depend on the accidental presence or absence of individual atom. In order to
forecast what kinds of effects science and industry will observe in this limit,
this project fabricates and tests electronic circuits that intentionally contain
single atomic defects. The experimental platform, which uses carbon nanotube
conductors only a few atoms wide, directly accesses the limit where atomic scale
effects can become measurable, distinguishable, and reproducible. Undergraduate
and graduate students are trained to test nanotube circuits before and after the
incorporation of single atomic defects, and to identify the electronic changes
that result. This degree of control allows the electronic consequences of atomic
defects to be systematically investigated and, through further chemical
tailoring, corrected for in practical devices. Combined with a unique
educational program in Materials Physics, this project provides junior
researchers with both practical and theoretical understanding of looming issues
in next generation electronic devices, and the relevant techniques for solving
them.&lt;br/&gt;