* 0801123
* Extensions of Hilbert's Tenth Problem and Computational Aspects of Arithmetic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2013
* Kirsten Eisentraeger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2013
* USD 119,412.00

The investigator will work on two projects connected with
number&lt;br/&gt;theory and arithmetic geometry. The first project is to
study&lt;br/&gt;generalizations of Hilbert's Tenth Problem. The problem in
its&lt;br/&gt;original form asked for an algorithm to decide whether an
arbitrary&lt;br/&gt;multivariable polynomial equation with integer coefficients
has an&lt;br/&gt;integer solution. In 1970 Matiyasevich proved that no such
algorithm&lt;br/&gt;exists, i.e. Hilbert's Tenth Problem is undecidable. This
motivated&lt;br/&gt;studying analogues of this problem by considering equations
and&lt;br/&gt;solutions in other commutative rings. The biggest open problem in
the&lt;br/&gt;area is Hilbert's Tenth Problem over the rational numbers. The PI
has&lt;br/&gt;proved the undecidability of Hilbert's Tenth Problem for
various&lt;br/&gt;function fields. These generalizations have used tools
from&lt;br/&gt;arithmetic geometry, such as the study of rational points on
elliptic&lt;br/&gt;curves. One research goal is to extend these results and
prove&lt;br/&gt;undecidability of Hilbert's Tenth Problem for the function
fields for which&lt;br/&gt;the problem is still unresolved. The biggest open
problems are&lt;br/&gt;function fields of one variable over an algebraically
closed field.&lt;br/&gt;Another goal is to explore Hilbert's Tenth Problem for
various&lt;br/&gt;subrings of number fields. The second project is to study
several&lt;br/&gt;problems that deal with computational aspects of curves and
their&lt;br/&gt;Jacobians. Elliptic curves and, more generally, Jacobians of
curves&lt;br/&gt;of small genus have many applications to cryptography, and the
second&lt;br/&gt;project focuses on these applications. One goal of the second
project&lt;br/&gt;is to explore curves of small genus and work on constructing
curves&lt;br/&gt;that are suitable for cryptographic purposes. The PI will also
work on&lt;br/&gt;applications of pairings to
cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both projects involve studying the solutions
to multivariable&lt;br/&gt;polynomial equations. Looking for solutions to such
equations over the&lt;br/&gt;integers or rational numbers has a long history
that goes back to&lt;br/&gt;ancient Greece. For the first project the
investigator will study the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental question of whether it is
possible to find a procedure&lt;br/&gt;that determines whether an arbitrary
multivariable polynomial equation&lt;br/&gt;has a solution in a given number
system. The second project focuses&lt;br/&gt;on computational aspects of certain
special classes of equations that&lt;br/&gt;have applications to cryptography.
For these applications one usually&lt;br/&gt;looks for solutions to these
equations over finite fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;