* 0801072
* Algebraic dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Thomas Tucker, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2011
* USD 149,937.00

This project focuses on the subject of algebraic dynamics. Orbits
of&lt;br/&gt;points under iterates of maps are among the most important objects
in&lt;br/&gt;dynamics. In the study of algebraic dynamics, the map is typically
a&lt;br/&gt;polynomial or rational map in one or more variables. It is natural
to&lt;br/&gt;ask what kinds of algebraic relations infinite families of
elements&lt;br/&gt;within an orbit can satisfy. The PI conjectures that if
infinitely&lt;br/&gt;many elements within an orbit satisfy an algebraic
relation, then that&lt;br/&gt;relation must in some sense be stable under some
iterate of the map.&lt;br/&gt;This conjecture may be thought of as a general
dynamical analog of the&lt;br/&gt;well-known Mordell-Lang conjecture for group
varieties. Thus far,&lt;br/&gt;this conjecture has been proved in a few special
cases using a&lt;br/&gt;combination of diophantine and p-adic analytic methods.
The main goal&lt;br/&gt;of this project is to prove the conjecture in general.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the interaction between
algebraic maps and&lt;br/&gt;algebraic equations. An algebraic map is a function
such as f(x) =&lt;br/&gt;2x+3. Applying the map repeatedly to a single number
gives what is&lt;br/&gt;called the orbit of that number under f. For example, if
f(x) = 2x+3&lt;br/&gt;and we start with the number 1, then the orbit is 1, 5,
13, 29, 61,&lt;br/&gt;and so on. One can also form orbits out of pairs,
triplets, and&lt;br/&gt;n-tuples of numbers by allowing f to be an algebraic map
in more than&lt;br/&gt;one variable. An algebraic equation is simply a more
general version&lt;br/&gt;of the familiar quadratic polynomials one encounters
in beginning&lt;br/&gt;algebra, except that it may have more variables and have
higher degree&lt;br/&gt;terms. One expects that if infinitely many numbers in an
orbit&lt;br/&gt;satisfy some algebraic relation, then that relation has an
innate&lt;br/&gt;connection with the algebraic map. The PI states a precise
conjecture&lt;br/&gt;along these lines, which he hopes to prove. The strategy
for the&lt;br/&gt;proof involves a wide range of techniques, some number
theoretic, some&lt;br/&gt;geometric, and some analytic.&lt;br/&gt;