* 0801729
* Diverse Engineering Pathways:  Curriculum Innovation and Best Practice for Recruitment, Retention, and Advancement of Engineering Technology Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* James Payne, Orangeburg-Calhoun Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Zhanjing Yu
* 07/31/2011
* USD 892,666.00

This project involves a formal partnership to improve and positively impact the
education of engineering technicians in an underdeveloped service area where
recently announced economic development opportunities are creating 5,500-8,000
new jobs through a billion dollar industrial project. The partnership is a
formal alliance of ten school districts; industry; a predominately minority
technical college, a private Historically Black College or University (HBCU);
and a publicly funded HBCU. The project also includes a State Department of
Education (SDE) and the State Board for Technical and Comprehensive Education
(SBTCE). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stated goal of the partnership is to increase
both the number and diversity of students who enter and complete associate
degrees in existing and emerging science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) cluster disciplines. It accomplishes the following
objectives: (1) Increasing both the number and diversity of students entering
associate degree programs in the computer engineering, instrumentation, and
other engineering technology disciplines through the implementation and
articulation of high school STEM cluster majors (programs of study); (2)
Improving success rates and professional advancement opportunities for
transitioning students from both high schools and industry through a formal
articulated K-16 STEM career pathway and Bridge Program designed to provide
transition courses in science, mathematics and engineering technology; (3)
Improving postsecondary delivery of science, mathematics, and technology
workplace skills, focusing on Mechatronics, Advanced Manufacturing, and Computer
Technology; and (4) Improving employer satisfaction with graduates in core
competencies and workplace skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
promoting access to STEM careers and provides courses for under prepared
students, especially women and under represented minorities. Strategies include
high school STEM career majors and STEM College Academies that build on national
models, such as Project Lead the Way; middle school STEM exploration activities
and summer camps, high school Individual Graduation Plans; program revision that
includes secondary and postsecondary faculty and student cooperative projects
and mentoring using a technology platform for remote equipment and process
diagnostics and collaboration; faculty development; and broad industry
involvement in curriculum development, internships and co-op opportunities,
scholarships, and Foundation support.