* 0801528
* CAREER: Knowledge Enhanced Clustering Using Constraints
* CSE,IIS
* 08/17/2007,08/31/2014
* Ian Davidson, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Clifton
* 08/31/2014
* USD 458,490.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the development of general principled
methods&lt;br/&gt;to efficiently include domain knowledge expressed as
constraints into &lt;br/&gt;clustering algorithms. This not only allows improved
clustering quality &lt;br/&gt;and algorithm performance but also finding
insights that are novel and &lt;br/&gt;useful with respect to existing domain
expertise. For example, phylogenetic &lt;br/&gt;trees built using hierarchical
clustering should be consistent with existing &lt;br/&gt;domain knowledge such
as that several species could not have evolved from &lt;br/&gt;one another.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing clustering under constraints work has focused on
non-hierarchical &lt;br/&gt;clustering with conjunctions of must-link and
cannot-link constraints that &lt;br/&gt;assert that two objects must or must not
be in the same cluster. This work &lt;br/&gt;can be interpreted as expressing
knowledge using a limited logic comprised &lt;br/&gt;of instances as objects,
two binary relations (must-link and cannot-link) &lt;br/&gt;and a single
connector (and).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make three primary
contributions. Firstly, it will examine &lt;br/&gt;a more complete logic to
represent knowledge by adding in new relations, a &lt;br/&gt;complete set of
connectives (not, and, or, implication), universal and &lt;br/&gt;existential
quantifiers and new objects. This logic can express a large &lt;br/&gt;variety
of knowledge such as minimum/maximum cluster separation, cluster
&lt;br/&gt;width and even forcing distributions of certain objects across
clusters. &lt;br/&gt;Secondly, it will investigate incorporating constraints
beyond non-hierarchical &lt;br/&gt;clustering algorithms into algorithms for
hierarchical agglomerative clustering, &lt;br/&gt;graph and social network
clustering, and feature selection for clustering. &lt;br/&gt;Lastly, it will
explore the computational challenges of using constraints by
&lt;br/&gt;identifying easy to satisfy sets of constraints and developing a
framework to &lt;br/&gt;explain why some constraint sets are more useful than
others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will demonstrate and validate its
technical contributions on two &lt;br/&gt;core application domains: analysis of
pandemic micro-simulations results to &lt;br/&gt;aid in disaster preparation and
image mining. The long term vision is to &lt;br/&gt;incorporate knowledge
efficiently in a principled manner into other data mining &lt;br/&gt;tasks such
as classification, anomaly detection and association rules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project outreach for high school and undergraduates
students will be in the &lt;br/&gt;form of hands-on discovery learning courses
with emphasis on the two core &lt;br/&gt;application domains. For graduate
students and researchers the tutorial slides, &lt;br/&gt;papers, datasets and
software generated from the project will be freely &lt;br/&gt;available.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information on this project may be found at the
URLs &lt;br/&gt;http://www.constrained-clustering.org and
http://www.cs.albany.edu/~davidson.