* 0801539
* Workshop on Phenotypic and Developmental Plasticity, December 15-20, 2007; Trivandrum & Kerala, India
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2007,05/31/2008
* Stuart Newman, New York Medical College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 05/31/2008
* USD 11,000.00

This is an award to support travel for a U.S. delegation of one senior and three
junior scientists to a workshop on "Phenotypic and Developmental Plasticity," to
be held in Trivandrum, Kerala, India, from December 16-20, 2007. The topic of
the meeting is timely and highly appropriate to the current state of the field
in developmental and organismal biology. The meeting brings together 50-55
scientists of highly disparate backgrounds in order to establish how to
effectively approach and conceptualize the multifaceted problems in phenotypic
and developmental plasticity. It is anticipated that general and common features
of phenotypic and developmental plasticity across disciplinary boundaries will
come to light as well as some discipline-specific aspects, and that
collaborative efforts leading to future requests for research support from the
National Science Foundation will be stimulated. The U.S. graduate students have
been chosen for their research interests and activities in the areas of
phenotypic and developmental plasticity and are expected to greatly benefit from
intensive scientific discussion with an array of highly regarded, active, and
internationally connected scientists and by publication of their research
findings in the conference proceedings. This proposal is co-funded by the
Evolution of Developmental Systems Program in the Division of Integrative and
Organismal Systems and by the Office of International Science & Engineering.