* 0801255
* Next Generation Decoders for Reed-Solomon Codes  -- Collaborative Research
* CSE,CCF
* 08/30/2007,06/30/2009
* Alexander Vardy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* William H Tranter
* 06/30/2009
* USD 117,522.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;--------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Digital communication,
embodied in such applications as cell phones and wireless Internet, by now
pervades our daily lives, while digital storage devices, such as CDs, DVDs, and
computer disk drives, have become the principal means of preserving our
information. In the "information age" in which we all now live, the need for
reliable transmission and storage of digital data is of paramount importance.
What makes such reliable transmission and storage possibles are error-correcting
codes, first conceived by Claude Shannon over 50 years ago. Indeed, as you are
reading these lines, millions of error-correcting codes are decoded every
minute, using efficient algorithms implemented in custom VLSI circuits. At least
75% of these circuits decode Reed-Solomon codes, invented by Irving Reed and
Gustave Solomon in the 1960s. In the four decades since their invention, Reed-
Solomon codes have been extensively studied and ingenious decoding algorithms
for these codes have been developed. What has been realized only recently,
however, is that Reed-Solomon codes can correct many more errors than previously
thought possible! In a series of theoretical breakthroughs, Sudan, Guruswami-
Sudan, and Koetter-Vardy have made state-of-the-art Reed-Solomon decoders out of
date. At least in principle, we can now achieve much better performance with the
same codes. The goal of this project is to follow-up on this exciting recent
work and to follow this line of research through to its ultimate potential, in
theory as well as in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In order to attain this
goal, we plan a broad line of attack. On one hand, the proposed investigation
will address deep theoretical questions. Can one exceed the Guruswami-Sudan
decoding radius? What is the optimal multiplicity assignment for algebraic soft-
decision decoding? How can iterative decoding methods be applied to Reed-Solomon
codes? On the other hand, we intend to go all the way to the first-ever VLSI
implementation of a soft-decision Reed-Solomon decoder. The proposed VLSI
architecture aims for high speed and low power dissipation. Thus complexity
considerations, inherently motivated by the practice of VLSI design, will be
paramount throughout our investigation. Specifically, The main topics to be
investigated are: (1) Multivariate interpolation decoding beyond the Guruswami-
Sudan radius; (2) Probabilistic model and multiplicity assignment schemes for
algebraic soft-decision decoding; (3) Iterative methods for soft decision
decoding of Reed-Solomon codes; (4) Analytic bounds on the performance of
maximum-likelihood and suboptimal decoders; and (5) Complete VLSI implementation
of a state-of-the-art soft-decision Reed-Solomon decoder in an FPGA and/or ASIC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;