* 0801736
* IHCS: ARMS: A Novel Adaptive ConfiguRable Multi-cell Battery System for Power-Aware Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Hamid Sharif, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 12/31/2012
* USD 299,626.00

Integrative, Hybrid and Complex Systems&lt;br/&gt;University of Nebraska-
Lincoln&lt;br/&gt;Song Ci&lt;br/&gt;IHCS: ARMS: A Novel Adaptive ConfiguRable
Multi-cell Battery System for Power-Aware
Electronics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop a novel adaptive configurable multi-cell battery system for power-aware
computing. Tasks include: (1) a study of adaptive configurable multi-cell
battery discharge behaviors under a time-varying load through modeling and
simulation; (2) investigation and development of an adaptive control and
optimization framework to dynamically select the optimal cell topology
configuration for the current load based on each cell's state of health and
state of capacity; and (3) establishment of an integrated power-aware embedded
platform for testing and evaluating the proposed adaptive configurable multi-
cell battery with a wide range of benchmark load
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project investigates
a novel design concept for multi-cell batteries with the goal of increased
utilization of battery capacity. The research also investigates a power
management system with simple direct current-to-direct current conversion
circuitry that is intended to increase the efficiency of multi-cell battery
discharge. Finally, the project seeks to develop a fundamental understanding of
multi-cell battery behavior, which is currently not well understood. This
project seeks to provide solutions for a variety of domain-specific
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. By improving the discharge
efficiency and life span of multi-cell batteries, the broader impacts of this
project are to increase a system's operating time with the same battery capacity
and to reduce environmental impact of discarded batteries. Results, outcomes,
software tools, benchmarks, and educational materials will be disseminated
through a project web site, as well as through journal and conference
publications. A new course on power-aware computing is being jointly developed
and taught at the investigators' univer&lt;br/&gt;