* 0801858
* MO Collaborative Research: A Genomics and Cultivation-Based Study on Novel Candidate Divisions OD1, SR1, OP11, and TM7 in a Sulfur-Rich Spring (Zodletone Spring, OK)
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2008,08/31/2015
* Mostafa Elshahed, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2015
* USD 806,001.00

During the last two decades, advances in techniques used to identify
microorganisms have demonstrated that there are many groups of novel, previously
unknown bacteria that appear to be very abundant in multiple environments. It is
likely that many of these groups have important ecological roles and yet they
have not been studied in the laboratory. The goal of this project is to
investigate the physiological characteristics, metabolic abilities, and
potential ecological roles of four of these important bacterial groups, termed
candidate divisions, OD1, SR1, OP11, and TM7. These four groups have been shown
to be relatively abundant in Zodletone spring, a low temperature (20 degrees C)
sulfide and sulfur-rich spring in southwestern Oklahoma and they are thought to
be important members of the community in terms of facilitating the biological
processes that are occurring in this spring. These processes include degradation
of hydrocarbons, formation of minerals and photosynthesis. Zodletone spring will
be used as a microbial observatory to study these groups. A set of genomic
techniques will be used, which involve sequencing DNA from the genome of one
individual microbial cell, literally fished from the spring using a flow
cytometer. The results will allow identification of the genes and assembly of
the metabolic pathways that may be used for the above processes. Ultimately the
data will be used to understand the chemical reactions and the ecological roles
performed by members of each these groups. Along with genomic studies, these
groups of bacteria will be cultivated and studied in the laboratory. These
bacteria come from an environment in which oxygen is rarely present and as a
result, oxygen is likely toxic to these cells. Sophisticated isolation
strategies will be used for isolating and growing bacteria that would not
normally grow in the laboratory and these will be adapted to work with
microorganisms that are oxygen sensitive. These cultivation studies will allow
us to verify that the bacteria are able to catalyze the reactions that have been
proposed for them and will allow us to study individual reactions to understand
how each process occurs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results obtained in this
proposal will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses offered at
Oklahoma State University and the University of Oklahoma. The proposal will also
provide several graduate and undergraduate research opportunities to members
(especially Native Americans)of underrepresented groups in science. Finally, the
project will help continuing and expanding outreach efforts to Oklahoma high
schools through the K20 Center at the University of Oklahoma and the Junior
Science and Humanities Symposia (JSHS) Program at Oklahoma State University.
&lt;br/&gt;