* 0801319
* Interface problems in fluids and nonlinear waves
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Chongchun Zeng, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 149,964.00

This project is concerned with the study of interface problems arising in fluid
mechanics and nonlinear wave equations with emphasis given to the study of
singular limits of solutions to these problems which include 1) free boundary
problems arising in inviscid fluid flows with and without surface tension; 2)
free boundary problems arising in magneto-hydro-dynamics; and 3) existence and
regularity of minimal surfaces in Minkowski spaces viewed as sharp interfaces of
singular limits of solutions to nonlinear wave equation with singular
potentials. A common thread of these problems is that they have a variational
formulation which has a geometric interpretation. By focusing on the
relationship between the analytical aspects and geometric aspects of these
nonlinear hyperbolic PDEs, the PI will develop new methods and techniques to
systematically obtain energy estimates, free boundary regularity bounds, and
well-posedness. The research will be based on the geometric methods that arise
either from variational principles or from the geometric nature of the problems
and analytical methods that arise in studying existence, uniqueness, regularity,
and long-time behavior of solutions to nonlinear PDEs.

These problems are prototypical for the study of free boundary regularity and
rapidly-oscillating solutions in hyperbolic partial differential equations.
Their resolution should be an important contribution to our understanding of
this area. They are a cohesive set of problems that will require new methods and
techniques that may well be useful in other area of PDEs. Fluid interface
problems arise in many physical, medical, and engineering models. Problems
involving fluid-vacuum interfaces arise in the study of water waves and
astrophysics including the shape of stars. Problems involving fluid-fluid
interfaces arise in multi-phase fluid flows while problems involving fluid-
deformable structure interfaces arise in biomedical modeling such as cell
deformation. Interface problems in magneto-hydro-dynamics are central to the
theoretical and practical study of producing energy by fusion. The free boundary
problems to be studied in this project may shed light on the instabilities
present in the magnetic fields used for confining plasmas. We will also study
the interface between hot and cool plasmas, i.e., the transport barrier. A
systematic mathematical analysis of these problems should help us understand how
various types of instabilities originate. The identification of ill-posed
problems should also be very beneficial for modeling considerations and
applications.