* 0801163
* Resolution of Singularities and Birational Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Jaroslaw Wlodarczyk, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2012
* USD 140,963.00

The investigator plans to adapt his simplified algorithm of Hironaka's
resolution of singularities to different types of resolution problems. The
Hironaka theorem on resolution of singularities plays a central role in
Algebraic Geometry. It constitutes a basis of proofs of many theorems in
Algebraic and Analytic Geometry. The theorem on desingularization is proven in
characteristic zero and is known only in some special cases in positive
characteristic. This is a major drawback for many theorems which rely on
desingularization and which can be proven in characteristic zero only. The
project deals with studying some new ideas and developing a new relatively
simple approach to the resolution problem in positive characteristic. By
suitable modification of the basic notions (like order, marked ideals and etc)
introduced in the algorithm in characteristic zero the investigator plans to
approach the problem of resolution of singularities in positive characteristic.
The new notions open some new possibilities in related areas. In particular, the
new invariant proposed in the project, so called p-order, may have interesting
applications in problems related to studying singularities in positive
characteristic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal splits into two parts.
First, the investigator plans to show how &lt;br/&gt;to reduce in a canonical
way the resolution of general singularities to the singularities of the special
form (singularities of Giraud hypersurfaces of maximal contact). Understanding
these singularities is considered to be the key for solving the problem. Second,
the investigator plans to approach the resolution of singularities by using the
introduced language and the inductive scheme developed in the first part.
Although the problem seems very difficult, using new tools significantly
simplifies it and allows us to better understand the problem in many particular
situations. Moreover the investigator plans to analyze and generalize the
simplified algorithms of Hironaka desingularization and the Weak factorization
from the point of view of further potential applications.