* 0801226
* Wave propagation: singularities and asymptotics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Andras Vasy, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2013
* USD 390,000.00

The object of the proposed research is the study of wave propagation. This
encompasses such diverse areas as the study of singularities of solutions of the
wave equation, which is the "nearby" behavior of waves, as well as the
asymptotic behavior of waves on curved space-times, such as in general
relativity. The project will employ geometric microlocal techniques to explore
new problems in these areas. Some of these techniques are constructive, such as
the ones used by the author in the description of the scattering operator on
asymptotically de-Sitter-like spaces, and some rely on phase-space energy
estimates, such as the microlocal positive commutator estimates employed by the
author in the proof of the propagation of singularities on domains with corners
and in showing that the wave diffracted by a smooth edge is more regular (which
can be interpreted as "weaker") than the incident wave under suitable
hypotheses, in joint work with Melrose and Wunsch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most
people are familiar with the following two descriptions of the propagation of
light. First, in geometric optics, light propagates in straight lines,
reflecting from smooth surfaces according to Snell's law (i.e., the angles of
incidence and of reflection are the same, as if light consisted of billiard
balls). Second, light can be described by the wave equation, its propagation
thus being similar to that of water waves. There is a close relationship between
these two viewpoints. Namely, for solutions of the wave equation, the
propagation of sharp signals (or "singularities" of signals obtained, for
example, by turning on light instantaneously) is precisely described by the
simpler geometric optics picture. Part of this project can be regarded as an
extension of this work to a more general setting, such as reflections from
curved edges. As wave propagation is ubiquitous in the physical world, a more
precise understanding of it has many potential applications, for instance, to
inverse problems. In a material with cracks inside it, one would like to find
out the location of these cracks by probing the material with waves (say, sound
waves, or x-rays). These cracks are typically not smooth (e.g., they may have
edges or corners), but they still fit into our general geometric framework. One
can use our proposed results -- namely, that the reflections from the tips of
the cracks are weaker (in a certain sense) than the reflections from the smooth
parts -- combined with the very precise understanding of reflections from the
smooth parts, to locate the cracks. The rough conclusion: the tips can be
ignored.&lt;br/&gt;