* 0801457
* Experiments with Quantum Gases of Lithium in 1, 2, and 3 Dimensions
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Randall Hulet, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 06/30/2012
* USD 595,000.00

Research with ultracold atomic gases has greatly expanded by rapid advancement
in the ability to trap, cool, and manipulate atomic gases, so that they may be
applied to gain better understanding of complex phenomena in condensed matter,
material, nuclear, and particle physics. Atomic gases can be cooled to the nano-
Kelvin regime where atoms behave more as waves than as classical particles. In
this "quantum regime," the atoms exhibit some of the most startling phenomenon
known in the physical world, including superfluidity, an analog of
superconductivity but with neutral atoms taking the place of electrons. Unlike
real materials that possess defects, impurities, and random disorder, the atomic
analogs are inherently clean and extraordinarily tunable enabling highly
controllable tests of fundamental models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments
performed under this grant will use ultra-cold Fermionic lithium atoms, Li-6, to
simulate the properties and characteristics of high-temperature superconductors,
which are materials of great technological significance, but remain only
partially understood. The group will also continue their studies of pairing of
mixtures with unequal spin numbers to map out the phase diagram of this
incredibly rich system. A particular focus is the "FFLO" phase, where pairing
occurs with non-zero center of mass momentum. The FFLO phase has been long
studied theoretically, but as of yet there are no clear experimental
observations. These experiments will hopefully clarify differences in
observations of phase separation with other experiments. Finally using a Bosonic
form of lithium, Li-7, the group will investigate Anderson localization, the
transition from a superfluid or conductor to an insulator due to disorder. A
second experiment in the Boson system will explore a recently proposed dynamical
stabilization scheme for creating two-dimensional solitons for the first
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this work is two-fold: firstly,
greater understanding of fundamental models of materials may enable the design
of real materials with improved performance, such as higher temperature
superconductors; and secondly, this research will provide a broad scientific
training for the students and post-doctoral scientists engaged in it.