* 0801334
* Fabrication of the NEM and NEMFET Logic Gates via Top-Down and Bottom-up Processes
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2008,08/31/2011
* H S Philip Wong, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2011
* USD 330,000.00

Proposal No. 0801334&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fabrication of the NEM and NEMFET
Logic Gates&lt;br/&gt;via Top-Down and Bottom-up
Processes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;H.-S. Philip
Wong&lt;br/&gt;hspwong@stanford.edu&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;250 Word Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to demonstrate for the first-time ultra-low power
logic gates based on nanoelectromechanical (NEM) switches and NEM field-effect
transistors. The proposed devices will solve the ever aggravating leakage and
static power consumption problem of the CMOS technologies. The approach is to
pursue simultaneously the lithography-based top-down processes and the
nanowire/carbon nanotube-based bottom-up techniques. The proposed research
aligns well with the EPDT program which aims at improving the fundamental
understanding of devices and components based on the principles of electronics
and electromechanics. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit resides in the
experimental realization of extremely low power ULSI logic systems combining two
traditionally distinct domains (MEMS and CMOS logic). Micron-sized MEMS devices
will be extended into the nanoscale regime. The ultra-low power operation of the
proposed devices follows from the fact that the signal propagation is based not
only on the movement of charge but also on the displacement of a solid rod. This
distinguishes the NEM relays and the NEMS-based transistors from the
conventional MOSFETs. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts will advance diversity in
the nanoelectronics workforce and provide intellectual technology transfer,
integration of research and education, public education, minority student
outreach, and promotion of partnerships. Specifically, collaboration with the
producers of the award-winning Silicon Run Film Series will result in new
educational films on MEMS and nanoelectronics. They will serve as a resource to
educators teaching in these new fields and assist with the professional
development of instructors in supporting disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;