* 0801154
* Problems in Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Xiaochun Li, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2012
* USD 161,594.00

The principal investigator is planning to work on a variety of problems in
harmonic analysis arising in the study of multilinear and rough linear singular
integral operators. Some problems that the PI is planning to work are related to
time-frequency analysis, which was used in the celebrated Lacey-Thiele's theorem
on the bi-linear Hilbert transform. These problems include uniform bounds for
the bi-linear Hilbert transform, the disc and the corresponding maximal bi-
linear multiplier, the Hilbert transform along Lipschitz vector fields, and
multi-linear Carleson-type operators arising in the almost everywhere
convergence of spherical partial sums of Fourier series in higher dimensions.
Some problems are related to Szemer\'edi's theorem on arithmetic progression and
the (multilinear) oscillatory integrals, in which the time frequency analysis is
unvaluable. These type of problems contain the bi-linear Hilbert transform along
curves, and the multi-linear oscillatory integrals along curves, the muliti-
linear oscillatory integrals with non-degenerate phases which was first studied
by Christ, Tao, Thiele and the PI. Some problems are associated to the Kakeya
problem such as the Lipschitz maximal functions, initiated by Lacey and the PI,
and the Zygmund conjecture. Recently, C. Muscalu and the PI generalized the
Carleson-Hunt theorem to the multi-linear case. And M. Lacey and the PI had been
able to use the time-frequency analysis to obtain some conditional results for
the Hilbert transform along Lipschitz vector fields. A fundamental subject in
analysis is the differentiability of the integral of certain functions. Recently
M. Lacey and the PI proved some estimates for a Lipschitz Kakeya maximal
function by a completely new method based on some crucial geometric
observations. It turns out that a complete understanding of the Lipschitz Kakeya
maximal function is a key to answer the question on the differentiablity of
certain functions in a Lipschitz choice of directions, which was posed by A.
Zygmund about seventy years ago. The Hilbert transform along curves had been
understood well by work of many people in the last several decades. However, the
bi-linear Hilbert transform along curves is a new field. Some partial results
such as uniform estimates for some para-products arising in the study of this
type of problem were obtained by the PI. As the linear case, the relation of
multi-linear singular integrals along curves and multi-linear oscillatory
integrals is an interesting and important topic in analysis. This relation is
only partially understood. Based on it, D. Fan and the PI obtained an
affirmative result for the bi-linear oscillatory integral along parabolas
incorporating some oscillatory factors, which is a starting point for
understanding the bi-linear Hilbert transform along curves. The main theme in
harmonic analysis is disassembling and assembling complicated objects into
simpler well-understood pieces, called frequencies, by analogy to decomposing
musical pieces into arrangements of a few basic tones. In signal processing,
harmonic analysis is used in the detection of irregularities of signals and
images, the protection against the loss of information due to a sudden and
unexpected interruption, and the retrieval of the original data. These
applications provide the main practical motivation for some theoretical research
described in this proposal. The research experience and results gained by
investigating these difficult problems such as the Stein's and Zygmund's
conjectures help the PI better understand a wide range of topics. It also
provides the PI with some new visions on mathematics that greatly benefits the
PI's teaching. Hopefully it will also benefit fellow mathematical educators, and
more importantly dedicated mathematical students, through sharing the new
knowledge and visions.