* 0801742
* MO: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: A MICROBIAL OBSERVATORY EXAMINING MICROBIAL ABUNDANCE, DIVERSITY, ASSOCIATIONS AND ACTIVITY AT SEAFLOOR BRINE SEEPS
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Barbara MacGregor, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

Brine seeps are caused by the dissolution of salt that was deposited when the
Gulf of Mexico was an evaporative basin and then buried beneath sediments. When
salt deposits come into contact with seawater, they dissolve, and form brines
many times saltier than seawater. Salt migration creates faults in the sediment
column and drives seepage of brine fluids and materials from the deep subsurface
to the seafloor. These heavy brines flow out of the seafloor forming puddles,
pools, and lakes of brine. Brine seeps occur along continental margins, but
surprisingly little is known about the diversity and activity of their microbial
communities. Brine seeps are fueled by persistent fluid and gas discharge over
periods of decades to centuries, thus it is likely that distinct free-living
microbial communities have adapted to these habitats. Brine seep habitats may be
analogs for brine seeps on other worlds as are thought to occur on Europa, Titan
or Mars. The laboratories of Drs. Samantha Joye of the University of Georgia,
Ian MacDonald of Texas A and M and Andreas Teske of the University of North
Carolina and colleagues from Germany and Denmark will be characterizing the
distribution and activity of the microbes in Gulf of Mexico brine seeps,
examining the interactions of the microbial communities with their unusual
environment, and evaluating the biogeochemical role of these communities in the
brine seep habitats. They will be using a three-pronged approach that includes
in-situ sampling, long-term monitoring, and experimentation to quantify the
abundance, diversity and activity of microorganisms mediating carbon and sulfur
transformations in brine seeps, to identify the environmental controls on these
microbial activities and distributions, to trace carbon and sulfur flow through
the microbial food web using stable isotope biomarkers, DNA and RNA and to
isolate and characterize novel microorganisms from these brine seeps. This
project will include a diverse portfolio of outreach activities. The research
will include undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral scientists. An
exchange program between US, German and Danish collaborators will permit US
graduate students to live and work in Bremen, Germany or Odense, Denmark. A
middle or high school science teacher will be participating in the research
cruises through collaboration with the Centers for Ocean Science Education
Excellence-Southeast program. The science teacher will work in one of the PI?s
laboratories to develop course materials for use in middle and/or high schools.
The PIs will have interactive web casts of research cruises and a project web
page will be available, by year one of the project, for the scientific community
and for the general public.