* 0801786
* Dynamics of Femtosecond-Laser Modification of Glass
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2013
* Denise Krol, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2013
* USD 520,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Ultra-short pulse (femtosecond) laser structuring of
glass is becoming increasingly important as a novel fabrication method to modify
the properties of glass with three-dimensional spatial selectivity. Despite the
fact that this technique has already been used for the fabrication of a variety
of passive and active optical devices and lab-on-chip components, little is
known about the processes by which the absorbed laser energy gets dissipated
into the glass, thereby causing the structural changes. The objective of this
project is to experimentally monitor the dynamics of femtosecond-laser
modification in fused silica to gain a better understanding of the mechanisms
involved and to determine how these depend on laser writing parameters. Highly
trained graduate and undergraduate students will be the resources generated by
the research in a cross-disciplinary setting. This project will offer them a
unique opportunity by providing hands-on experience with state-of-the-art
optical and materials characterization
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The focus of the proposed
research is to experimentally monitor the dynamics of femtosecond-laser
modification in fused silica to gain a better understanding of the process. This
is done by employing a number of different femtosecond-laser pump-probe
experiments. In the first set of experiments the initial (peak) electron density
resulting from the absorption of the femtosecond-laser pulse is determined as
well as its dependence on laser-writing parameters such as laser wavelength,
pulse energy, pulse duration and focusing conditions. The second set of
experiments involves measuring the time evolution of the electron density. Once
the electron density (or plasma) has decayed a hot liquid results, which then
cools leaving the permanent modification. Time-dependent Raman measurements are
used to probe the temperature of the hot liquid as a function of time until it
has cooled completely. These experiments give important information about the
mechanisms responsible for femtosecond-laser modification in glass. The findings
have a major impact on the potential commercialization of this technique for
optical device fabrication. This project involves foreign students and visitors
through exchange programs provided by the NSF-International Materials Institute
for New Functionality in Glass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;