* 0801855
* Solid State Chemistry of Crystalline and Glassy Chalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2011
* Mercouri Kanatzidis, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 04/30/2011
* USD 488,044.00

The present research program aims to expand the boundaries of what is possible
in the solid state by pursuing and developing new synthetic methodologies for
metal chalcogenides. The project deals with the effectiveness of salt fluxes to
discover new materials in the broad chalcogenide class of compounds as well as
with the in-depth studies of these materials. The need to control chemical
reaction systems and to discover new materials through developing general
synthetic methodologies defines one of the main challenges to our understanding
of the relationships between chemistry, crystal structures, and properties in
complex solids. Many of the relationships are subtle and poorly understood. In
particular, the project focuses on complex ternary and quaternary metal
chalcophosphate and chalcoarsenate materials. This class continues to present
marvelous scientific challenges and it is broadly relevant to many technological
applications. An extensive and diverse set of characterization tools will be
applied. Exciting new materials are anticipated with interesting and potentially
useful physical properties such as semiconducting behavior, non-linear optical
activity, glass formation, and reversible phase-change crystal to glass
transitions. The project will explore (a) lithium polythiophosphate and poly-
selenophosphate fluxes to discover new alkali metal-free phases and also
lithium-containing phases; (b) the synthesis of low valent selenophosphates and
tellurophosphates (i.e. compounds with phosphorous atoms in a low valent state);
(c) alkali metal polythioarsenate and polyselenoarsenate fluxes to further
develop this chemistry and discover new materials; (d) investigation and study
of the properties of glass forming systems occurring in certain chalcogenide
stoichiometries.. These are called phase-change materials and are relevant in
non-volatile data storage and computer memory applications. The results obtained
from this research will enhance our understanding of chalcogenide phase
stability, structure, bonding and properties. This project will educate and
expose students in a worthwhile intellectual discourse. The students working on
the project will receive outstanding training in synthetic solid state chemistry
and materials research. They will acquire a direct awareness of the relevance of
their materials to science and technology. The proposed activity will strive to
furnish a meaningful, coherent research and education program for students so
they, as future independent scientists, are able to synthesize, handle and
manipulate novel classes of solid-state materials. Relatively few laboratories
in the US provide this type of synthesis training. Undergraduate students also
participate in this type of research, which has a lasting impact on their
college laboratory experience and future career choices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New materials
are at the core of many advanced technologies and products. This project seeks
to discover new materials using novel synthesis techniques and to train students
in the discourse of this type of research. The materials belong to the broader
class of semiconductors and are expected to possess potentially useful physical
properties and economic value. These include controllable electrical
conductivity, photoactivity, glass forming properties and phase-change
properties. In this project will investigate new phase-change materials which
are relevant in non-volatile data storage and computer memory applications and
in the sensing of chemicals in the environment. The methodology developed and
the insights gained during this work, about the formation, chemistry and
properties of unusual solids, could enable or facilitate useful technologies and
thus could make an important contribution to science and could have a
significant impact in a number of technologies and by extension on the US
economy. Graduates and undergraduate students participate in this type of
research, which is expected to have a lasting impact on their college laboratory
experience and future career choices. The results of this research will be open
to the public and will undergo peer-review before being published. The broad
dissemination of scientific results and knowledge through the communications
media, the web and journal publications will help enhance the public's awareness
in the new knowledge being generated as well as its scientific understanding and
appreciation of science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;