* 0801745
* Stability and dynamics of shock, detonation, and boundary layers
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Kevin Zumbrun, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 862,795.00

The principal investigator proposes to study a variety of problems in
stability&lt;br/&gt;and behavior of shock and boundary layer type solutions of
the equations of compressible gas dynamics, with an emphasis on global (i.e.,
amplitude-independent) analysis; new functional-analytic tools suitable for
treatment of time-periodic, discrete, and or kinetic waves; and practical
numerical testing of stability and bifurcation, especially for the large systems
resulting from inclusion of viscous heat- and magnetic- or electromagnetic-
inductive, phase-transitional, and reactive effects, or by Fourier
transform/truncation in transverse modes of genuinely multidimensional solutions
such as nonplanar (i.e., varying in transverse, or nonaxial, coordinates) flow
in a cylindrical duct. The latter is expected to provide quantitative
information of interest to physical practitioners in shock and detonation
theory. A larger goal is to move beyond simple stability analysis to the study
of nontrivial dynamics including bifurcation, interaction, and behavior of
complex flows. The project involves interesting and nonstandard issues in
singular perturbation theory, dynamical systems and bifurcation, spectral theory
of linear operators, and nonlinear partial differential equations, and should
result in the development of new mathematical tools of general application. The
plan of attack centers around Evans function and related spectral techniques
developed recently by the investigator and various
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stability of regular flow patterns is an
old and central topic in fluid, gas, and plasma dynamics, deciding which
(stable) patterns will typically be observed, and which unstable) are only
mathematical and not physically observable solutions. The transition from
stability to instability is of particular importance, since it usually signals
the appearance of alternative, more complicated flow patterns close to the
original (now unstable) one- this is a way to understand complicated flows by
the study of simpler and better-understood ones. Our goal is to move existing
theory from the qualitative to the quantitative regime, obtaining new
information of use to practitioners at the same time that we advance the
mathematical theory. The planned activities expected to strengthen and extend
existing networks of cooperation across field, and to aid in training of
graduate and postdoctoral students. The ultimate aim of these investigations, of
quantitative predictions of transition to instability, would, if achieved, be of
direct and practical use at the level of engineering, in chemical,
manufacturing, and other processes.