* 0801712
* Detector Optimization for SuperCDMS and Other Experiments.
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Betty Young, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 04/30/2012
* USD 160,109.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER: 0801712&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Santa Clara
University&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: PHY - PARTICLE
ASTROPHYSICS&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Young, Betty
A.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Detector Optimization for SuperCDMS and Other
Experiments.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations of galaxies,
superclusters, distant supernovae and the cosmic microwave background radiation
tell us that ~85% of the matter in the universe is not made of ordinary
particles, but exists in some dark form. Deciphering the nature of this dark
matter is of fundamental importance to cosmology, astrophysics, and high-energy
particle physics. A leading hypothesis is that it is comprised of Weakly
Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPs) that were produced moments after the Big
Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then their presence in our Milky Way may be
detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei in a terrestrial detector. The
Cryogenic Dark Matter Search (CDMS) Collaboration has pioneered the use of low-
temperature phonon-mediated detectors to detect the rare scattering of WIMPs on
nuclei and distinguish them from backgrounds. With this powerful technology,
operating deep underground in the Soudan mine in Minnesota, they have a world-
leading effort with a projected sensitivity reach for 100 GeV/c2 WIMPs in CDMSII
of a factor of eight beyond their best published limit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal from Santa Clara University requests base-
program support which will allow for (a) the completion of the CDMSII
experiment, which is fully constructed and acquiring science data at the Soudan
Mine, (b) the testing and underground operation in the CDMSII infrastructure at
Soudan of two new ?SuperTowers,? each comprised of six next-generation
detectors, and (c) a modest effort of long-range R&amp;D to develop and test new
hardware and detectors for possible follow-up experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concerning Broader Impacts, the technical development will
push the envelope of phonon-mediated detectors which have increasing
applications. In addition, the SuperCDMS collaboration will continue its support
of the public outreach program at Soudan, which hosts thousands of visitors each
year for tours of the mine and laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;