* 0801511
* Tools for assessment of transmission-constrained market power in electricity markets
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Ross Baldick, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 07/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop better understanding of market
power in electricity markets when there are tight supply conditions and when
transmission limits bind. The approach involves the combination of fundamental
economics principles with a new sensitivity analysis of the results of
electricity market clearing to assess the incentives for a market participant to
mark-up their prices in an electricity market. This approach directly addresses
the determinants of market power and avoids ad hoc indices of market
power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this approach stems from
two factors. The first is that market power continues to be a problematic issue
in restructured electricity markets, so that understanding and analyzing market
power is an important topic. The second is that the approach begins with basic
economics principles and combines them rigorously with analysis of the clearing
of electricity markets to establish an index of market power. This strongly
contrasts with existing ad hoc approaches to assessment of market power in the
presence of transmission constraints. Such approaches utilize indices, such as
the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) that, at best, have only an indirect
relationship with market power in the presence of transmission
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project includes
the integration of results into an existing graduate class on market that is
taught at The University of Texas at Austin. Moreover, understanding and
quantifying the structural drivers of market power in electricity markets
enables a better approach to mitigating market power by market power monitors
and regulatory agencies. Given that market power remains pervasive in
electricity markets, it is extremely important to correctly identify and
diagnose market power in electricity markets. &lt;br/&gt;