* 0801129
* Operator Algebras and Noncommutative Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2013
* Ping Xu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2013
* USD 175,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Xu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves studying
problems in noncommutative geometry using tools&lt;br/&gt;from operator
algebras, in particular groupoid C*-algebras. Xu proposes to&lt;br/&gt;continue
the study of twisted K-theory over differentiable stacks using&lt;br/&gt;KK-
theory of C*-algebras, based on the theory developed by Tu,&lt;br/&gt;Laurent,
and himself. The problems include studying the periodic
cyclic&lt;br/&gt;homology of convolution algebras of proper Lie groupoids,
investigating the&lt;br/&gt;relation between the twisted K0-group and the
Grothendieck group of twisted&lt;br/&gt;vector bundles over groupoids, studying
the Chern-Connes character map for&lt;br/&gt;twisted K-theory, and studying the
ring structure on global twisted&lt;br/&gt;cohomology. The project also aims to
study C*-algebras associated to&lt;br/&gt;non-abelian gerbes and
2-groupoids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea of noncommutative geometry in the
sense of Connes is to study geometry via algebras of functions on
?noncommutative manifolds.? On such a ?noncommutative manifold,? the relevant
objects are no longer points in a space, but rather an associative algebra,
which may not be commutative. Nevertheless, many notions in classical
(commutative) geometry including vector bundles, connections, K-theory,
(co-)homology, elliptic pseudo-differential operators, Chern characters, and
measures can be generalized to noncommutative settings arising naturally from
geometric situations. In string theory, space-time is modeled by a new kind of
mathematical structure called gerbes. A very useful way to think of the stringy
space-time is to consider it as a ?noncommutative space? in the sense of Connes.
Such a noncommutative space can be constructed using the convolution algebra of
a certain groupoid. The project, which is centered on the application of
noncommutative geometry and operator algebras, is to investigate questions
motivated from mathematical physics by a combination of ideas from algebraic and
differential geometry, noncommutative geometry, operator algebras, and KK-
theory, and thus the project promotes further interaction between these fields.