* 0801102
* YIA-PGR: Molecular Evolutionary Genetics of Crop and Weed Responses to Crowding
* BIO,IOS
* 08/27/2007,01/31/2009
* Cynthia Weinig, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 01/31/2009
* USD 445,027.00

PI: Cynthia Weinig (University of Wyoming) CoPI: Julin Maloof (University of
California-Davis)

Domestication of wild species is characterized by changes in diverse traits,
including plant architecture, fruit and seed morphology, fruit dispersal, and
the timing of developmental events. These changes result from human selection to
increase yield. Changes in environmental responses are also important in this
regard. For instance, higher planting densities could increase yield in many
crop species, but densities are limited by developmental responses to crowding,
in which time to flowering decreases and relative allocation to structural
organs increases at the cost of agronomically desirable traits such as leaf,
root, and fruit production. Regardless of the trait selected in a crop species,
agricultural weeds exhibit dramatic compensatory evolution that increases weed
fitness at the cost of crop productivity.

Comparative genetic approaches and genomic tools provide a means to investigate
the genetic basis of phenotypic responses to crowding. The research program
focuses on crowding responses in Brassica rapa. In addition to domesticated
varieties, naturalized populations occur in both agricultural fields and
disturbed, weedy sites. Thus, this system is appropriate for investigating both
the loci targeted during domestication and those underlying adaptation of weed
species to agricultural settings. The research takes advantage of available
genomic tools to investigate the genetic basis of competitive responses in
agricultural and natural settings. Specific goals include 1) identifying the
genetic determinants (known as quantitative trait loci or QTL) for fitness and
traits affecting competitive ability in field settings, 2) using controlled
light environments to identify QTL important for response to specific
environmental cues, 3) quantifying evolutionary responses (measured as allele
frequency changes) at QTL determining fitness and phenotypic responses to
competition in agricultural and disturbed sites, and 4) cloning QTL for traits
important to competitive ability with the aim of determining both genetic
targets for crop improvement and loci underlying evolutionary change in
agricultural weeds.

The experimental research will not only apply current genomic tools to
evolutionary studies but also develop and distribute additional genetic
resources for dissemination to other researchers. The results will contribute
significantly to both crop improvement and an understanding of weed evolution
that may aid in management. Finally, the collaborative nature of this work will
provide unique, cross-disciplinary training for undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdoctoral researchers in the application of genomic tools to
evolutionary genetics and the study of both crop species and agricultural weeds.