* 0801075
* Combinatorics in Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Federico Ardila, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,998.00

The PI will explore three related projects in tropical geometry, the Schubert
calculus, and convexity, through a combinatorial study of matroids, convex
geometries, and similar structures. Tropical linear spaces, perhaps the simplest
and most fundamental tropical varieties, have a very interesting discrete
structure that is far from understood. The first project is the combinatorial
study of these and other related objects such as tropical hyperplane
arrangements and oriented matroids. The second project is the study of the
Littlewood-Richardson numbers of the flag variety, driven by the open questions
of computing them combinatorially, and determining when they vanish. The third
project explores convex geometries and their role in three contexts: metric
spaces of non-positive curvature, tropical geometry, and random processes
involving pruning procedures.

This proposal is driven by the philosophy that many objects, relationships, and
procedures in pure and applied mathematics are best understood by studying the
rich discrete structures underlying them. The PI will apply this philosophy to
various geometric and combinatorial questions which are firmly rooted in pure
mathematics, and which are often motivated by and used in concrete applications
in optimization and phylogenetics. This research program is the academic
backbone of the San Francisco State University-Colombia Combinatorics
Initiative, an ongoing teaching and research collaboration between students in
these two locations, many of whom are members of underrepresented groups in
mathematics. Through joint courses and research projects, students participate
in their first international academic experience, while making significant
scientific contributions.