* 0801830
* RUI:   Microbial Processes Facilitating Xylophagy in a Loricariid
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jay Nelson, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2013
* USD 312,378.00

This project focuses on a fascinating group of fish - armored catfish, from the
genus Panaque, which include members that are capable of surviving and obtaining
energy by eating wood. Wood eating, or xylophagy, is a rare dietary strategy and
often involves a complex intestinal tract microbial community. A major goal of
this project is to identify the microbial communities present in the
gastrointestinal (GI) tract of the wood eating Panaque nigrolineatus and examine
the mechanisms used for cellulose decomposition and nitrogen fixation that
enable this xylophagous lifestyle. A long-term dietary experiment will be
performed to compare the microbial communities in fish fed an herbaceous diet to
those fed a wood-only diet. DNA sequencing and other molecular methods will
allow the description of microbial communities in fish subjected to different
dietary regimes and furthermore, compare microbial communities in different
regions of the fish GI tract, pinpointing key areas involved in cellulose
breakdown. Nitrogen fixation will also be examined by isolating genes involved
in this vital global process, and by culturing nitrogen fixing microorganisms
associated with the Panaque GI tract. Broader scientific implications of this
project include enhancing our knowledge of cellulolytic and nitrogen fixation
gene diversity and the importance of the microbial community within xylophagous
fish. Cellulose is the most abundant carbon polymer in the biosphere, yet, few
degradation pathways have been characterized. As cellulose is an important
compound in the global carbon cycle and a potential source for biomass fuel
generation, gaining a better better understanding of its degradation in the
environment is critical. Furthermore, discovery of novel pathways may have
critical implications for biofuel production and the global carbon and nitrogen
cycles. Educational impacts include the training of graduate and undergraduate
students during this research project. An outreach activity with a Baltimore
City elementary school is planned, enabling a hands-on opportunity for children
in grades 3-8 with the goal of promoting science as a career choice for these
children.