* 0801139
* Topics in Dynamical Systems:  Open Systems, Coupled Systems and Discretization
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Mark Demers, Fairfield University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2012
* USD 108,086.00

The author will undertake several projects in the area of dynamical systems and
ergodic theory. The first project concerns open systems from which orbits are
allowed to escape. The project will study various mechanisms which facilitate or
hinder escape in nonuniformly hyperbolic systems (such as billiards or Henon
maps) and quantify the relation between escape rate and positive Lyapunov
exponents. The second project investigates the behavior of dynamical systems
which are comprised of (possibly infinitely many) smaller components linked
together, with orbits or energy allowed to pass between components. When focused
on one component at a time, such systems generalize the discussion of open
systems in a natural way by allowing both entry and escape. The third project
concerns the Ulam discretization problem for hyperbolic maps. This is an
important tool used in the numerical study of dynamical systems. All three
projects involve a detailed analysis of the spectral properties of the transfer
operator associated with the corresponding system without relying on restrictive
Markovian assumptions on the dynamics.

Much research in dynamical systems has focused on closed systems in which the
dynamics are self-contained. In many modeling situations, however, it is not
possible to obtain such a global view so that it becomes necessary to study
local systems which are influenced by other unknown systems, possibly on
different scales. Such considerations motivate the study of the types of systems
considered in this project: systems in which mass or energy may enter or exit
through deterministic or random mechanisms. Many of these problems are motivated
by models from mathematical physics. For example, open billiards are used to
model atom traps. Extended and linked particle systems are used to create
mechanical models of heat conduction in solids and to investigate metastability
in molecular processes. In addition, the method of Ulam discretization provides
a practical way to approximate complex systems numerically. The research will
provide analytical tools to solve problems posed and approached formally in the
physics literature. The project will both promote and be informed by this
interdisciplinary dialogue.