* 0801407
* Magnetic Resonance Studies of Strongly Correlated Electron Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Douglas MacLaughlin, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2012
* USD 430,000.00

Technical:&lt;br/&gt;In the muon spin rotation (muSR) technique spin-polarized
muons are used as magnetic resonance probes of electronic structure and
magnetism in condensed matter. This award supports a study of magnetism and
superconductivity in highly correlated electron metals and alloys, where the
correlations between electrons dominate the behavior. The sensitivity of muSR to
atomic-scale magnetism makes this technique an ideal tool to probe local effects
of these strong electron correlations. The unique Pr-based heavy-fermion
superconductor PrOs4Sb12 and Pr(Os,Ru)4Sb12 alloys will be studied to elucidate
the mechanism for broken time reversal symmetry in the end compound. The
interplay between magnetism and superconductivity will be investigated in
(Pr,Nd)Os4Sb12 alloys. The unusual spin freezing and fluctuations recently found
in the highly frustrated antiferromagnets NiGa2S4 and Pr2Ir2O7 will be studied
in detail. Graduate students in this program will be well prepared for
research/teaching careers in both basic and applied
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;In simple metals the
electrons that conduct electrical currents do not affect each others' behavior
very much, but correlations between electrons are important and even crucial in
understanding the behavior of more complex materials, the so-called strongly-
correlated electron systems. Our research uses the muSR technique, in which a
short-lived subatomic particle, the muon, probes its local magnetic environment
on the atomic distance scale. This work will lead to better understanding of the
behavior of (1) the so-called heavy-electron metals, in which electrons act as
if they were hundreds or even thousands of times more massive than free
electrons, and (2) "frustrated" magnets, in which competing magnetic
interactions lead to new quantum phenomena. Graduate students in this program
will gain valuable insight into facility-based research at the national and
international level, and will be well prepared for research/teaching careers in
both basic and applied condensed-matter physics and materials research.