* 0801235
* Intermediate Subfactors and Planar Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2011
* Pinhas Grossman, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Clancey
* 11/30/2011
* USD 98,249.00

The project will investigate the structure of intermediate subfactors using the
planar algebra approach as well as algebraic and combinatorial methods. The
theory of subfactors was intitiated by Jones, who discovered symmetries
associated to certain inclusions of von Neumann algebras which led to powerful
new knot invariants. This geometric aspect of subfactor theory is captured in
the notion of a planar algebra, developed by Jones as a description of the
standard invariant of a subfactor, which had been axiomatized by Popa. Subfactor
theory can be thought of as a nonommutative Galois theory, and it is an open
problem to classify lattices of intermediate subfactors. The present project
will study intermediate subfactors along several distinct but related lines.
First, we will continue the classification of quadrilaterals of subfactors, on
which the PI has previously worked with Jones and with Izumi. Second, we will
analyze planar relations that reflect the presence of multiple intermediate
subfactors, following work of Bisch-Jones on the planar algebra of a single
intermediate subfactor. Third, we will study compositions of supertransitive
subfactors, following Bisch-Haagerup's study of compositions of group-type
subfactors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of operator algebras was
inspired by von Neuamnn's work on the mathematical foundations of quantum
mechanics, and has been closely linked with mathematical physics ever since.
Subfactor theory in particular has had applications to statistical mechanics and
to algebraic quantum field theory. The planar algebra approach is a new
direction to understanding the underlying symmetries. Intermediate subfactors,
which are algebras sandwiched in between two von Neumann algebras, represent
"sub-symmetries", and understanding these sub-symmetries is a fundamental
problem in subfactor theory. This project aims to apply the theory of planar
algebras to the classification of intermediate subfactors. This should lead to a
better understanding of planar algebras and the structure of von Neumann
algebras. &lt;br/&gt;