* 0801853
* Coordination of Renewable Hydro-Wind Units for Enhancing the Hydrothermal Power System Operation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Mohammad Shahidehpour, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 07/31/2011
* USD 353,408.00

Coordination of Renewable Hydro-Wind Units for &lt;br/&gt;Enhancing the
Hydrothermal Power System Operation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The restructuring of
electric power industry and concerns over energy security and global warming
have resulted in a rapid deployment of generating units that produce renewable
and emission-free energy such as wind power generating units. However, the
intermittency and volatility issues of wind energy have introduced new
challenges in managing the security of electricity infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is the objective of the research effort to develop an
integrated framework for firming of wind power generation in electric power
systems through novel hydro-wind coordination in an existing hydrothermal power
system. As a result, notoriously intermittent and volatile wind power generation
will become a dispatchable generation resource with a smaller requirement for
spinning reserves and additional transmission capacity. The framework will be
implemented and tested as part of a next-generation security-constrained
simulation software tool for analyzing the power system economics, security, and
environmental issues considering the impacts of wind power intermittency and
volatility on power system operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The coordinated hydro-wind operation will be analyzed and quantified in the
study in terms of minimizing the daily operating cost, and satisfying hourly
operating constraints, and greenhouse emission constraints. The investigation is
important since a high penetration of wind power units is being considered
worldwide for satisfying economic objectives as well as operating and
environmental constraints in electric power systems. The project team is highly
qualified to perform the study and the research and educational facilities at
IIT are adequate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The effort also applies
to other renewable energy forms with similar intermittency and volatility
natures, such as solar energy. The implementation of the research results in
practical power systems has the potential to enhance the operation of stressed
power systems, to reduce the chance of blackouts, to lower the emission of
greenhouse gases, and to improve the nation's energy security and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational activities are integrated with
research activities enhanced at both undergraduate and graduate levels with
broad participation of underrepresented student groups. Minority students are
currently engaged and will be further involved in wind energy research.
Undergraduate students will participate in the research activities through the
designated inter-professional project courses at the home institution. It is
also planed to increase public awareness and facilitate the understanding of the
complexity of power systems operation among ratepayers, regulators, politicians,
utility executives, and market participants.