* 0801119
* Computational Models to Study Auditory Processing and Learning Disorders in Children
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Aditya Mathur, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/2009
* USD 103,000.00

This work, modeling auditory processing in children with learning disabilities
and its corresponding treatments, builds, validates, and experiments with
computational models the processing of audio signals in the auditory nervous
system of the human brain. The following tasks will be completed during this
work: . Modeling and validation of a "single neuronal channel (SNC)" along the
pathway from the auditory nerve fiber all the way to the auditory cortex; .
Expansion of the SNC to include possibly all neurons along the auditory pathway
and validation of the resulting highly parallel model, with feedback along the
pathway, on a high performance computer; . Modeling of diseases (disorders) of
the auditory pathway as faults in the neuronal circuitry in the computational
model and studying their impact on signal processing along the pathway; and .
Determining the correlation of the neuronal activity of the "computationally
diseased" model with the human brainstem response observed through
experimentation with learning-impaired children. With a long-term goal for
capturing into a computational model the knowledge related to the acoustic
processing streams acquired by speech and hearing scientists through experiments
with the human auditory system, the project aims to accomplish the following
short-term goals: . Understanding what portions of the auditory processing ought
to be included in the model; . Building a neural network model in consultation
with researchers in speech and hearing sciences; and . Validating the model by
running computer simulations against experimentally observed data. Such a model
was expected to predict brainstem responses to audio signals that come in via
the human ear and partition into its finer spectral components in the cochlea
from where the impulses travel via the auditory nerve and several specialized
nuclei in the brainstem to the auditory cortex. The fact that the audio signals
split into two distinct "what" and "where" streams in the auditory cortex or en-
route to it motivates the research. Although many computational models of the
auditory system exist, the novelty of the proposed research lies in . Including
the ventral and dorsal streams in the computational model and . Validating the
model against auditory brainstem responses observed in children with learning
disorders. Research into the understanding of the different auditory pathways
has wide ranging implication in the treatment of various speech and
communications disorders such as language impairment in children.

Broader Impacts: Validated computational models of the auditory cortex carry the
potential for performing computer-based experiments and trials to understand the
impact of proposed treatments for such disorders. Such experiments can be fast,
relatively inexpensive, and serve as a precursor to conduct experiments
involving humans and animals. Additionally, students also gain expertise in the
area. The research expands the discipline of neuron-computational modeling and
should contribute in understanding the causes of learning disabilities in
children, thus enabling development of the corresponding treatment. However, it
is unclear as to what type of training will be needed for such computational
model to mimic the experimentally observed behaviors and then to suggest
behaviors that can be verified experimentally. The computational model will be
used to answer "what if" questions.