* 0801627
* IGERT: ConvEne--Conversion of Energy Through Molecular Platforms
* EHR,DGE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Fred Wudl, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Boone
* 07/31/2014
* USD 3,198,873.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
a program at the University of California, Santa Barbara, entitled Conversion of
Energy Through Molecular Platforms. In this program, an interdisciplinary
approach to graduate education is aimed at providing a new generation of
chemical scientists and engineers with the technical skills, environmental
awareness, business expertise, and teamwork approaches that will be required to
address fundamental and applied issues in the generation and conversion of
energy in efficient and environmentally-sustainable ways. The program is founded
on the recognition that graduate students of Materials Chemistry and Engineering
are conventionally trained to prepare and employ specific classes of functional
materials to address particular technological needs. For a problem as broad and
as urgent as global energy needs, these traditional modes of training do not
suffice. In our new interdisciplinary model of education, the focus is on the
better husbanding of fossil fuel resources, and on the inexpensive and large-
scale conversion of solar energy to electricity. Graduate students with diverse
backgrounds, drawn from a broad pool from across the country, are directed to
address issues in energy conversion without being confined to any single
material or technology, while learning to appreciate the economic and
environmental issues that impact the implementation of technology. A mark of the
program is a solid foundation in the entrepreneurial and communication skills
needed to influence fundamental research directions, industrial advances, and
national priorities in a significant and lasting manner. IGERT is an NSF-wide
program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and
engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen
discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the
career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural
change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.