* 0801891
* Integrated Design Methodologies for High Performance Electric Drives
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Leila Parsa, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 07/31/2012
* USD 271,215.00

The objective of the project is to investigate integrated design methodologies
and introduce new high efficiency, high torque electromechanical energy
converters with wider speed ranges that are capable to live and operate under
extreme conditions such as winding faults. The approach is 1) to consider the
contribution of different orders of space harmonics originating from the
geometry and time harmonics of the excitation in order to design efficient
electric machines. The machine will be decomposed into several child machines
and modeled in multi-space, multiple frame of references 2) to combine the
torque-speed profiles of electric machines through their reconfiguration and
increase the speed range 3) to develop control strategies for varying the
excitation patterns and modifying the magnetic field in the machine and
therefore accommodate for the faulty condition.

Intellectual merit: This project will facilitate a move away from the standard
off-the-shelf electric machines to new high performance, fault tolerant ones. An
analytical approach is introduced for the optimal design of high performance
electric machines. The new systems are analyzed and modeled accordingly. Pulse
Width Modulation strategies for realizing the excitation patterns are developed.
Broader impact: Employing more efficient electric motors will significantly
decrease the energy consumption. The existence of high performance electric
drives can be of great interest for renewable energy systems, hybrid electric
vehicles, aerospace and ship propulsion applications. In order to make the
discipline more interesting the existing undergraduate courses will be
restructured to include research components and a new graduate course will be
developed.

