* 0801809
* Collaborative Research: MIP: Pressure Influences on Microbial Life in the Puerto Rico Trench
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2015
* Wilford Schmidt, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2015
* USD 128,586.00

Pressure is a physical parameter which influences the evolution and distribution
of microbial life. Far from Earth?s surface, deep ocean trenches represent the
upper boundaries of pressure in the biosphere. This is where scientists can
study high pressure adaptations in their most extreme forms. No studies have yet
characterized the diversity of microbial life in trenches. In order to do this,
Doug Bartlett from UC San Diego and Wilford Schmidt from Univ. Puerto Rico-
Mayaguez, will be using an untethered, free-falling, pressured-hardened device
to sample bacterial and archaeal life in the deepest trench in the Atlantic
Ocean, the Puerto Rico Trench (PRT), at a depth of 8.4 km (5.2 mi). They will
profile the ambient environment in which these prokaryotes live (pressure,
temperature, salinity, and current velocity). They will also chemically analyze
the trench seawater and carry out total microbial cell counts and probe-based
counts of particular microbial groups, perform DNA extractions and isolate and
culture deep-dwelling microorganisms. It is these last two goals that are at the
heart of the project. They will use the DNA to characterize the trench microbial
community via indicator genes and community fingerprint techniques. Cultivation
of these high pressuring loving microbes (called ?piezophiles?) is difficult
since the culture vessels are under very high pressure and the samples are
difficult to manipulate. The Bartlett laboratory has the expertise to culture
piezophiles and so a major effort will be made to isolate pure cultures of some
of the major microbial groups observed in the PRT, including members of the
class ?Alphaproteobacteria?, order Flavobacteriales, order Planctomycetales, and
subclass marine group I Crenarchaeota. They will also characterize the
physiology and taxonomy of particular isolates. In the long term, these
investigators are interested in studying the effect of decompression or
pressurization on deep-trench or surface-water microbial assemblages because
they are interested in understanding the unique abilities of piezophiles to
survive and grow under very high pressures. Bartlett and Schmidt will develop
outreach programs for pre-college and university students, in Puerto Rico and in
southern California, to teach them about this research. Their efforts will
include the development of a marine microbiology laboratory class. They will
also create highlights from their research for the Birch Aquarium's Deep Ocean
Exhibit.