* 0801720
* IGERT: Marine Ecosystem Sustainability in the Arctic and Subarctic (MESAS)
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2015
* Gordon Kruse, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Tankersley
* 07/31/2015
* USD 3,109,742.00

The Marine Ecosystem Sustainability in the Arctic and Subarctic (MESAS) Program
at the University of Alaska Fairbanks is an Integrative Graduate Education and
Research Traineeship program (IGERT) that will educate future leaders in
ecosystem-based management and sustainable use of living marine resources. This
interdisciplinary graduate program will use case studies, courses, and seminars
to teach the fundamental principles and analytical tools of fisheries science,
oceanography, ecology, economics, management, marine policy, and anthropology.
Students will collaborate on research that transcends traditional disciplinary
boundaries; they will learn to address the unique challenges of ecosystem-based
management and to understand its implications for society. The program will
challenge students to develop innovative approaches to pressing real-world
problems. Students will gain career-developing experience through research,
teaching, and internships. MESAS will actively recruit women and minorities,
especially Alaska Native students, and provide graduate students with
opportunities to mentor Alaska Native and rural Alaskan undergraduates.
Ecosystem-based public management of marine resources, now being required under
law and regulation, will have broad societal effects nationwide. Alaska is an
ideal setting for training the experts needed to implement ecosystem-based
management successfully in the modern world. Alaska?s living marine resources,
especially its fisheries, are largely healthy but also include examples of
species that have dangerously diminished or have gone extinct within recent
history. Alaska?s fishery harvests range from small-scale subsistence and
traditional fisheries to the largest and most technologically advanced
sustainable fisheries in the world. MESAS graduates will be well-prepared to
develop ecosystem-based solutions to critical research and stewardship problems
arising from the sustained use of living marine resources, skills that will be
critically needed in the coming years. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to
meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.