* 0801204
* Collaborative Research: Cluster Algebras, Canonical Bases and Nets on Surfaces of Higher Genus
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Michael Gekhtman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2011
* USD 119,973.00

This project explores links between classical combinatorics, modern theory of
Teichmueller spaces, real algebraic geometry and total positivity, and the
rapidly developing theory of cluster algebras. In particlular, PIs utilize the
link between decorated Teichmueller spaces and the algebra of geodesics on the
one hand and the theory of cluster algebras on the other hand to investigate the
structure of the dual canonical basis of a cluster algebra. Furthermore, they
use cluster algebra point of view to study directed nets on surfaces and
describe compatible Poisson-Lie structures for nets and solutions of
corresponding inverse problems and to study associated integrable hierarchies.
The latter will be applied to investigate new relations between double Hurwitz
numbers of coverings of the sphere by higher genus curves and, on the other
hand, to analyze a new two- and multi-matrix models and associated biorthogonal
polynomials and apply them to problems of enumeration of bicolored embedded
graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Space discretization using networks on surfaces is
an important in the theory of random processes, in mathematical physics,
including 2D gravity, the theory of electric potential and especially theory of
electrical networks and in other fields.&lt;br/&gt;Combinatorial properties of
surface networks capture crucial features of complex mathematical and physical
structures.&lt;br/&gt;Recently it was observed that surface networks also
exhibit many features that are typical for cluster algebra
structures.&lt;br/&gt;Introduced only a few years ago by Fomin and Zelevinsky,
the cluster algebra formalism is proved to be widely applicable in investigation
of algebraic and geometric objects with symmetries often associated with
important physical systems. Interplay between the two concepts will be
instrumental in the study of combinatorial quantities and geometric phenomena of
physical relevance and classical and quantum exactly solvable
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;