* 0801671
* Collaborative Research: High-Efficiency Gearless Power Conversion Systems With Silent Permanent-Magnet Machines
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Ernest Mendrela, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 08/31/2011
* USD 186,386.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to design, build, and investigate
novel high-efficiency gearless electromechanical power conversion systems
employing power electronic converters and silent permanent-magnet, alternating-
current, electric machines with a high number of magnetic poles. Two such
systems, that is, a highly automated wheelchair and a small wind turbine system
will be focused on. Four innovative machine designs will be studied. Abatement
of the emitted acoustic and electromagnetic noise will be endeavored.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the project will consist in development of new structures, control strategies,
and electromagnetic models of the investigated machines and power conversion
systems. It will allow an insightful analysis of the electromagnetic fields and
dynamic phenomena in complex assemblies of mechanical, electrical, magnetic, and
electronic components. The direct outcome will be a novel gearless drive for
wheelchairs and a novel gearless wind-turbine system for residential renewable-
energy sources. The systems will have high efficiency, low speed and high
torque, minimal torque ripple, low cost and maintenance requirements, high
reliability, quiet operation, and user-friendliness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Enhancement of the knowledge of
modeling, design, and control of novel types of electric machines, and
enrichment of the technological base for new vehicular drives and renewable-
energy systems, are the broader impacts of the project. The project will
generate at least two PhD dissertations. Efforts will be made to recruit
research assistants from underrepresented groups. Research results will be
disseminated through publications and presentations, and the experimental setups
developed will be utilized in exercises and demonstrations for university and
high-school students.