* 0801525
* IGERT: Interdisciplinary Quantum Information Science and Engineering: a Graduate Research and Training Program
* EHR,DGE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2015
* Jeffrey Shapiro, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Tankersley
* 06/30/2015
* USD 3,000,000.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
the development of an interdisciplinary graduate program in quantum information
science and engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). The
field of quantum information lies at the intersection of science and
engineering, addressing the behavior of computers and communication systems at
the most microscopic scales, where quantum mechanics becomes important. It is a
rapidly developing field, incorporating elements of physics, mathematics,
computer science, chemistry, and engineering. The MIT program will develop a
unified, multidisciplinary curriculum in quantum information that will include
laboratory and teaching experiences, as well as summer internships with
international consortium partners from academia, industry, and government.
Student theses will emphasize the interplay between theory and experiment, and
between science and engineering. Each year, the program will offer a week-long
quantum information summer school for college seniors, to encourage women and
underrepresented minorities to enter the field. Through cohort development
activities, a required seminar on research ethics, and interactions with
consortium partners, students will learn to become responsible and responsive
members of the international scientific and engineering community. Society is
increasingly demanding more and better information devices and systems, and
continued United States leadership in these application areas depends on
cultivating our best young minds in new ways. Breakthrough technologies ? for
secure communications, precision measurements, and supercomputers ? will surely
depend on quantum-mechanical behaviors. The MIT program will prepare students to
meet these demands. By transcending traditional disciplinary boundaries and by
creating innovative educational techniques, its graduates will bring much-needed
quantum expertise to academia, to government, and to the industries that will
develop and produce quantum technologies. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended
to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.

