* 0801829
* Integrated Nanosystem Combining Engineered Nanopore Devices and Hierarchical Model-Based Diagnosis Algorithms for Ultra-Rapid Biomolecule Analysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Christopher Summers, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 05/31/2012
* USD 450,286.00

&lt;br/&gt;Objective:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to create a
nanoscale system that achieves ultra-rapid, high-resolution analysis of
biomolecules such as nucleic acids and proteins. The approach is based on a
combination of nanopore device fabrication, predictive physics-based diagnostic
algorithms to control biomolecule transport in the device, and integration of
these subsystems to demonstrate high-speed biomolecule analysis with much higher
resolution than currently possible.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This work addresses the challenge of developing nucleic acid
and protein sequencing platforms that achieve orders-of-magnitude savings in
time and cost. This is essential to transform current understanding of the
genetic basis of disease and thereby revolutionize many areas of medicine and
biotechnology. This work takes an integrated approach to the critical issues of
device fabrication and high-performance operation. It combines a wafer-scale
process (based on advanced electron-beam and atomic layer deposition techniques)
to fabricate the first reproducible arrays of engineered nanopore devices, with
a novel computational diagnosis platform that couples hierarchically detailed
simulation engines and mathematical algorithms to adaptively refine the nanopore
device performance for ?single-nucleotide? resolution.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;This program will develop interdisciplinary
and diverse science and technology manpower by training three graduate and nine
undergraduate students across five engineering and science disciplines, enhanced
by collaborations with national laboratories. Three of the undergraduate
trainees will be recruited from underrepresented minorities by active
collaboration with a campus program for creating research opportunities for
underrepresented minorities. The project will develop hands-on modules for
undergraduate, graduate, and continuing education courses in circuit diagnosis,
nanofabrication, and nanosystems.&lt;br/&gt;