* 0801490
* IGERT: Polar Environmental Change
* EHR,DGE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2015
* Darren Ranco, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Tankersley
* 07/31/2015
* USD 2,924,666.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
the development of an interdisciplinary graduate program in polar sciences and
engineering by merging expertise and facilities from Dartmouth College with the
U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory and institutions in
Greenland. The purpose of this program is to train doctoral students to have an
interdisciplinary view of polar systems and to understand the social and ethical
implications of their research. Broader impacts include training and research
focused on the components of polar systems that respond to and contribute to
rapid environmental change, including the cryosphere (glacial ice, snow, and sea
ice systems) and the biogeochemical linkages between plants, soils, and animals.
The core curriculum includes an Introduction to Polar Systems and a second
course on Sustainability Science, Policy and Ethics that will train students to
frame research questions that will have relevance to Arctic residents and policy
by using perspectives from western science and traditional ecological knowledge.
Depending on their research interests, students will be trained during the
Greenland Field Seminar in either terrestrial ecosystem or cryosphere dynamics,
followed by instruction in the human dimensions of Arctic change in Nuuk, the
site of the University of Greenland and the Inuit Circumpolar Council. IGERT
students will receive continuing interdisciplinary training through a seminar
series and other related events on polar science and policy organized with the
Dickey Center Institute of Arctic Studies, a workshop on preparing grant
proposals, an annual program evaluation and research symposium, cross-IGERT
activities, and opportunities for specialized training at other institutions or
field sites. A special effort will be made to engage with Native American
students. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of
educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary
background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries.