* 0802288
* Computational Studies of Nonequilibrium processes in Electrochemical Materials Science
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Per Arne Rikvold, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 285,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education in computational and theoretical studies of nonequilibrium phenomena
in electrochemical materials science. These studies are concerned with modeling
of specific experimental systems, with investigation of fundamental
nonequilibrium phenomena of importance to such systems, and with further
development of computational and theoretical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
particular experimental phenomena, which will be investigated in collaboration
with experimental groups, are island growth and dissolution in electrochemical
pulsed-potential studies of single-crystal gold surfaces, and verification of a
new method to study the dynamics of electrode surfaces that was suggested by the
PI's computer simulations. Particular nonequilibrium phenomena that are
investigated include the influence of lateral diffusion during electrochemical
metal deposition and in heterogeneous catalytic reactions, and hysteresis in
systems that are driven far from equilibrium by an oscillating
force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main method that will be used in the proposed
research is large-scale computer simulation of model systems. Both continuous
and discrete models will be used, and the computational methods will include
kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulations and numerical solution of stochastic
differential equations, both with model parameters obtained from quantum-
mechanical density-functional-theory calculations. The simulation data will be
analyzed using several theoretical methods, including finite-size scaling
theory, theory of stochastic processes, and statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research has broader impact beyond the particular scientific investigations
undertaken and contributes broadly to understanding issues of nonequilibrium
processes and is relevant to technological development and has educational
benefits. Since all time-dependent phenomena in nature, as well as in
technology, are out of equilibrium by definition, nonequilibrium statistical
mechanics is an essential research area. This research adds to our fundamental
understanding of nonequilibrium processes. More specifically, this research
improves understanding of nonequilibrium processes at electrode-electrolyte
interfaces, and thereby contributes to the future development of new,
electrochemistry-based manufacturing processes for advanced nanomaterials. Such
fundamental knowledge and simulation algorithms developed through the research
are applicable in many scientific and technological fields, including materials
science, chemistry, biology, and even to the design and analysis of
communications networks and power grids. This computationally intensive research
is ideal for involving apprentices at all levels in the discovery process. It
will contribute to education at all levels while including women and minorities
by involving undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, who
will mentor K-12 students. The results of the research will be communicated
through articles in a wide spectrum of professional journals, through talks at
scientific meetings, and through presentations for the general public, as well
as through the World Wide Web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education on the growth of materials and structures of atoms on
the scale of nanometers, about one ten-millionth of an inch, by electrochemical
methods. During the last two decades experimental techniques have become
available that enable electrochemical methods to manufacture high-tech materials
that derive their functionality from structure on the nanometer scale. These
methods are rapidly becoming cost-effective alternatives to traditional methods.
These impressive experimental developments are matched by spectacular progress
in computer technology and computational methods. The PI will use computer
simulation methods to study how nanoscale structures grow on the surface of
electrode materials immersed in a chemical solution with an electric current
flowing through the electrodes. The study of growth phenomena like these
advances the understanding of phenomena that are intrinsically out of
equilibrium, an area of intense interest in modern statistical physics. Since
all time-dependent phenomena in nature, as well as in technology, are out of
equilibrium by definition, nonequilibrium statistical mechanics is an essential
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This computationally intensive research is ideal
for involving apprentices at all levels in the discovery process. It will
contribute to education at all levels while including women and minorities by
involving undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, who will
mentor K-12 students. The results of the research will be communicated through
articles in a wide spectrum of professional journals, through talks at
scientific meetings, and through presentations for the general public, as well
as through the World Wide Web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;