* 0802424
* Tunnel Number 1 Knots
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Darryl McCullough, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2011
* USD 159,747.00

The main focus of the work is in the area of knot theory, specifically the class
of tunnel number 1 knots, or equivalently the knots whose exteriors admit
genus-2 Heegaard splittings. These include many of the common types of knots,
such as 2-bridge knots, torus knots, and genus-1 1-bridge knots. The work
already underway gives a new theoretical description of this class, by relating
it to combinatorial constructions originating in group theory and the theory of
mapping class groups of handlebodies. This description yields a unique procedure
to construct any knot tunnel, and even a numerical parameterization of all the
tunnels of all tunnel number 1 knots. It provides the foundation for a new level
of investigation in this area, with many directions being pursued in ongoing
research. Additional work with several other investigators will examine
questions about minimal triangulations of 3-manifolds, and at least in its
initial stages will develop software to examine large collections of
examples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of its connections with numerous other
mathematical areas, and its relevance to the 3-dimensional space in which we
live, 3-dimensional topology has been a vigorous area of research for many
decades. The study of knots is one of its central themes, and reflects this rich
diversity of viewpoints. The work underway develops new connections between
tunnel number 1 knots and certain disk complexes and curve complexes, which are
objects of much recent interest in low-dimensional topology and Teichmuller
theory. As basic research in a pure theoretical discipline, the work does not
envision immediate applications to science or technology. Nonetheless, there are
numerous ways in which the PI's ongoing research program has a broader impact in
education and student research. The work to date and its planned continuations
involve heavy participation by the PI's doctoral students. The PI served for
seven years as director of his department's graduate program, in particular
stressing the recruitment of women and minorities into graduate-level
mathematics. The PI also directs undergraduate research students, and has long
been active in regional activities of the Mathematical Association of America,
including service as Section Governor.