* 0802974
* RUI: CSUMS: Research in Scientific Computing in Undergraduate Education (RESCUE)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Steven Leon, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 788,985.00

Gottlieb&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0802974&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The overall goal of this
project is to prepare undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;mathematics students for, and
engage them in, a sustained&lt;br/&gt;research experience in computational
mathematics. The PI and her&lt;br/&gt;colleagues at the University of
Massachusetts Dartmouth integrate&lt;br/&gt;research in scientific computing
into the undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;curriculum by designing research-based courses
from the Freshman&lt;br/&gt;level upwards, and engaging upper-level students in
a sustained&lt;br/&gt;and significant research experience. The project creates
an&lt;br/&gt;integrated undergraduate research experience by engaging
students&lt;br/&gt;in research from the introductory level through
graduation,&lt;br/&gt;completely embedding research into the undergraduate
curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;The essence of this approach is to mentor students into
genuine&lt;br/&gt;research problems and research methods in computational
science,&lt;br/&gt;beginning with senior high school students for
recruitment&lt;br/&gt;purposes, freshman and sophomore students for orientation
to&lt;br/&gt;research in computational science through carefully
selected&lt;br/&gt;research topics, and culminating in major senior
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;research projects where an expected outcome is
professional&lt;br/&gt;presentation at a SIAM, AMS or MAA meeting, and
preparation of a&lt;br/&gt;publishable research paper. An integral part of this
project&lt;br/&gt;involves the identification, training, and support of
students&lt;br/&gt;from groups not normally well-represented in
scientific&lt;br/&gt;computing, to encourage and support diversity in this
field. &lt;br/&gt;This project engages students in an integrated program that
leads&lt;br/&gt;them from the use of computational tools in course work to
the&lt;br/&gt;development and use of computational tools in research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;It serves as a model for a curriculum that stimulates
research&lt;br/&gt;activity in computational science as an integral part of
a&lt;br/&gt;mathematics degree program, from the freshman year onwards.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The overriding goal of this project is to include
and&lt;br/&gt;integrate research activities into the undergraduate
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;curriculum. This program revolutionizes the teaching
of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics at the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth
by&lt;br/&gt;including research-based activities in courses across
the&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate mathematics curriculum. This project has
a&lt;br/&gt;significant impact on the structure of undergraduate courses
by&lt;br/&gt;introducing research seminars from the freshman year,
linking&lt;br/&gt;students across year levels in common goals and cohorts,
and&lt;br/&gt;stimulating new research-based courses in computational science.
&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, outreach to high school students and
their&lt;br/&gt;mathematics teachers has an impact on awareness of the field
of&lt;br/&gt;computational mathematics and careers in computational science.
&lt;br/&gt;The approach of this project recognizes that students can
be&lt;br/&gt;attracted to and prepared for a career in scientific computing
by&lt;br/&gt;engaging in genuine research-based activities throughout
their&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate education. The benefit of this approach is that
it&lt;br/&gt;builds a stronger and more diverse population of
computational&lt;br/&gt;scientists by attracting talented students to the field
of&lt;br/&gt;scientific computing and training them in the tools and
analysis&lt;br/&gt;of numerical methods for solution of various real-world
problems. &lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by the MPS Division of
Mathematical&lt;br/&gt;Sciences, the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities,
and the&lt;br/&gt;EHR Division of Undergraduate Education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;