* 0802887
* SGER: Flight Tests and Validation of the New HIAPER GISMOS Radio Occultation System
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2008,06/30/2009
* Jennifer Haase, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 06/30/2009
* USD 76,876.00

This grant supports the Principal Investigator (PI) to collect and process the
data necessary for a full validation of the High-performance Instrumented
Airborne Platform for Environmental Research (HIAPER) Global Navigation
Satellite System (GNSS) Instrument System for Multistatic and Occultation
Sensing (GISMOS) to demonstrate its capabilities for high vertical resolution
atmospheric sounding in the troposphere. The current GISMOS system has gone
through the first stage of testing along with other equipment developed under
the HAIPER Airborne Instrumentation Solicitation (HAIS). Despite unforeseen
problems with the high gain antennas, 3 days of data were collected in July 2007
from the direct antenna that will allow significant advances for testing data
processing software. Unlike other new instrumentation on board HIAPER, the
GISMOS is an entirely new airborne measuring system that requires thorough
validation with independent observations. This can only be achieved with a
dataset that is extensive enough for sound conclusions regarding the achievable
accuracy. A flight is available on HIAPER for February 2008 to make overflights
of radiosonde launches and drop at least 20 dropsondes. This will provide
independent data to complete the validation study. The error characteristics of
the profiles will be used in an Observation System Simulation Experiment in
order to estimate their impact in numerical weather
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Because the GISMOS is part of
the HIAPER facility, it will enhance the research infrastructure available for a
large community in atmospheric science. Temperature and moisture profiles of the
larger environment are often a requirement for research field campaigns,
especially for research related to tropical cyclone forecasting. With relatively
limited requirements for physical space inside the aircraft, it would easily be
available for most missions. The work promotes training and education of young
researchers by involving graduate students and young post-docs, in particular
with graduate students encouraged to take major responsibility in the fieldwork.
The HIAPER GISMOS and other Lower Atmosphere Observing Facilities will also be
used as examples in the undergraduate atmospheric instrumentation curriculum at
Purdue and surrounding Midwestern universities to educate the next generation of
scientists about the frontiers in atmospheric observational science.