* 0802006
* Background Cancellation of Noise and Harmonic Distortion in Analog-to-Digital Converters
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Bahar Jalali-Farahani, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 06/30/2012
* USD 265,784.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;The design of highly accurate analog circuits becomes
increasingly difficult in deep submicron technology. In particular, errors due
to high-order nonlinearities are the limiting factors in achieving high
resolution analog-to-digital convertors (ADCs). Conventional methods of
estimating nonlinear terms needs higher order statistics of the output signal
and involve complicated signalprocessing techniques that can overshadow the
benefits of digital calibration. The objective of this research is to use
innovative digital calibration techniques for compensation of noise and
harmonics with minimal overhead in the analog design. The research includes
design, fabrication and proof-of-concept of the novel calibration techniques
incorporated in a Nyquist-rate ADC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit:&lt;br/&gt;This research will lead to breakthroughs in the design of
analog circuits in deep submicron technologies where traditional circuit design
techniques are unable to achieve the required performance. The proposed
techniques will also result in significant reduction in power consumption and
increased efficiency. Although the calibration techniques will be demonstrated
in a Nyquist-rate ADC, they are generic in nature and can be used in any analog
block with minimal modifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;This research has promising applications in multi-standard wireless
systems and bio-implantable systems used for diagnosis and prognosis purposes.
The outcome of this research will be used in a new graduate course focusing on
application of advanced digital-signal processing techniques in enhancing
performance of analog circuits. The interdisciplinary nature of the project
which combines the knowledge of analog circuit design, digital VLSI design and
digital signal processing will provide excellent opportunities for several
senior design projects for undergraduate students.