* 0802654
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Black Elite Philanthropists
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Harvey Molotch, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2010
* USD 6,938.00

SES-0802654 Harvey Molotch Jane Jones New York University

The discourse on wealth generally does not include African Americans (blacks),
but does mention their lack of wealth. Conversely, the literature on race,
particularly in regard to African Americans, has only recently come to include a
substantive discussion of black members of the middle and upper middle classes.
This research is a sociological study of race, as well as class status and
focuses on philanthropic practices amongst the black elite. There are two main
questions that organize this project. First, what is the relationship between
philanthropy and the social organization of the black elite? Second, what
meanings and motivations do black donors bring to the practice of philanthropy?
The first question lends itself to a group level analysis, while the second
question requires an individual level analysis. By conducting interviews with
elite black donors in New York City, this study will evaluate how class and race
interact in ways that influence black elites? subjectivity and identity. The
unique intersection of racial oppression and class privilege at which the black
elite are socially located produces an experiential knowledge that informs the
practices of this group.

Broader Impacts: The broader implications of this work are both scholarly and
practical. Empirically, this project opens up a new population to be studied ?
the black elite. Theoretically, it bridges intersectionality theory and studies
of power and privilege by looking at the consolidation of power within a
marginalized group. More broadly, practitioners interested in developing
relationships with African American donors will find this work useful. One broad
implication of the changing nature of philanthropy is that African Americans
will become a ?niche market? of sorts for fundraisers. If this is the case, then
this study?s portrait of the patterns of giving among black elite
philanthropists will be a useful guide. As society increasingly looks to the
private sector for solutions to social inequality, the role of philanthropists
will become even more important. Determining what types of organizations that
black elites support, and why they do so, will provide useful knowledge about
black elites? position in the philanthropic field