* 0802008
* Realization Theory and Functional Model Reduction in Biochemical Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Mustafa Khammash, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2012
* USD 330,000.00

Eccs-
0802008&lt;br/&gt;Bamieh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;One of the central problems in the emerging field of Systems Biology is
the analysis and functional classification of large complex biochemical reaction
networks. Such networks are increasingly being scrutinized and their individual
components painstakingly investigated in detail. However, a general methodology
for inferring dynamical and functional behavior from the detailed network
description is still sorely lacking. We propose methodologies by which large
components of such networks can be replaced by components of much smaller state
dimension that have similar functionality. We term this problem Functional Model
Reduction to emphasize distinctions with traditional model reduction techniques.
The enabling ideas behind this methodology consist of understanding how
dynamical systems that are designed for prescribed functions (such as logical or
hybrid operations) can be implemented with dynamical networks constrained to
have specific types of building blocks. We investigate it in the specific
context of building blocks that are available from basic biochemical kinetics.
Enabled with this analysis, we pose the problem of carrying out this analysis in
reverse, that is, given networks with specific types of building blocks, we ask
what type of functional behavior they represent, and whether it is possible to
mirror that behavior with dynamical system of much lower dimension. Our goal is
not to develop a general nonlinear model reduction technique, but rather one
that is particularly tailored to the differential equations that result from
biochemical kinetics. Some novel aspects of systems theory will need to be
developed such as realizations with prespecified network components as well as
functional objectives for model reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncovering and classification of function from the
detailed description of biochemical reaction networks is a central problem in
systems biology and dynamical systems theory. The proposed work will contribute
techniques that are particularly tailored to the dynamical network that arise
from biochemical kinetics. A new paradigm for model reduction based on network
function will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work include the
application of the model reduction techniques developed in this project to a
high order complex model of ischemic stroke that is being developed, which will
make possible new understanding of this disease and new treatments for it. The
multi-disciplinary nature of this work will ensure that graduate students from
dynamical systems and control and those from the life sciences will develop new
skill sets from the other disciplines and will help create graduates who are
comfortable working at the boundary of their disciplines.