* 0802959
* CSUMS: A Computational Training and Interdisciplinary Research Program for Undergraduates in the Mathematical Sciences at the University of St. Thomas
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* John Kemper, University of St. Thomas
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2014
* USD 706,936.00

DMS-0802959

The project features a year-long, combined educational and research experience
for a cohort of 9 to 12 students during each of the five project years.
Participants are recruited from the institutions of the Associated Colleges of
the Twin Cities (ACTC) and perform their coursework and research under the
mentorship of faculty at the University of St. Thomas (UST) in St. Paul, MN and
faculty at other ACTC institutions. Participants benefit from a course developed
to support the learning and use of computationally intensive methods in
mathematics and statistics. The cohort participates in a variety of workshops,
seminars, conferences, and field trips. In small groups, cohort students
contribute to research projects requiring the computational skills acquired in
the course and share their progress with fellow students and project faculty.
Students periodically present their results in the larger professional
community. The intellectual merit of the project is the result of the following
achievements. Students become proficient using computational methods and learn
to apply this knowledge to perform research on problems whose solutions require
the use of these methods. Through interaction with local academicians and
industrialists, students see how their computation research methods are used in
other areas of research and in real-world problems. The broader impact of the
project is felt at four levels. At UST, students learn how to perform research
using computational methods and faculty gain experience teaching a new course
that emphasizes computational methods. On a larger level, these same impacts are
realized by students and faculty at other ACTC institutions. Local industries
that utilize computational methods benefit from graduates of ACTC schools who
enjoy a high level of proficiency in scientific computation. Finally, student
presentations and sponsored conferences promote to a national audience the
innovative curricular elements developed and research advancements made by
cohort members.

Computing power continues to grow at an incredible rate. As a result,
scientists can use the computer to create highly sophisticated models for use in
solving complicated mathematical problems. In addition, computational methods
developed decades ago that were once intractable in practice due to the lack of
computing facilities can now be employed to model and solve problems. It is
imperative that undergraduate mathematics students at universities in the United
States receive the training they need in order to make the utmost advantage of
the world's ever-increasing computing resources and remain technologically
competitive with scientists on a global level. Towards this end, mathematics and
engineering faculty from the University of St. Thomas in St. Paul, MN and
mathematics faculty from other institutions in the Associated Colleges of the
Twin Cities engage undergraduate students in research groups under the auspices
of the National Science Foundation's Computational Science Training for
Undergraduates in the Mathematical Sciences program. For each of the next five
years, a group of 9 to 12 mathematics majors forms a cohort and participates in
a year-long program to learn about computational methods used in mathematical
research and put the knowledge they have accrued to work as they join with
faculty mentors to perform research on problems with applications to areas such
as cancer treatment, image compression and analysis, tornadic storm detection,
the behavior of thin films, and directed cell movement. Students visit local
industries in the Twin Cities to further learn how scientific computing is used
to solve real-world problems and present results of their work at national
conferences. Students leave the program armed with both the tools required and
experience necessary to continue work at a high level either in industry or
graduate school on problems requiring an expertise in scientific computation.
The project is supported by the MPS Division of Mathematical Sciences, the MPS
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, and the EHR Division of Undergraduate
Education.