* 0802187
* International Research Fellowship Program:    Hadamard Wellposedness and Asymptotic Stability of Finite Energy Solutions for a Structural Acoustic Interaction Modeled by Nonlinear
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Lorena Bociu, Bociu                   Lorena
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 08/31/2014
* USD 197,513.00

0802187 Bociu

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Lorena
Bociu to work with Dr. Jean-Paul Zolesio at Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Institut Non-Lineaire de Nice, Sophia Antipolis, and with Dr. John
Cagnol, at Pole Universitaire Leonard de Vinci, in Paris, France.

The proposed research is focused on wellposedness and stability of finite energy
solutions to nonlinear structural acoustic models with curved walls. Structural
acoustic interactions are described by a system of coupled equations: the wave
equation, which models the acoustic medium in a 3-D chamber, and the dynamic
shell equation, describing the flexible wall of the chamber. In turn, the motion
of a dynamic shell is described by a set of coupled nonlinear partial
differential equations, both of hyperbolic type: an elastic wave for the in-
plane displacement, and a nonlinear Kirchhoff equation for the scalar normal
displacement. Structural acoustic models, due to their large spectrum of
engineering applications, have received a lot of attention in engineering and
mathematical literature. However, most of the analysis has been performed on
linear models with flat walls. The main novelty of the proposed research is that
it will account for nonlinear displacements of the curved wall (i.e. fully
nonlinear shell) in a coupling with a nonlinear acoustic medium (nonlinear wave
equation). Thus, both nonlinear (topological) and geometric aspects will be at
the focus of the proposed research, with Euclidean flat geometry being replaced
by Riemannian geometry. More specifically, the following issues, recognized as
open problems in the literature, will be addressed: First, for a nonlinear shell
with nonlinear boundary sources: local and global existence (or blow-up in
finite time), uniqueness and regularity of finite energy solutions. Second, for
a 3-D structural acoustic nonlinear model with viscous damping and involving
shells on the interface between the media: (i) Hadamard wellposedness of finite
energy solutions driven by critical and supercritical sources, along with
stability of solutions in the presence of boundary (geometrically restricted)
damping, and (ii) quantification of the level of nonlinearity of the damping
that is sufficient to ensure that finite energy solutions be global. Thus,
nonlinearity of the damping is at the heart of the problem. The solution to this
problem will not only provide a novel and important contribution to PDEs and
their control, but will also have far-reaching potential for transferable
research into engineering-based design. The project will use the dynamic shell
model based on intrinsic geometry developed by M.Delfour and J.P.Zolesio, which
offers great advantages for an analytic formulation of the problem. Host
J.P.Zolesio is also an expert in analysis and control of interactive structures
- a dominant theme in the proposal. The project will also benefit from strong
interaction with J. Cagnol, who is well experienced in shell analysis, including
computations with intrinsic geometry-based codes. The proposed research will
provide a mathematical solution to a physical problem that is fundamental in
application (noise suppression in an acoustic environment). It should also
stimulate new approaches in engineering design, eventually impacting society.
The proposed methods could be applied to other PDE models sharing common
properties: propagation of singularities, finite speed of propagation and
supercriticality. Moreover, good wellposedness theory is fundamental for control
theory methods to be applied.