* 0802559
* Doctoral Dissertation Resarch: Gender Roles and Ethnicity in   Transnational Migration
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2010
* Erika Busse, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2010
* USD 7,370.00

Elizabeth Heger Boyle&lt;br/&gt; PI and Erika Busse&lt;br/&gt;University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current iterature on gender and migration
provides divergent findings regarding gender hierarchies. Some scholars find
that migration opens room for gender transformations, while others find that it
reinforces patriarchal systems. Further, scholars who emphasize the gendered
nature of migration have to date focused primarily on immigrants living in the
receiving country. Researchers who study transnational communities in both the
receiving and sending societies do not address the question of transformations
in husband-wife relationships. This research compares three types of Peruvian
families: husband-leading migration, wife-leading migration, and family unity
migration, and focuses on the question: What are the mechanisms that exacerbate
or moderate patriarchal relations in transnational families? Thus, this research
aims to resolve a contradiction in the literature about whether transnational
connections reaffirm or erode gender hierarchies. The hypothesis is that
patriarchal relations will change in form and social arena but will not
necessarily go away. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is a multi-site
ethnographic fieldwork in the U.S. and Peru. Examining not only families and
individuals located in the United States, but also their relatives in Peru,
allows me to observe strategies adopted by men and women to impose and resist
power in their relationships in each type of family. As these mechanisms are
present in different social arenas, this research focuses on these dynamics in
households, at the community level, and through transnational connections. The
investigator conducts in-depth interviewing with and intensive participant
observation of multiple members of the same family in the U.S. and in Peru. In
so doing, this research investigates the gendered structure of the family and
its interconnections with ethnic constructions pertaining to family. The
research occurs in three phases. The first (Paterson, NJ in 2006) and the second
phases (in Peru 2007) consist of 66 interviews (32 with women and 34 with men)
and ethnographic observations within each type of family. The third and last
phase will be in Paterson, NJ (2008).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study makes an
important contribution in that it places family at the center of the analysis,
highlighting the family's role as a site where gender and ethnic ideas and
practices are shaped and reshaped in transnationalism. This study will also
provide a foundation for creating methodological tools to study families living
in two (or more countries). Finally, study findings will be made accessible to a
larger audience, including organizations that serve migrant families and
communities both in the U.S. and in Peru.