* 0802867
* Out of Africa: Geophysical Monitoring and Capacity Building around the World, Boston Massachusetts Workshop, February 18-19, 2008
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2008,12/31/2008
* David Simpson, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2008
* USD 56,326.00

0802867&lt;br/&gt;Simpson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, co-funded with the
NSF Office of International Science and Engineering, will support a workshop in
Boston, MA on February 18-19, 2008 that will bring together key members of the
IRIS community with seismologists from several countries in Central America,
South America and Southeast Asia. We intend to build strategies for
transitioning networks of earthquake monitoring stations in developing countries
into fully sustainable networks of advanced seismic observatories. Modern
observatory networks can support international research and educational
collaborations through standards-driven data acquisition, management and open
access. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US seismology community is poised to take
advantage of a recent increase in resources from development and disaster
recovery agencies for building networks in low- and middle-income countries to
foster seismographic networks outside the US for several reasons. First, an
NSF/OISE PIRE award to Pennsylvania State University helped to establish
AfricaArray, which has strengthened many international scientific
collaborations, deployed a set of seismographs in SubSaharan Africa, and
demonstrated that developing a permanent seismic network can provide critical
new data for imaging Earth structure while also strengthening scientific
capacity building and supporting hazard monitoring. Second, IRIS's initial
investment in several regional networks through its long-term loan program of
refurbished RefTek data loggers has provided another successful model on which
to build.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals for the workshop are to (1)
enumerate leading regional science objectives that require long time series of
high-fidelity seismological waveform records, (2) identify broader regional
social benefits from improved seismological capacity and sophisticated data
products, (3) suggest mechanisms for assessing the technical capacities and
performance of new and existing regional and national networks, and (4)
introduce development experts and aid providers to the need for integrated
network solutions. One outcome will be a report, prepared by the workshop
organizers, on the opportunities for developing geophysical observing systems
linked to capacity building.&lt;br/&gt;