* 0802964
* Collaborative Research: CSUMS: URGE to Compute
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2015
* Joaquin Carbonara, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,549.00

Ringland&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0802994&lt;br/&gt;Carbonara&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0802964&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; URGE to Compute provides a year-long
computationally&lt;br/&gt;intensive Undergraduate Research Group Experience in
the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical sciences to an annual cohort of 12
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;mathematics majors. A collaboration of the University at
Buffalo&lt;br/&gt;(UB), Buffalo State College (BSC), and the Hauptman-
Woodward&lt;br/&gt;Medical Research Institute, the project brings together
an&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary group of 16 faculty researchers who have
a&lt;br/&gt;shared sense of the importance of computation in the
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;sciences, a record of successful supervision of
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;research, and a commitment to increasing the
effectiveness of the&lt;br/&gt;preparation of students at UB and BSC for post-
graduate education&lt;br/&gt;and careers in the many fields that now demand a
combination of&lt;br/&gt;computational and mathematical skills. Prior to
commencing the&lt;br/&gt;full-year research experience, students take
calculus,&lt;br/&gt;differential equations, linear algebra, and a new
sophomore&lt;br/&gt;course in scientific and mathematical computing which
was&lt;br/&gt;developed with this project in mind and is offered to all
math&lt;br/&gt;majors. Special efforts are made to recruit minorities
and&lt;br/&gt;women, who are underrepresented in the mathematical sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;The year of research begins in the Spring semester of
the&lt;br/&gt;students' junior year with: a support course that
provides&lt;br/&gt;background on the theme that unifies all the research
projects&lt;br/&gt;for that year (e.g. stochastic processes in 2009); a team-
taught&lt;br/&gt;course on the tools and methods of computational
research;&lt;br/&gt;regular meetings with the research project mentor; and the
first&lt;br/&gt;part of a seminar that runs throughout the year.
Research&lt;br/&gt;continues through the summer, and students write an honors
thesis&lt;br/&gt;or a paper for publication in the Fall. Computational
resources&lt;br/&gt;available to the students include a 2000-node cluster and
a&lt;br/&gt;visualization laboratory at UB's Center for
Computational&lt;br/&gt;Research. Talks by eminent outside researchers are a
feature of&lt;br/&gt;the seminar, and students attend a national conference in
an area&lt;br/&gt;related to their research, disseminate their results at
regional&lt;br/&gt;meetings and local exhibitions of undergraduate scholarship,
and&lt;br/&gt;participate in outreach activities at local high schools.
After&lt;br/&gt;the year is over, in their final undergraduate semester, the
now&lt;br/&gt;highly trained students serve as teaching assistants in
the&lt;br/&gt;introductory differential equations course that is taken by
all&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, engineering, and science students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Over the multi-year course of the project, the
research&lt;br/&gt;focuses on a wide variety of topics of societal importance.
&lt;br/&gt;These include optical fiber communications, agricultural
pest&lt;br/&gt;control, cryptography, medical imaging, and the behavior
of&lt;br/&gt;materials (from semiconductor devices to mudflows). The
project&lt;br/&gt;not only trains a select annual cohort in these vital areas,
but&lt;br/&gt;also reaches a substantial fraction of all math majors at UB
and&lt;br/&gt;BSC with a curriculum that is computationally enriched by
the&lt;br/&gt;preparation and support courses for the project, and
a&lt;br/&gt;departmental life that is enhanced by the seminars and
the&lt;br/&gt;exposure to peers engaged in research. The project is
supported&lt;br/&gt;by the MPS Division of Mathematical Sciences, the MPS Office
of&lt;br/&gt;Multidisciplinary Activities, and the EHR Division
of&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate Education.