* 0802036
* Development of a novel optomechanical uncooled metamaterial-enhanced active Terahertz detection imager
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2008,04/30/2013
* Richard Averitt, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 04/30/2013
* USD 259,699.00

The objective of this research is to create a terahertz detector for safety and
security applications. The approach is to develop a low-cost easily fabricated
room temperature metamaterial-enhanced optomechanical radiation detector for
active imaging applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the development of active
structures and devices for enhancing the ability manipulate and detect terahertz
radiation by combining electromagnetic metamaterials with microelectromechanical
system technologies. Motivating our effort to advance terahertz science and
technology is the unique characteristics of terahertz radiation which includes
transparency to materials such as cardboard, plastic, and styrofoam which are
opaque at other wavelengths, and the sensitivity of terahertz radiation to gas
and solid phase molecular signatures including biological agents and chemical
explosives. A potential application is imaging and identification of embedded
illicit or hazardous materials. While there have been laboratory-based
demonstrations, further improvements in terahertz sources, components, and
detectors are required for systems which are sufficiently compact and robust for
real-world operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed multidisciplinary effort will
facilitate the development of fieldable terahertz systems by combining
electromagnetic metamaterials with microelectromechanical system technology.
Metamaterials is an emerging field with considerable opportunity for scientific
exploration and relatively near-term technological impact. Furthermore, the
marriage of metamaterials with microelectromechanical technology enables
technological advances that would otherwise be difficult to achieve. This work
will set the stage for additional advances through the intelligent design of
micromechanically responsive metamaterial composites while providing
undergraduate and graduate level students with unique educational opportunities.
The PIs will also develop summer short courses for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;