* 0802305
* Manufacturing an Engineering Resource Center: An NSF National Center of Excellence
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2013
* Bart Aslin, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2013
* USD 1,600,000.00

This project represents a merger of two NSF National Centers of Excellence:
&lt;br/&gt;(a) The National Center for Manufacturing Education (NCME) which
operates the Manufacturing Education Resource Center (MERC Online), an online
clearinghouse of manufacturing and related educational resources (administered
by Sinclair Community College of Dayton, Ohio); and &lt;br/&gt;(b) The New
Jersey Center for Advanced Technological Education (NJCATE) which operates the
National Engineering Technology Education Clearinghouse (NETEC) an online
clearinghouse of engineering technology and related educational resources
(administered by Middlesex County College of Edison, New Jersey).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The goal of the project is to increase
the national impact of engineering and manufacturing technology reform through
the dissemination of model programs, materials, and instructional curricula via
a web-based clearinghouse (www.merconline.net), faculty professional
development, and related outreach services. The primary areas of emphasis are
(1) proactively expanding the educational resources available in the digital
clearinghouse and (2) aggressively expanding the user base of pre-college and
postsecondary faculty across the country. The instructional resources
disseminated nationally by the digital clearinghouse represent cutting edge
technology content and project-based pedagogy. An experienced external evaluator
is assuring effective formative and summative assessment of the project
outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Merging the two centers
leverages the best practices developed by both while providing operational
efficiencies and cost reductions. The resource center is the dissemination site
for numerous professional societies (Society of Manufacturing Engineers,
Manufacturing Education and Research, SME Education Foundation, and the ASEE
Manufacturing Division) and NSF-funded centers such as the Consortium for
Alabama Regional Center for Automotive Manufacturing (CARCAM) and the National
Center for Welding Education and Training at Lorain County Community College.
Online services are being expanded to include professional development,
mentoring, and technical assistance.