* 0802417
* A New Collaborative Model for Geospatial Technology Education and Workforce Studies in a Rural Region
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Charles Gregory, University of Maine at Machias
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Lea
* 12/31/2012
* USD 815,697.00

This collaborative project, led by the University of Maine at Machias (UMM) with
partners in five other colleges and universities and an extended community of
GST educators, is designed to meet the growing demand for workers skilled in
geospatial technologies (GST) in Maine. The approach includes developing
educational programs that are more accessible and applicable to the needs of a
rural workforce and increasing the number of students enrolling in courses,
receiving two-year degrees and certificates, and pursuing further higher
education. The model for GST education takes into account the lack of access to
high-speed Internet and computing capacity in rural areas and the limited
enrollment in rural community colleges across the state. This project is filling
important gaps in understanding the educational needs of the rural geospatial
workforce, particularly the skills needed by ancillary users of GST in
government, natural resource conservation, and economic development. Information
obtained from the workforce study is being used to inform the development and
testing of curriculum, program structure and instructional methods for technical
education that blend the best of distance education and on-site, inquiry-based,
service learning. This project is demonstrating new modes of cooperation among
institutions of higher education to meet the needs of the rural geospatial
workforce nationally. Through outreach via the National Consortium for Rural
Geospatial Innovations in America, this project serves as a model for GIS
education in rural regions.