* 0802643
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Effects of Task Dimensions of the Division of Labor on Person-to-Group Bonding
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2011
* Cecilia Ridgeway, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2011
* USD 7,500.00

SES-0802643&lt;br/&gt;Cecilia Ridgway&lt;br/&gt;Lynn Chin&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research asks how the division
of collective responsibilities within a group affects the extent to which
individuals bond to the group? Every day people divide and share tasks used to
achieve group goals. However, there are numerous ways goal-oriented tasks may be
structured. Do people work separately or together? Do they perform the same work
tasks or are they responsible for different tasks? Do all group members have
general skills that enable them to take over each other?s tasks or are the
skills specialized and known to only a few? This dissertation studies the
conditions under which the division of labor in task structure creates a sense
of mutual interdependence, similarity, and joint responsibility versus a sense
of separation, difference, and low efficacy between group members. The research
goes beyond the overly-simplified question of whether task differences inhibit
or enhance group solidarity to study how group attachment is affected by the way
actual tasks are divided amongst group members, this dissertation goes beyond.
The co-PI uses a micro-order approach to study the mechanisms which cause people
to bond to immediate social groups by analyzing 1) how task structure affects
patterns of interaction within a group and 2) how those patterns of interaction
affect person-to-group attachment. The co-PI will conduct a series of
experiments using university students to test of how different types of goal-
oriented task structures affect person-to-group bonding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study has
implications for how organizational task structure can affect member attrition
rate. It will provide insights that will help us understand the fine line
between motivating people to feel personally responsible and invested in their
group and recognizing that people need to value others and understand that they
cannot accomplish group work alone. By examining how task structure influences
personal bonding to a group, this dissertation can help organizational planners
better understand how they can structure in-group interaction. Organizations can
use information about the effects of task structure to organize their daily work
routines in ways that create a balance between cooperative coordination between
employees and the desire for individuals to be responsible and self-autonomous
at work. With this type of information, organizations may be able to help their
work groups create a stronger sense of group solidarity and cohesion by creating
group task structures that best fit the collective needs of their group. Thus,
it is important to study the fine line between when skill specialization and
task differentiation solidifies group solidarity and when they erode it.