* 0802059
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Symbolic Capital and the Construction of Race
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Jane Zavisca, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2009
* USD 14,845.00

SES-0802059&lt;br/&gt;Jane Zavisca&lt;br/&gt;Danielle
Hedegard&lt;br/&gt;University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
addresses the question of how do differently situated social groups symbolically
construct race and capoeira to mark boundaries, claim meanings, and gain
material and cultural advantage? Capoeira academies in Salvador are an ideal
setting to observe the construction of race. These academies attract
international tourists in search of an "authentic" experience, and authenticity
for tourists relates to race as the tourist economy of Salvador markets
encounters with ?authentic? Afro-Brazilian cultural traditions such as dance,
food, and capoeira. Through the tourist economy, people with divergent
backgrounds and conceptions of race meet in an intensely interactive setting ?
capoeira academies. These interactions will be ethnographically observed through
intensive participant observation, supplemented by in-depth interviews with
practitioners, in three academies. These academies all attract international
tourists, but each draws on a different local socioeconomic base ? a low-income
group comprised of mostly dark-skinned individuals with little access to the
tourist center, a middle-class group of both light and dark-skinned individuals
with access to the tourist center, and a low-income group of mostly dark-skinned
individuals located within the tourist center. Observing tourists in interaction
with different socioeconomic groups provides an opportunity to observe
constructions of race as symbolic capital. It also allows us to better
understand the process through which groups convert a symbolic resource ? race ?
into cultural and material resources for local capoeira practitioners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The project contributes to ongoing
sociological studies of social capital and how racial categories are created and
forges new links between Brazilian and US researchers.&lt;br/&gt;