* 0802825
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Preferential Association and Allocation Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2010
* Yen-Sheng Chiang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2010
* USD 7,500.00

SES-0802825&lt;br/&gt;Katherine Stovel&lt;br/&gt;Yen-Sheng
Chiang&lt;br/&gt;University of Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how
individuals? judgments of fairness emerge is an important research topic in the
social sciences. Drawing on sociological insights about the importance of
partner selection processes, this project combines a mathematical model with a
laboratory experiment in order to investigate whether dynamic preferential
association increases fairness in dyadic allocative decisions. Preferential
association is operationalized here by allowing actors to rank members of the
pool of potential interaction partners, based on preferences derived from
previous experiences. There is ample reason to believe that this approach better
mirrors real patterns of interaction that we observe in our daily life social or
economic transactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first portion of this
project, the investigators assess the prevalence of fairness by introducing a
model of the Ultimatum Game?a two-player game involving a division of fixed
resources. In this game the first player makes a proposal concerning how to
split fixed stakes with a second player. The second player can either accept or
reject the proposed division; if accepted, the stakes are so divided. If the
second player rejects the division, neither player receives anything. The
mathematical model shows that when actors are matched with playing partners
based on their mutual ranked preferences, proposals are more equitable. In the
second part of the project, the researchers conduct an experiment using
undergraduate subjects connected via networked computers. The experimental
design allows the investigators to examine how different interaction structures
affect the likelihood of fair allocations. They expect that when subjects are
paired with subjects they prefer to play with, their behavior will be more
equitable and less punishing than when they are randomly assigned a playing
partner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Substantively, the results of
this investigation into the relationship between dynamic partner selection and
fairness will enhance our understanding of how prosocial behaviors emerge in
real social contexts. Understanding the factors that affect equitable divisions
will shed light on a whole host of problems, including how likely two parties
are to settle before a case goes trial. In an era when formal institutions often
claim a monopoly on dispute resolution, the research addresses the need for
empirical evidence concerning how equitable divisions can emerge through
decentralized social processes. In addition, the project contributes to the
development of an experimental infrastructure in the social sciences at the
University of Washington, and will provide research opportunities for
undergraduate students--both as subjects and as lab assistants.&lt;br/&gt;