* 0802962
* Algebraic and Number Theoretic Aspects of Vertex Algebra Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Antun Milas, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sommers
* 07/31/2013
* USD 85,555.00

Three projects are being proposed. In the first part the PI will pursue a new
direction in representation theory of vertex algebras, by studying (new)
families of vertex algebras of finite representation type, which involve both
indecomposable and logarithmic modules. It is expected that categories of
modules obtained in this way are equivalent to categories of modules for certain
quantum (super)groups at root of unity. In addition, an extension of this
project to the setup of vertex superalgebras will be obtained. The structures
investigated in this part are basic ingredients for building logarithmic
conformal field theories, increasingly popular among physicists. The second part
involves studies of characters of vertex algebra modules, closely related
pseudocharacters and modular differential equations. From these considerations
the PI proposes a whole array of results of interest to number theorists,
including constant term identities and modular identities. Finally, the PI,
jointly with his collaborators, will continue to work on combinatorial aspects
of vertex algebra theory. In particular, considerable attention will be devoted
to "principal subspaces" of standard modules for affine Lie algebras, by using
primarily the theory of intertwining operators. It is expected that this will
lead to new combinatorial bases of standard modules.

Conformal field theory and string theory have had major impact on modern
mathematics. Two-dimensional conformal field theory has also important
applications in condensed mater physics and statistical mechanics. The aim of
this research is to use symmetries in physical theories (through the language of
representation theory) to study analytic and combinatorial properties of
correlation functions and partition functions. This will, on one hand, advance
our understanding of processes in nature and, on the other, lead to new results
and structures in mathematics.