* 0802333
* Clues to gamma-ray burst formation through observations of afterglows, GRB-supernovae and dark burst host galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Bethany Cobb, Cobb                    Bethany        E
* Fellowship Award
* Edward Ajhar
* 08/31/2011
* USD 231,000.00

Dr. Bethany Cobb is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
California-Berkeley. Dr. Cobb will make progress toward understanding gamma-ray
burst (GRB) progenitors by examining GRB afterglows, GRB-related supernovae
(SNe) and the host galaxies of dark bursts. GRBs have the potential to serve as
powerful tools in many areas of astronomical research because they probe regions
of the universe that are otherwise hidden from view. However, exactly how and
why GRBs form is still not understood. This investigation will make use of the
1.3-m Small and Moderate Aperture Research Telescope System (SMARTS) in Chile
and the 1.3-m robotic Peters Automated Infrared Imaging Telescope (PAIRITEL) in
Arizona for rapid and long-term follow-up of GRB afterglow and GRB-related SNe,
as well as the WIYN and Keck observatories for deep imaging of GRB host
galaxies.

Dr. Cobb will also develop and teach a series of 6-week courses through the UC
Berkeley Osher Lifelong Learning Institute and the Berkeley Adult School to
promote life-long learning and to bring the excitement of astronomy to adults
50+. These centers focus on helping seniors develop skills and interests that
will enrich and enhance their quality of life. Dr. Cobb will make the materials
produced for these classes publicly available and extensively document the
challenges and rewards of teaching astronomy to mature students.