* 0802394
* Planning Grant for a National Center of Logistics and Supply Chain Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2008,10/31/2009
* Rex Beck, Riverside Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 10/31/2009
* USD 69,992.00

A group of academic institutions and industry are planning a National Center of
Logistics and Supply Chain Technology. The initiative is being jointly led by
Riverside Community College District in California and Sinclair Community
College in Ohio. Participating partners include (a) in California the
Distribution Management Association of Southern California, Cardinal Health
Systems, and Ozburn-Hessey Logistics; and (b) in Ohio ABX Air, Boeing, DAU
(Defense Acquisition University), and Honda.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective
is to develop a five-year strategic plan for a National Center of Logistics and
Supply Chain Management to include (a) mission and vision, (b) organizational
structure, (c) partnerships and linkages to other initiatives, (c) student
recruitment strategies, (d) faculty development strategies, (e) outreach and
dissemination methods, and (f) evaluation criteria and methodology. The National
Center of Logistics and Supply Chain Technology is being planned to develop
high-quality programs, curricula, and faculty professional development in the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines of (1)
mathematics: (i.e. operations research, statistics); (2) technology: (i.e.
Global Positioning Systems, Radio Frequency Identification); and (3) engineering
(i.e. human-machine interface, automated systems design)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Currently, many initiatives are being
designed to create and make available information on logistics educational
programs, teaching materials, and jobs. These efforts accomplish an important
mission within a local area or industry; however, they are disparate and
localized. This planning project is creating a blueprint for a national center
designed to standardize creation and dissemination of logistics education,
standards, and materials. It is melding military and private logistics methods
for increased efficiency and effectiveness for both sectors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The development of a national center for
logistics and supply-chain management addresses two critical issues. First, the
logistics and supply chain management are important industries, which offer
career ladders to family-supporting jobs. Employment in logistics and support
industries is growing and projected to add 969,000 jobs by 2030. Second, the
Department of Defense is on the verge of a retirement-driven talent crisis. By
2015, 54% of the federal acquisition workforce will retire. The development of a
national center provides a mechanism to support the growth and replacement of
talent in this vital economic sector.