* 0802650
* SCI: Collaborative Research: DAPLDS - a Dynamically Adaptive Protein-Ligand Docking System based on Multi-Scale Modeling
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2007,08/31/2009
* Michela Taufer, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Manish Parashar
* 08/31/2009
* USD 388,808.00

The DAPLDS or Dynamically Adaptive Protein-Ligand Docking System project
involves collaboration among the University of Texas, El Paso, The Scripps
Research Institute (TSRI), and the University of California, Berkeley. This
project, through implementation and use of a cybertool, DAPLDS, that enables
adaptive multi-scale modeling in a global computing environment (i.e.,
distributed, heterogeneous computing environment using "volunteer" PC
computers), will further knowledge of the atomic details of protein-ligand
interactions and, by doing so, will accelerate the discovery of novel
pharmaceuticals. The goals of the project are: (1) to explore the multi-scale
nature of algorithmic adaptations in protein-ligand docking and (2) to develop
cyber infrastructures based on computational methods and models that efficiently
accommodate these adaptations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the project derives from small molecules, called ligands, which play an
essential role in turning protein functions on or off, or in providing
substrates for chemical reactions catalyzed by enzymes. Knowledge of the atomic
level details of the protein-ligand docking is a valuable resource in the
development of novel pharmaceuticals. The docking process depends on the
characteristics of the protein-ligand complex involved and given a certain
complex, the characterization and modeling of the docking process can affect
both solution accuracy and model execution time. Based on characteristics of the
protein-ligand conformations and the availability and reliability of
computational resources, DAPLDS adapts, when appropriate, the model and/or the
computational system to optimize model accuracy and time to solution. The multi-
scale modeling adaptation in DAPLDS comprises at least three spanning scales:
(1) protein-ligand representation spanning scale from rigid to flexible
representation of protein-ligand interactions, (2) solvent representation
spanning scale from less accurate to more accurate modeling of solvent
treatment, and (3) sampling strategy spanning scale from fixed to adaptive
sampling of the protein-ligand docking space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: DAPLDS applies multi-scale modeling to the search for putative drugs and
drug leads. Our project changes the way in which grand challenges are approached
by implementing an adaptive cybertool that scales beyond the protein-ligand
docking application, e.g., this tool can be adapted and used for protein folding
and protein structure prediction. Moreover, the use of public computing
resources promotes and disseminates science research and science knowledge among
the users of PCs involved in this effort.&lt;br/&gt;