* 0802739
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: From Nations to Networks: Global Climate Change and Local Climate Governance in the U.S.
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2008,12/31/2010
* Paul Robbins, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 12/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Creating and implementing effective climate change regulation is the subject of
intense debate throughout the United States. Traditionally, much of the
political focus has been upon the creation of a national climate program in the
U.S., along with the possibility of coordinating such efforts with an
international climate change agreement. During the past several years, however,
local and regional governments have begun implementing climate change programs
that have not been created or mandated by the federal government. Yet, little is
known about these sub-national programs or their potential political and
ecological effects. As a result, this research examines the emergence of sub-
national, municipally-based climate change programs in the U.S., and more
specifically, the creation and implementation of the U.S. Mayors Climate
Protection Agreement (MCPA). In the time since it was endorsed by the U.S.
Conference of Mayors in June 2005, more than 750 U.S. cities whose combined
populations include more than 75 million U.S. citizens, have signed on to the
MCPA. Participating MCPA communities pledge to reduce their greenhouse gas
emissions by implementing land use policies that reduce sprawl, passing city
ordinances to promote energy efficiency, and undertaking environmental
restoration projects. Using an in-depth case study involving interviews, focus
groups, and observation in Seattle, Washington and a multi-city survey of all
participating MCPA cities, this research examines: 1) how and why local climate
programs have emerged in the U.S. and with what implications for global climate
governance; 2) how and why municipal systems of climate governance engage
environmental issues that are often described as more global in their extent;
and 3) how the networks of people and information involved in the development
and spread of the MCPA are created and maintained. Another important outcome of
this research will include a more in-depth analysis of how cities are addressing
the causes of climate change and the potential impacts that may be felt in their
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this doctoral dissertation
research will deepen current understandings of the role that local and regional
governments play in climate governance, as well as the ways that people come to
understand the relationships between local and global scales of physical systems
and political processes. Changing geographies of climate governance, including
the emergence of programs like the MCPA, have raised significant social,
political, and ecological questions regarding the most effective political scale
at which global climate change can and should be addressed. This project will
contribute to these policy debates through the writing of academic and policy
papers, as well as participation in professional conferences of organizations
involved in climate governance. These outreach efforts will incorporate
individuals and organizations both inside and outside of academia to facilitate
further collaboration between public policy institutions and scientific research
centers through wide dissemination of project results.&lt;br/&gt;