* 0802282
* Lake Breeze System of the Great Salt Lake
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* John Horel, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 05/31/2012
* USD 285,122.00

Shallow thermally-driven wind circulations commonly develop along extensive
coastlines, across which horizontal gradients in solar absorption, evaporation
and resultant sensible heating rates are often quite large. Associated sea
breeze development along extensive (and generally stationary) coastlines
bordered by flat terrain has been well described. These circulations modulate
surface air temperatures and boundary-layer mixing, and thus impact both
meteorology and air quality in the coastal zone. Less well understood are the
structure and dynamics underlying lake-breeze formation in the presence of steep
orography and/or variable coastline location, as prone to occur owing to
fluctuation of water levels in runoff-fed lakes within arid regions. Such is the
situation for the Great Salt Lake (GSL), which is bordered by the major urban
area of Salt Lake City and has undergone marked changes in water level and
associated projection of its coastline over the past decade. Prior work has
described the rudiments of GSL lake breeze formation, including statistics of
its frequency and preferred seasonality, but have been confined mainly to a two-
dimensional (surface-based) perspective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new study
will (1) analyze archived observations over a 10-year period, which include data
from a relatively dense surface mesonetwork ('MesoWest', and its predecessor the
'Utah Mesonet') and a terminal Doppler weather radar (TDWR) site, to develop a
more complete 3D climatology of GSL lake-breeze behavior; (2) collect and
analyze both routine and special observations (including aforementioned radar
based views of low-level airflow, wind and thermodynamic profiles from two
mobile balloon-launch platforms, and selectively positioned measurements from up
to eight portable surface meteorological stations) to examine ~10 lake-breeze
events during Autumn 2008; and (3) apply a combination of large-eddy simulation
(LES) and more traditional mesoscale simulations using WRF (the Weather Research
and Forecasting model) to explore the response of these circulations to
variations in surface heating induced by varying lakeshore extent and large-
scale forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work rests in
advancing our basic understanding of thermally-driven circulations along
coastlines in the presence of nearby steep terrain, and increased knowledge of
processes that control the development of lake breezes in arid environments. It
will also provide a detailed description of some of the complex
interrelationships between regional-scale weather and the GSL ecosystem, and
better quantify potential sensitivity of atmospheric circulations to both
natural and anthropogenic changes in the underlying surface state.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this work will include contributions
toward more accurate simulation of local/regional weather and impacts on urban
meteorology in densely populated coastal zones (including, for example, daily
maximum temperature forecasts impacting energy demands and changes in
ventilation/mixing impacting air quality). Training of a graduate student and
postdoctoral research associate in the design and execution of coordinated LES
and traditional mesoscale simulations will be supported, as will involvement of
up to 20 undergraduate students to be directly involved in planning and
conducting field data collection in the vicinity of lake-breeze fronts adjacent
to the GSL.