* 0802019
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic Mode High Density Probe Based Data Storage
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Aditya Ramamoorthy, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2011
* USD 99,994.00

Objective: The need for storing and accessing large amounts of data with the
ease of being portable is apparent from the ubiquitous use of small form factor
consumer electronics where demands for terabit per inch square areal densities
is predicted. Conventional modes of data storage are reaching fundamental
limitations on the areal densities achievable. Probe based data storage
solutions, based on atomic force microscopy principles employ a force probe that
has the resolution to image data at the atomic scale. Information is stored in
the form of indentations that are a few square nanometers in area. Probe based
high density data storage has the promise of delivering&lt;br/&gt;a few terabit
per square inch densities in the near term. The dynamic mode probe based data
storage platform will be developed under the proposal
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A real-time model of the probe
dynamics will be developed for high density data storage applications. The
dynamic mode operation that leads to significantly smaller forces on the media
and the probe will be employed as compared to the static mode operation that has
been used in previous work. The fundamental tradeoff between the speed of
reading the data and the resolution of the read data existing in current dynamic
modes is overcome, leading to two orders increase in the detection speed. The
physical modelling part of the proposal will provide an appropriate level
abstraction of the forces appearing between the probe and media that
remains&lt;br/&gt;tractable and is sufficient for data storage purposes. The
communication system&lt;br/&gt;modelling and design objectives part will develop
a communication channel model of the data storage system. Efficient and high
performance detectors and error control codes will be developed for the
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The proposal objectives if
achieved will directly impact the&lt;br/&gt;consumer electronics market and will
provide a small form factor high density data storage alternative. Synergistic
transfer of knowhow between the academia and industry by exchanging student
visits and presenting specialized workshops will be achieved. A new course on
probe based data storage that bridges the know
how.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;