* 0802830
* Dynamical Properties of Nanoscale Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Massimiliano Di Ventra, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 285,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education into dynamical properties of nanoscale systems. Researchers are
investigating previously unexplored fundamental issues and novel phenomena
concerning transport in nanoscale systems. Efforts are in developing novel
approaches and theories to describe them, by combining first-principles methods
and model calculations, and advancing predictions which can be tested with
available experimental capabilities. Test bed systems for this research include
(but are not limited to) atomic and molecular junctions, i.e., structures made
of a relatively small number of atoms connected to much larger (bulk)
electrodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New research investigations are initiated in
this work. Researchers will determine what the role of initial correlations and
memory effects is on the transport properties of nanostructures. It is also
intended to determine under which conditions the electron flow develops
characteristics of a turbulent liquid. Researcher will theoretically
investigate, for given a set of initial conditions, the spatial and temporal
correlation laws of the electron dynamics in these systems. Practically, it is
necessary to know how the above properties depend on i) the parameters of the
electron liquid, such as its density and viscosity, ii) the resistance of the
junction, and iii) its atomic geometry and structure. Finally, the grand
question, is to determine whether a dynamical calculation of conductance, using
time-dependent density-functional methods, is able to capture many-body effects,
such as coulomb blockade, with available functionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this theoretical setting, the researcher plans to investigate novel many-body
effects and concepts in spin transport. The first effect considered is related
to the viscous nature of the electron liquid and gives rise to a dynamical spin
resistance. The second one is due to the interaction between local resistivity
spin dipoles, i.e., dipoles of local spin due to the scattering of electrons at
the junction. These effects definitely contribute to magnetoresistance, and
under certain conditions may even be the dominant contributions to spin
transport in nanostructures. The above studies will be carried out using a
combination of Time-Dependent Density-Functional Theory and analytical models.
Predictions will be made which can be directly tested with available
experimental capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond basic research, the
investigations have practical and education consequences. There is a continuing
effort to connect theoretical predictions with quantities that are verified
experimentally. The effort contributes to the training of both graduate and
undergraduate students as demonstrated by his past track record. All of the
above projects are particularly suitable for a Ph.D. thesis. They involve a
balanced combination of numerical and analytical work, as well a lot of novel
physical concepts. This provides a robust educational experience for the
advanced students studying for the doctorate. Selected aspects of the program
are also amenable to undergraduate research giving the student studying science
in college an opportunity to experience theoretical research and gain the
associated experience and education. The research has practical implications in
the operation of electrical circuits made of nanoscale systems. The physical
insights obtained with this project will therefore generate basic knowledge and
significant new input for future developments in the field. The integration of
research and education within a challenging program like the present one will
aid the preparation of highly skilled personnel with expertise in an area of
high demand both in academia and in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education into
dynamical properties of electrical conduction in nanoscale systems. Researchers
are investigating previously unexplored fundamental issues and novel phenomena
concerning transport in nanoscale systems. Efforts are in developing novel
approaches and theories to describe them, by combining fundamental theoretical
methods and model calculations, and advancing predictions which can be tested
with available experimental capabilities. Test bed systems for this research
include (but are not limited to) atomic and molecular junctions, i.e.,
structures made of a relatively small number of atoms connected to much larger
(bulk) electrodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond basic research, the
investigations have practical and education consequences. There is a continuing
effort to connect theoretical predictions with quantities that are verified
experimentally. The effort contributed to the training of both graduate and
undergraduate students as demonstrated by his past track record. All of the
above projects are particularly suitable for a Ph.D. thesis. They involve a
balanced combination of numerical and analytical work, as well a lot of novel
physical concepts this providing a robust educational experience for the
advanced students studying for the doctorate. Selected aspects of the program
are also amenable to undergraduate research giving the student studying science
in college an opportunity to experience theoretical research and gain the
associated experience and education. The research has practical implications in
the operation of electrical circuits made of nanoscale systems. The physical
insights obtained with this project will therefore generate basic knowledge and
significant new input for future developments in the field. The integration of
research and education within a challenging program like the present one will
aid the preparation of highly skilled personnel with expertise in an area of
high demand both in academia and in industry.