* 0802112
* Proactive Cross-Layer Adversary Localization for Hostile or Harsh Wireless Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Yaling Yang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2012
* USD 329,498.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop a
localization system capable of localizing an adversary that is actively trying
to disguise its location in a wireless network by distorting its signal
features. The approach is a proactive, cross-layer localization design that
incorporates attack traceback, cross-layer traffic manipulation, and physical
layer position estimation. The attack traceback aspect focuses on narrowing down
an adversary?s location to the coverage area of a couple of access points. The
traffic manipulation aspect will develop trapping techniques to force or lure
the adversary to exhibit their true location-related signal features. Leveraging
these true location-related signal features, the physical layer position
estimation aspect will develop proactive and robust localization techniques to
accurately position the adversary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
proposed project will help to establish accountability in wireless networks and
will result in the development of key attack countermeasures. It is the first to
address many technical challenges in localization and traceback. This project
can also enhance the security of systems where location information is used to
restrict access to critical resources. Furthermore, the proposed research
results can be used to improve the accuracy of localization systems in harsh
communication environments that severely distort the characteristics of emitted
signals from legitimate users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
proposed research will foster the integration of research and education by
fortifying the existing curriculum with the project?s research results. The
outreach component of the project will disseminate research results and
pedagogical materials via education and industry outreach programs.