* 0802575
* Experimental Particle Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2008,10/31/2011
* Bernard Sadoulet, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 10/31/2011
* USD 1,329,550.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER: 0802575 INSTITUTION: University of California ? Berkeley NSF
PROGRAM: PHY ? UNDERGROUND PHYSICS PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Sadoulet, Bernard

TITLE: Experimental Particle Cosmology ABSTRACT

A broad range of observations, from galaxies and superclusters to distant
supernovae and the cosmic microwave background radiation, tell us that about 85%
of the matter in the universe is not made of ordinary particles, but exists in
some dark form. Deciphering the nature of this dark matter is of fundamental
importance to cosmology, astrophysics, and high-energy particle physics. A
leading hypothesis is that it is comprised of Weakly Interacting Massive
Particles, or WIMPs, that were produced moments after the Big Bang. If WIMPs
exist and are the dark matter, then their presence in our Milky Way may be
detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei in a terrestrial detector.

This proposal requests the renewal of the base program of the UC Berkeley group
to support their participation in the Cryogenic Dark Matter Search (CDMS) CDMS-
II & SuperCDMS 25 kg projects. This includes (a) the completion of the CDMS-II
experiment, which is fully constructed and acquiring science data at the Soudan
Mine in Minnesota, and (b) the testing and underground operation in the CDMS-II
infrastructure at Soudan of two new SuperTowers.

This program will have broader impact than improving limits or detecting WIMPs.
Not only are its scientific results important for astrophysics and particle
physics, but its technological development will also push the envelope of
phonon-mediated detectors, whose applications are increasingly widespread, and
contribute to the development of non-dissipative readout techniques.
Furthermore, they continue to support the public outreach program at Soudan,
which hosts some 60,000 visitors and tens of classes each year for tours of the
mine and laboratory.