* 0802843
* GEM: Quantifying the Rate of Diffuse Auroral Electron Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Richard Thorne, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

Diffuse auroral precipitation provides a major source of energy input to the
Earth's upper atmosphere. The precipitated particles lead to changes in the rate
of ionization, which can modulate large natural current systems and induce
electrical currents along transmission lines and pipelines. The additional
ionization can also result in chemical changes to the neutral atmosphere, which
has been linked with ozone-depletion. The precipitated particles also lead to
changes in the electrical conductivity of the ionosphere, which maps along
magnetic-field lines and further affect the transport of plasma in the
magnetosphere.

The diffuse aurora is primarily caused by rapid pitch-angle scattering of plasma
sheet electrons. Because the magnetosphere is essentially collisionless, the
only viable mechanism that can cause pitch-angle scattering is wave-particle
interactions. Previous studies have shown that scattering by both electrostatic
electron cyclotron harmonic (ECH) waves and whistler-mode chorus could be
important, but there is still no general consensus on the dominant process. This
project will examine the roles of ECH and chorus waves by looking at the rate of
wave-induced particle scattering by both classes of wave. Pitch-angle diffusion
rates will be calculated with existing codes, based on a comprehensive analysis
of the spectral properties of chorus and ECH waves observed by the CRRES
satellite in the outer magnetosphere, under different levels of magnetic
activity. Computed rates of electron scattering will be used to determine the
equilibrium pitch-angle distribution and the rate of precipitation loss to the
atmosphere compared to the limit imposed by strong diffusion. The scattering
results will be used, together with statistical data on the global distribution
of trapped electrons in the near-Earth plasma sheet, to model the global
distribution of diffuse auroral emissivity. This study will provide a
quantitative understanding of how microphysical processes regulate the transfer
of energy in geospace. The proposed research is central to the primary science
objectives of the new GEM Focus Group on Diffuse Auroral Precipitation.

Much of the research will be undertaken by a graduate student and a young
research scientist. The scientific results obtained will be made available to
other members of the magnetospheric community interested in modeling the global
distribution of the ring current electron population and diffuse auroral
precipitation under different geomagnetic conditions. The results of the study
can be used to model the global distribution of ionospheric conductivity, which
regulates the rate of magnetospheric convection, and is critical for the
development of a Geospace General Circulation Model. Quantification of electron
scattering rates in the near-Earth plasmasheet is also important for
understanding the evolution of electron flux and pitch angle distributions
during injection events, which provide the source of free energy for the
excitation of waves affecting energetic radiation belt dynamics. The important
physical processes studied at Earth, can be applied to other magnetized planets
such as Jupiter and Saturn, where similar scattering can occur.