* 0802741
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Health and Nature in Twentieth and Twenty-first Century Zululand
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2010
* William Cronon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 03/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

South Africa in general, and KwaZulu-Natal specifically, is a place where
staggering HIV prevalence rates reflect the uneven racial, economic, and
environmental legacy of Apartheid, and where the government continues to waffle
on how best to treat the epidemic. Indeed, HIV/AIDS is affecting nearly every
segment of South Africa society, including large and small-scale environmental
managers. Through natural resource management, which includes the everyday tasks
of herding and gardening, behavioral modifications due to ill health are helping
to inscribe the HIV/AIDS pandemic on the South African landscape. As the
environment changes, so too does the health of the people. This HIV/AIDS-
environment nexus puts the livelihoods of South Africa's poorest and most
vulnerable citizens at great risk. This risk is then situated in a larger
spatial and temporal context where local, state, and global actors are
responding to today's challenges as a product of the region's environmental and
epidemiological histories. Understanding HIV/AIDS and other health predicaments
as environmental health conditions requires scholars and policy makers to
broaden their conception of environmental health. This project pushes the
boundaries of environmental health by attempting to understand the relationships
between health and nature, as complex concepts that have multiple meanings, with
biophysical and ideological components. Working in this South African context,
this project poses three key questions: How are health and nature related? How
have health and nature evolved from the mid-twentieth century to the present?
What is the role of labor (via natural resource management) in connecting health
and nature? A wide variety of methods will be employed to complete this project
including qualitative and quantitative analyses from both oral and written
sources. Methods will include the collection of life and oral histories, a
historical re-survey, focus groups, landcover change analysis, and archival
research. These methods will gather a large amount of data including qualitative
information on local environmental and health changes, scientific reports,
policy documents, historical aerial photographs, and longitudinal agricultural
and epidemiological data. These sources will then be combined to provide a
complete and nuanced understanding of health and nature in Pholela, KwaZulu-
Natal from 1940 to the present.

In order to understand how Pholela's current HIV/AIDS epidemic and landscape are
a result of a larger cultural and historical context this project combines
information gathered through archival sources, oral histories, and landcover
change analysis. Further, by using a framework of health and nature as not just
disease and environment, but as parts of larger social networks and systems of
belief, this project will enable a broader understanding of both categories. To
this point scholars and practitioners have tended to focus on straightforward
environmental health conditions like malaria. As a result, the complete
relationship between conditions like HIV/AIDS and the environment has seldom, if
ever, been addressed. Sitting at the intersection of environmental history,
medical and health and healing history, and political ecology, this project will
explore the boundaries of environmental history and political ecology, by
incorporating health into analyses of human-environment interactions. It will
also encourage the literature on health and healing in Africa to incorporate
biophysical aspects into analyses of socio-cultural context. To conduct this
research the investigators will employ a mixed methodology. By broadening the
idea of environmental health, this study will help scholars and policy makers
see physical and ideological connections between the state of the environment in
which people live and the health of the people themselves. This project stands
poised to help alter the way both academics and practitioners address health and
environmental concerns throughout sub-Saharan Africa. Finally, because this
study stresses spatial and historical perspective, it will offer a way to look
at how connections between human and environmental health change over both time
and space.