* 0802230
* Young Circumstellar Disks: Exoplanet Diagnostics
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* John Wisniewski, Wisniewski              John           P
* Fellowship Award
* Edward Ajhar
* 07/31/2011
* USD 231,000.00

Dr. John Wisniewski is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
Washington. Dr. Wisniewski will address two questions fundamental to advancing
our understanding of the formation and early evolution of exoplanets: 1) How do
dust grains grow and evolve in protoplanetary disks?; and 2) What is the
architecture of long- and short-period exoplanets in debris-disk systems? He
will use ground- and space-based multi-wavelength high-contrast imaging
techniques to map the spatial and size distribution of dust in protoplanetary
disks to enable him to investigate how dust evolves from particle-size grains to
planetesimals, the building blocks of planets. Dr. Wisniewski will also use
high-contrast imaging techniques and high-precision astrometry to search for
evidence of long- and short-period exoplanets in debris-disk systems.

Additionally, Dr. Wisniewski will integrate his exoplanet research into two core
education and public outreach activities. He will develop a suite of exoplanet-
related active-learning exercises for use in introductory college courses,
develop corresponding assessment tools to measure quantitatively the
effectiveness of these exercises, and site-test them via courses he will teach
as a Fellow. Dr. Wisniewski will also develop a "Diversity in Exoplanets:
Diversity in Astronomy" planetarium outreach program, targeted at middle-
through high-school students, which highlights both the diverse nature of
exoplanets and exoplanetary systems detected to date and the diverse nature of
the astronomers making these discoveries.