* 0802327
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Whole Genome Sequencing of Bacillus Megaterium QM B1551
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2007,03/31/2009
* Jacques Ravel, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2009
* USD 251,252.00

This goal of this project is to sequence the complete genome of Bacillus
megaterium, a bacterium that has a number of unique properties that are of both
economic and scientific interest. Its cells are approximately 100 times larger
in cell volume than most other bacteria. This increase allows for the
examination of cellular localization of certain proteins and protein complexes.
A genetic system has been developed and many genetic tools are now available. B.
megaterium's ability to synthesize and secrete products without degradation also
allows for the large-scale production of beneficial compounds including vitamin
B12, antiviral compounds such as oxetanocin, which is active against HIV, and
penicillin amidase, used to construct synthetic penicillins. In addition to
producing these beneficial compounds, B. megaterium also contains a number of
plasmids. These small extrachromosomal pieces of DNA are thought to contain
genes responsible for the organism's ability to grow in environmentally
contaminated sites as well as aiding in the remediation of these sites. The
genetic factors responsible for increased cell size, the process of cell
division in this larger bacterium, and the identification of gene products
potentially responsible for the remediation of environmentally contaminated
sites will be studied through examination of the genome sequence data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;B. megaterium is an ancestral relative to other Bacillus
species, including the bioweapon pathogen B. anthracis as well as the model
bacterial species B. subtilis,. The genome sequencing and comparative genomics
of this bacterium may provide additional insights into the development of
treatments and therapies for pathogens as well as elucidate basic processes that
have been studied in Gram positive bacilli such as sporulation and germination.
The project will also include an undergraduate summer workshop, a conference for
high school and college general science educators and development of a website
to inform the public about the interesting biology of B. megaterium, a
charismatic microorganism. &lt;br/&gt;