* 0802593
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Integrated Agent-Based Microsimulation Model for Hurricane Evacuation in New Orleans
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Nina Lam, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2009
* USD 7,809.00

Mass evacuation of urban areas due to hurricanes is a critical problem that
requires extensive basic and applied research. Previous research used a
microsimulation approach to simulate individual vehicle and driver behavior but
was limited mostly to simulation in a small study area. Very few studies have
considered the use of vulnerabilities in the evacuation strategies. There is a
need to develop a better approach to integrate the various information (such as
vulnerabilities) to better simulate evacuation so that we can evacuate people
timely and efficiently. This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement project
will develop an integrated microsimulation model to simulate hurricane
evacuation in New Orleans. The first objective of this project will be to create
a two-level regional disaster evacuation model by integrating two agent-based
microsimulation models. The first model will treat each vehicle as an agent to
simulate regional road network traffic movements on highways, while the second
model will use each census block centroid as an agent to simulate the local part
of the regional road network traffic. The second project objective will be to
evaluate the effectiveness in terms of overall evacuation time and other metrics
of three different regional evacuation strategies, including simultaneous
evacuation strategy, a staged evacuation strategy based on different community-
evacuation vulnerabilities over the study area, and a staged evacuation strategy
based on different social-biophysical vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will contribute to the fields of dynamic spatial modeling,
visualization, and disaster and vulnerability science. The incorporation of
vulnerabilities into two types of agent-based models will provide more realistic
and accurate pictures of how evacuation behavior affects the effectiveness of
different evacuation strategies, thus providing useful guidance to policy
makers. Although the proposed integrated agent-based model will be based on
hurricane evacuation in New Orleans, the methods developed and the knowledge
gained from this research will be applicable for other regions and other kinds
of disasters. Furthermore, the computer modules developed in this research will
be widely distributed to benefit other agent-based traffic microsimulation
models. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;