* 0802757
* Support for the Archaeometry Laboratory at MURR
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Jeffrey Ferguson, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 339,404.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Michael Glascock and his colleagues
will continue the operation of the Archaeometry Laboratory at the University of
Missouri Research Reactor Center (MURR). The MURR Archaeometry Laboratory is one
of the most comprehensive US-based laboratories dedicated to chemical
characterization studies of archaeological materials. The MURR laboratory is
widely recognized around the world for its leading role in chemical
characterization and interpretation of archaeometric data. The analytical
techniques available at MURR include neutron activation analysis (NAA),
inductively-coupled-plasma mass-spectrometry (ICP-MS) of solutions using high
resolution and quadrupole instruments, laser ablation ICP-MS (LA-ICP-MS), and
conventional- and portable-XRF. These multi-elemental techniques permit the
quantification of major, minor and trace elements simultaneously and with a high
degree of accuracy and precision in a wide range of archaeological materials.
The MURR laboratory also plays an important role in training students in the
analytical techniques for application to specific archaeological questions.
Frequently, archaeology students are invited to spend time on site visiting the
Missouri laboratory where they are taught a variety of methods for interpreting
archaeological data and have direct access to the large compositional databases
containing more than 90,000 previous analyses of pottery, obsidian, basalt, and
chert by INAA, ICP-MS, and XRF. Online access to these databases is continuing
to be developed and improved for integration with databases from other
laboratories. MURR laboratory staff and students are also involved in efforts to
rescue of compositional databases from laboratories no longer in operation. In
addition to continued support of student and senior archaeology research
projects, Dr. Glascock will also work toward the development of calibration
standards and analytical procedures that facilitate the integration of data from
multiple analytical techniques (e.g., INAA, ICP-MS, XRF). These efforts will
benefit both new and mature analytical programs involved in archaeometric
compositional analysis research. Dr. Glascock and his colleagues also will
continue to oversee the development and application of LA-ICP-MS to
archaeological materials and will facilitate the development of portable-XRF for
archaeometric research. The broader impacts of this grant are that elemental
data generated in collaboration with colleagues and students will be used to
address important topics related to human and social dynamics of prehistoric
peoples and societies, such as, mobility patterns and migrations of people,
cultural responses to conflict and stress, community social organization, the
development of craft production and specialization, and the creation and
maintenance of social boundaries and identity. Compositional data will also be
used improve our understanding concerning changes in ancient technology and
provide insight into prehistoric diet and nutrition.