* 0802045
* Electrical Distribution Technician Training System
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2008,12/31/2011
* Scott Alsobrooks, Pearl River Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Zhanjing Yu
* 12/31/2011
* USD 449,903.00

The project, in cooperation with Mississippi's State Board for Community and
Junior Colleges and the region's electrical power generation and distribution
industry, is developing an electrical distribution technician training system in
order to address the need for energy industry technicians. The project team is
creating specialized technology training that encompasses the academic material
and physical skills required for technicians within the energy sector and can
lead to an Associate of Applied Science Degree. These efforts include the
development and refinement of curricula, exploration of pathways into advanced
training, development of instructors in new technologies for the energy sector,
and development of an outdoor physical skills laboratory designed to simulate
the actual energy transmission environment. The implementation involves a series
of modular training blocks or classes, with each module leading to an industry
recognized credential. These are being built into a full AAS degree program and
offered to those seeking minimum skills needed to enter employment. The project
team also is establishing an outdoor training facility at the Pearl River
Community College's Advanced Technology Center that is providing practical
training with real electrical distribution poles and towers, substations,
underground utilities, and other training areas that simulate actual electrical
distribution networks. The evaluation effort, under the direction of an
experienced external evaluator, is looking at student enrollment, retention,
achievement, internships, and placement. The investigators are disseminating
their materials and results through website postings and presentations at local
and regional conferences. Broader impacts include the dissemination of their
materials and outreach and dual enrollment programs with area high schools.