* 0802124
* GOALI : Collaborative Proposal: Advanced Coding and Signal Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,10/31/2011
* Krishna Narayanan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 10/31/2011
* USD 175,723.00

Integrative, Hybrid and Complex Systems&lt;br/&gt;Xinmiao Zhang, Case Western
Reserve University&lt;br/&gt;Krishna Narayanan, Texas A&amp;M
University&lt;br/&gt;GOALI: Collaborative Proposal: Advanced Coding and Signal
Processing for Magnetic Recording: From Theory to
Implementation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to develop practical soft-decision Reed-Solomon decoding algorithms, signal
processing algorithms and corresponding efficient hardware implementations to
demonstrate a novel read-channel architecture that can support recording
densities of a terabyte per square-inch. The approach is to integrate
theoretical development with the design of a hardware architecture such that
practical high-performance systems can be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In this research, algorithms
and hardware are jointly designed to allow the implementation and evaluation of
novel soft-decision decoding algorithms for Reed-Solomon codes. Equalization
designed to work in tandem with the soft-decision decoding algorithm is another
focus. The work falls into three areas: (1) design of a soft-decision Reed-
Solomon decoding algorithm that combines algebraic soft-decision decoding with
generalized minimum distance decoding; (2) integrated hardware architecture and
algorithm design for high-performance and hardware-friendly soft-decision
decoding and equalization; and (3) design of efficient algorithms tailored to
magnetic recording channels rather than to simplified channel models for more
general applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research has the
potential to help the recording industry make the critical choice of whether to
retain the use of Reed-Solomon codes for read channels or to use other codes.
The collaboration with a disk drive manufacturer provides opportunities for
technology transfer to industry. The project also creates opportunities for
students to interact with industry collaborators through internships and regular
meetings. The research has the potential for impact other applications where
Reed-Solomon codes are used, such as optical recording, compact disk and DVD
players, deep-space communications, and high-speed modems.&lt;br/&gt;