* 0802828
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Balancing the Quantity and Quality of Chinese Rice
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2010
* Amy Zader, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 11/30/2010
* USD 12,000.00

The consumption and production of rice is an integral part of Chinese society,
politics, and economy. In an effort to be self-sufficient in grain production
through modern technology, the Chinese government has invested significantly in
using hybrid rice and developing biotechnology to feed the people through
scientific advances in rice production. In recent years, urban consumers are
rejecting this mass-produced rice in favor of higher-quality rice, such as
japonica varieties grown in China's northeast. At the same time, the state
discourse of suzhi (quality) promotes a model citizen subjectivity meant to
counter the Mao era's emphasis on material mass-production and population
quantity. This doctoral dissertation project will identify how the Chinese state
discourse regarding "quality" people affects the production and consumption of
rice in contemporary society. The following questions will be addressed: (1) How
do the Chinese state and farmers negotiate the need for high-quantity mass
production of rice with urban consumer demand for high-quality rice? (2) In what
ways does japonica rice represent "quality" for both urban consumers and rural
producers? A case study of japonica rice from China's northeast will demonstrate
the ways that this particular rice is considered to be "high quality." The
doctoral candidate will conduct interviews with Chinese rice scientists and
agricultural policy makers, surveys with urban consumers in Beijing, and an in-
depth ethnographic exploration of japonica rice production, distribution, and
consumption in the northeast region of China. The integration of findings from
these activities will reveal the rising power of consumption as state policy has
shifted to reflect the role of consumers. As the Chinese state discourse of
"quality" expands into the realm of agricultural policies, this project will
provide an appropriate lens to analyze the connection across rural-urban social
divides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research project will enhance
basic understanding regarding how Chinese state discursive practices have
influenced changes in grain production and consumption practices. Moreover, it
will provide insight into the growing influence that consumers have in guiding
agricultural production in China's new market economy. In addition to increasing
basic understanding of domestic social and environmental changes in China,
project results will relate to the global market for rice and food trade. This
will have special relevance because the U.S. Department of Agriculture and
California rice growers increasingly are concerned about Chinese japonica rice
exports to Asia slowing their own market. The project may also shed new light on
broader ranging issues, such as the safety of food imports from China to the
U.S. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
research career. This project is jointly supported by the NSF Geography and
Regional Science Program and the East Asia and Pacific Program in the Office of
International Science and Engineering.