* 0802676
* Arkansas Alliance for Minority Participation (ARK-LSAMP) in STEM Careers - New Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2014
* Charles Colen, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 06/30/2014
* USD 3,500,000.00

Arkansas Alliance for Minority Participation (ARLSAMP) in STEM
Careers&lt;br/&gt;Executive Summary (Intellectual Merit and Broader
Impact)&lt;br/&gt;The Arkansas Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(ARLSAMP) is a collaborative alliance of nine institutions, including two
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU) and two two-year
institutions, which has a goal of increasing the pool of baccalaureate, masters,
and doctoral degree graduates in STEM disciplines in Arkansas? workforce.
Through ARLSAMP, for the first time, there is an assembly and networking of a
representative number of public and private institutions mobilized by the
embracement of a common need to produce more well-qualified STEM graduates;
guided by a shared vision to help make Arkansas, the region, and the nation a
more competitive force in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;The activities of the alliance
will address recruitment (both from secondary schools and from two-year
colleges). A Pre-Freshmen an ARLSAMP Summer Institute will help to prepare first
semester freshmen to successfully navigate the transition to college level
coursework. A review of bottleneck courses will result in interventions to
prevent students from being removed from the STEM pipeline at these critical
points. Summer and academic year research in faculty laboratories will provide
extracurricular involvement in research at the forefront of STEM. Mentoring
programs will provide for peer mentoring (upper-level student to lower-level
student) as well as faculty mentoring. A STEM seminar series will provide
training in research ethics, as well as information on STEM careers, STEM in
society, and preparation for Graduate School. Alliance-wide and inter-
institutional conferences and activities will foster greater collaborative
research among faculty across institutions.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
proposal will build upon and add to the knowledge base of best practices for
increasing the number of underrepresented minorities entering, succeeding in,
and completing undergraduate degrees in STEM disciplines with the ability and
desire to pursue advanced degrees within these disciplines. These will include
practices for recruiting students to STEM, retaining students in STEM, and
preparing them for pursuing advanced STEM degrees.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The increase in the number of underrepresented students receiving baccalaureate
degrees in STEM will provide an enhanced workforce for the state of Arkansas.
Those continuing to obtain graduate degrees will increase the pool of students
going into leadership and faculty positions in STEM areas. The research
experiences of the students will increase the number of entrepreneurial ventures
in STEM areas. Requirements for students and faculty mentors to visit other
alliance institutions will bring increases in cross institutional collaborations
among faculty and researchers. The use of ARLSAMP student scholars in public
outreach and recruiting to K-12 schools will provide a positive feedback loop to
increase the number of students who pursue STEM degrees when they get to
college.