* 0802744
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reconstructing Guatemala's Ownership Society
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2009
* J. Keith Gilless, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

Land administration projects (LAPs) build state institutions that are charged
with the public administration of land as property via the systematic mapping,
titling, and registering of land with the goal of creating formalized,
transparent land markets. Although these may seem to be only technical tasks,
when taken in context, LAPs often become sites of struggle for political and
economic identities. This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement project
will examine post-war Guatemala's land administration project in the Franja
Transversal del Norte, a "frontier" region sited for agricultural colonization
beginning in the 1950s. This region's complicated history of repeated
colonization and counterinsurgency violence and its majority indigenous Maya
Q'eqchi' population exemplify the difficulties in implementing a uniform LAP.
The doctoral candidate will seek answers to the following questions: How are the
cadastral survey and the reconstruction of the Guatemalan state after the civil
war mutually constituted? What is the relationship between the state territorial
process of individualized propertied citizenship and emergent indigenous
autonomy? The doctoral candidate will explore the degree to which territorial
visions map onto ethnic identities and how the Q'eqchi' must articulate a
territorial identity in relation to propertied citizenship. The researcher also
will attempt to determine whether the land administration project has decreased
land conflicts. She will use a political ecology framework to explore material
outcomes of the production of property regimes, key theoretical debates on the
role of cadastral surveys in producing state identities, and the relationship
between territoriality, indigenous autonomy, and citizenship. She will employ a
mixed-methods approach, including regression analysis of land tenure survey
data, review of archival and grey literature, and participant observation of
rural villages, a Maya Q'eqchi' community association and international
development agencies. This extensive study of the land administration project in
Guatemala will consider the dynamics of territorialities over time and scales.

This research project use both qualitative and quantitative methods to enhance
basic understanding of the effects of land administration development projects.
Different methods employed in prior studies have led to radically different
conclusions regarding the effects of these projects, but this project's mixed-
methods research approach should shed light on the sources of these differences,
and it should strengthen fundamental knowledge by explicitly incorporating
geospatial factors into analysis. In the theoretical literature, there is a
schism in the geographical literature between state mapping projects and
counter-mapping. This schism means that state projects are often portrayed as
finalized, historical moments and that works on counter-mapping often fail to
address the influence of state and development processes on those movements. By
addressing state mapping and counter-mapping in the same research, this project
will contribute to understanding these processes as generated out of productive,
dialectical tension. This project will also assist Maya Q'eqchi' communities in
attaining government recognition for their land rights. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.
This project is jointly supported by the Geography and Regional Science Program
and the Americas Program of the Office of International Science and Engineering.

