* 0802717
* VORTEX2: Multiscale Analyses of Tornadic Storms Using Multiparameter Mobile Radars
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2012
* Louis Wicker, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 11/30/2012
* USD 805,007.00

Intellectual merit: The Verification of Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes
Experiment #2 (VORTEX 2) is a multi-scale investigation of factors that lead to
tornadogenesis. VORTEX 2 is a follow on to VORTEX 1 whose field phase was
conducted during the Spring of 1994 and 1995. The VORTEX 1 advanced knowledge of
the kinematic structures of tornadic and nontornadic storms and provided some
hints as to the sensitivity of the evolution of supercell storms and
tornadogenesis to very fine spatial scale heterogeneity. The VORTEX 2 community
intends to extend and build upon the results of VORTEX 1. The research supported
under this proposal addresses the stormscale circulations, and thermodynamic and
precipitation variability that affect the development and distribution of
vorticity in tornadic storms. The primary data set common to these research
objectives are Doppler and polarimetric radar observations over the entire
breadth and depth of the parent tornadic storm and its immediate environment.
C-band radars, with their ability to both penetrate heavy precipitation and
sense the clear-air inflow associated with supercell storms, are required.
Although the Principal Investigators will cover the entire depth of the storm
with two C-bands, frequent coordinated sampling of the lowest 3 kilometers will
be made with a X-band dual-polarimetric radar to examine the microphysics and
dynamics of the rear-flank downdraft and angular momentum beneath the
mesocyclone. These three radars will be tightly coordinated to provide the
storm-scale circulation and precipitation structure needed to place finer-scale
observations from other instruments into the context of larger-scale storm and
environmental flow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objectives of this
research are to study: (i) vorticity dynamics associated with low-level rotation
in supercells, (ii) the role of angular momentum transfer on tornadogenesis
(iii) precipitation and thermodynamics of the rear-flank downdraft, (iv) the
impact of environmental heterogeneity (including boundaries) on storm evolution,
(v) the role of cell mergers on tornadogenesis, (vi) the evolution of
polarimetric signatures within tornadic and non-tornadic supercells, and (vii)
improvements in the analysis and forecasting of tornadic storms through the use
of ensemble Kalman-filtering data assimilation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: According to the 1997 Workshop on Societal and Economic Impacts of
Weather, tornadic storms account for about 73 fatalities each year and have an
average economic impact of about $700M. While lead times associated with tornado
warnings have increased with the National Weather Service (NWS) Doppler
modernization and forecaster training program, false alarm rates have
essentially remained flat. The lack of improvement in false alarms reflects lack
of understanding of the physical processes that can cause or limit
tornadogenesis. The research conducted here will improve fundamental knowledge,
enabling better conceptual models and improved forecasting ability. The improved
data assimilation and numerical weather prediction techniques will aid
forecasters in their efforts to better warn the public. The independent dual-
polarization and multiple-Doppler derived wind fields will aid in storm process
and model validation studies. The dual-polarization data will provide an early
indication of polarimetric signatures associated with tornadogenesis, if they
exist, which will maximize the benefit of the dual-polarimetric upgrade of the
NWS operational radar network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The datasets will also be
used in university classes from freshman orientation to graduate level term
projects. Computer-based teaching modules will be developed and made available
to the community.