* 0802626
* Applications of Heat Kernel Techniques to Zeta Functions of Quotients of Symmetric Spaces and of Graphs
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Jay Jorgenson, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew D. Pollington
* 06/30/2012
* USD 131,670.00

The grant proposal describes several directions of research to be undertaken by
Jay Jorgenson and his co-authors which, somewhat generally, build on his prior
investigation of number theoretic applications of heat kernel and heat kernel
analysis. Previous work by Jorgenson with J\"urg Kramer focus on analytic
aspects of Arakelov theory. Continuing this work, Jorgenson and Kramer recently
established a relation between certain L-functions attached to non-holomorphic
Maass forms and L-functions attached to holomorphic forms of weight two. Part of
the proposed research describes work to be carried out by Jorgenson and Kramer
which studies the application of their L-function relation to questions
involving bounds of Fourier coefficients of Maass forms. Additionally, the
Jorgenson and Kramer collaboration has resulted in projects involving the inter-
relations between hyperbolic, parabolic, and elliptic Eisenstein series. The
research proposal describes a number of problems which remain in this direction.
In collaboration with Gautam Chinta and Anders Karlsson, Jorgenson has initiated
a program of study of heat kernels and analytic number theory associated to
totally disconnected spaces, including discrete tori and Cayley graphs
associated to finite groups. The proposal outlines further questions to be
investigated by Jorgenson in his joint research efforts with Chinta and
Karlsson.

The heat kernel, and heat kernel analysis, is present in many areas of
mathematics and related fields. For example, one component of the joint research
undertaken by Chinta, Jorgenson and Karlsson is to study determinants of certain
matrices associated to graphs associated to finite groups. Going back as far as
Kirckhoff in 1847, connections have been known which establish relations between
these determinants and other disciplines, such as electrical engineering and
chemistry. More recently, one can say that a considerable amount of financial
mathematics and financial engineering is built on heat kernel analysis. In
addition to specific research problems posed by Jorgenson which relate to
finance, his teaching duties include curricular development activities involving
financial engineering and bio-statistics courses, all of which benefit from
Jorgenson's research program. Finally, the proposal describes a wide range of
problems which are assessable to students of many levels, ranging from advanced
undergraduate students to recent Ph.D.'s.