* 0802678
* Quantum Computational Complexity of Classical Statistical Mechanics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Daniel Lidar, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 07/31/2011
* USD 235,237.00

The computational advantages of Quantum Information Processing in the context
of&lt;br/&gt;classical statistical mechanics are still largely unknown. This
proposal is concerned with understanding the power of quantum computation in the
context of hard classical statistical mechanics problems. This will be done by
developing a classification of which instances of the Ising Spin Glass and Potts
models (key models in statistical mechanics) are amenable to fast quantum
simulation. It is expected that this will lead directly to an understanding of
the quantum computational complexity of related problems in combinatorics, graph
theory, knot theory, and topology. Thus this proposal aims to shed light on the
border between classical and quantum computational complexity theory, beyond the
existing variants on Shors and Grovers algorithms. Two distinct approaches will
be pursued: (i) The use of coding theory and an exisiting quantum algorithm for
number-theoretic objects known as Gauss sums, and (ii) A representation of
quantum circuits in terms of an algebraic object known as quadratically signed
weight enumerators. In both cases a direct connection can be made to the
partition function of the Potts model or the Ising Spin Glass model,
which&lt;br/&gt;are known to generate computationally hard problems. The basic
approach to be&lt;br/&gt;pursued is to classify instances of these two models in
terms of their quantum&lt;br/&gt;computational complexity. This will shed light
on the power of quantum computation, and may lead to the discovery of new
quantum algorithms which outperform their classical counterparts. Broad Impact:
This proposal will promote training, and learning in quantum computation.
Quantum computation has potential for dramatic impact on ab initio materials and
drug design. This proposal aims to elucidate the potential of quantum
computation in simulating classical physics, which can benefit society by
providing fast solutions to hard classical statistical mechanics problems
arising, e.g., in polymer physics, and fields requiring combinatorial
optimization. The PI is the Director&lt;br/&gt;of the newly formed Center for
Quantum Information Science &amp; Technology (CQIST) at USC, which will
coordinate outreach activities aimed at socioeconomically challenged as well as
gifted students in the Los Angeles area. It will build a University home base
for science teachers at high schools in central Los Angeles. CQIST will
disseminate the results of the research of this proposal, by means of
publications, regular series of meetings, and contacts with the press.