* 0802141
* Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Charge-Charge Interactions in Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2007,08/31/2009
* George Makhatadze, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2009
* USD 392,855.00

Understanding the mechanisms of stabilization of protein structure represents
one of the major aspects of the protein folding problem. The contributions of
various short-range interactions, such as hydrogen bonding, the hydrophobic
effect, and configurational entropy, to protein stability have been well
documented. However, it is becoming more and more evident that the long-range
electrostatic interactions between charged protein groups are also important
contributors to protein structure and stability. The overall goal of this
project is to explore the relation between the charge-charge interactions on the
protein surface and properties of proteins such as stability, solubility and
enzymatic activity. The experimental work will be performed with several model
proteins (ubiquitin, CspB, CDC42) that differ in three dimensional structure,
size, and functional activity. The amino acid sequence of these proteins will be
altered according to the theoretical predictions based on different models for
calculation of charge-charge interactions. The consequences of these changes in
terms of stability, solubility and enzymatic activity will be measured using a
variety of biophysical methods. The fundamental importance of this research is
that using a combination of theoretical calculations and experimental
measurements the relationship between charge-charge interactions and the protein
stability will be explored.

This research will provide the foundation for the design of proteins stable at
extreme temperatures. This will benefit the industrial use of proteins where
thermostability of enzymes is in many cases the largest obstacle. This research
will also have broad impact on the research and education infrastructure because
training of graduate and undergraduate students is an intrinsic aspect of all of
the experimental and theoretical work. The scientific concepts derived from this
work will be incorporated into graduate courses that are offered by the PI.