* 0802469
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Transplanting and Translating the Stock Market in Developing Countries
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2010
* Richard Swedberg, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2010
* USD 7,500.00

SES-0802469 Richard Swedberg Christopher Yenkey Cornell University

Stock markets are unique market structures whose efficacy is predicated on
complex sets of institutionalized formal rules and procedures. Developing
countries in sub-Saharan Africa are rapidly establishing stock markets despite
the frequent lack of institutional frameworks needed to facilitate the operation
of sophisticated markets. This dissertation seeks to answer: 1) What
institutional arrangements are transplanted from first-world sources to
developing countries and how effectively are they translated into their new
environments; 2) What difficulties do regulators face in enforcing newly adopted
regulations, and what role is played by formal regulation in establishing
confidence in these new markets; and 3) What factors affect investment options
available in sub-Saharan stock markets?

Quantitative data will be collected from a sample of seven stock markets in sub-
Saharan Africa (Kenya, Malawi, Nigeria, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe).
Quantitative data collection will focus on levels and types of firm and
shareholder participation, market performance data, involvement by foreign
advisors, rates of regulatory rule violations, availability of investment
instruments, and qualifications of domestic regulators. Qualitative data will
also be gathered through in-depth interviews with market regulators,
intermediaries, and listed and unlisted firms in Kenya and Tanzania. Collecting
qualitative data on topics similar to the quantitative aspects will add
explanatory depth and clarity to the quantitative analysis.

Broader Impacts: The research contributes to ongoing efforts to stimulate
economic development in sub-Saharan Africa and will strengthen research ties
with several African organizations as well as creating a comprehensive database
on African capital markets. The field work is hosted by the Institute of
Economic Affairs in Nairobi, Kenya and durable research relationships are being
formed with many African capital market organizations, as they contribute to the
creation of a new and diverse database that will be a valuable resource to
scholars interested in issues of institutional change as well as economic
development in emerging markets.