* 0802350
* Technology and Innovation in Manufacturing and Engineering (TIME) Center
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2012
* Dennis Faber, Community College of Baltimore County, Essex
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 03/31/2012
* USD 2,652,058.00

The Technology and Innovation in Manufacturing and Engineering (TIME) Center is
continuing its transformational activities and broadening its focus on
manufacturing and engineering technology at the secondary and postsecondary
levels. Center partners are pursuing a comprehensive strategy to: 1. Develop
secondary and post-secondary manufacturing and engineering technology curricula
in demand-driven program areas. 2. Provide professional development
opportunities for secondary and post-secondary manufacturing, engineering
technology and science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) faculty.
3. Collaborate with partners and key stakeholder groups to enhance the
visibility and image of manufacturing and engineering technology as viable
career options. 4. Explore innovative instructional methodology to support more
effective delivery of manufacturing and engineering technology education.

The target audiences for these strategies include students from middle school
through college, parents, K-12 teachers, college faculty, high school and
college career counselors, adult learners, incumbent workers, and members of the
employment community. In order to reach these diverse constituencies, the TIME
Center is working with a wide variety of local, regional and national partners.
Among the collaborators are seven community colleges, three universities, state
and local K-12 educational systems, state and local workforce and economic
development agencies, six business organizations, and individual companies. The
objectives of the TIME Center build upon its many successes to date, continue
the transformation in manufacturing and engineering technology education already
begun, and expand involvement and expertise into new areas that enhance
capabilities to address these changes.

Intellectual Merit: Activities systematically build upon successes and lessons
learned to date by continuing the redesign and restructuring of secondary and
post-secondary manufacturing and engineering technology programs in Maryland;
identifying new, emerging areas for coursework and possible degree options that
continue to meet the industry's need for trained technicians; ensuring that
faculty have access to current instructional materials, technologies, and state-
of-the practice professional development; exploring innovative instructional
delivery approaches; and institutionalizing products and expertise into partner
programs at various educational levels.

Broader Impact: Activities continue to involve the Center in regional and
statewide workforce development partnerships and initiatives; maintain close
interaction with the employer community; broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups; advance efforts to create systemic educational change
at the secondary and post-secondary levels; more effectively assess the impact
of collective efforts on student learning; collaborate with other ATE Centers on
professional development and research on alternate instructional delivery
options; and ensure sustainability and institutionalization of products and
services.