* 0802278
* Hydrogen in Crystalline Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Michael Stavola, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 04/30/2012
* USD 283,297.00

Technical: The goal of this experimental research program is a fundamental
understanding of the hydrogen impurity and its properties in semiconductor host
materials that are important in electronics technology. Vibrational spectroscopy
of the light hydrogen atom has proved to be a powerful probe of the microscopic
structure and properties of hydrogen-containing defects and is the principal
method used in this project. Recent advances make the following experiments
attractive: (i) Hydrogen has been found to increase the band gap of dilute III-
N-V alloys. Vibrational spectroscopy provides information about the structures
of the defects causing this effect and the number of hydrogen atoms they
contain. (ii) Hydrogen forms interstitial molecules in Si whose rotational-
vibrational properties have recently been deciphered. Infrared spectroscopy is
used to probe the ortho-para transition of the interstitial hydrogen molecule.
(iii) H has been found to have a strong effect on the conductivity of
semiconducting oxides like ZnO. Vibrational spectroscopy of H implanted into ZnO
at cryogenic temperature investigates the properties of the fundamental isolated
hydrogen defect. Graduate and undergraduate students conduct the experiments on
impurities in semiconductors that are the focus of this research program.
Students learn about the physics of semiconductors, the optical properties of
materials, and crystal defects. This experience provides an excellent foundation
for careers in science and engineering.

Non-technical: An understanding of the hydrogen impurity in semiconductors is
vital in electronics technology. Hydrogen is introduced easily into
semiconductors, either intentionally or unintentionally. Once present, hydrogen
modifies the electrical properties of semiconductor materials and the behavior
of electronic devices. Experimental studies of the microscopic structures and
fundamental properties of defect "molecules" in semiconductors that contain
hydrogen are the focus of this research program. The semiconductor materials
that are of interest include Si, which is important for integrated circuits and
solar cells, and compound semiconductors, which are important for light-emitting
devices. We extend our research to relevant areas of semiconductor technology.
For example, a method to detect the small concentration of hydrogen introduced
into Si by methods used by industry to improve the efficiencies of solar cells
has been developed and used to study manufacturing processes. This research
program on hydrogen in semiconductors provides an excellent opportunity for
undergraduate and graduate students to make important contributions to problems
in physics that have an impact on electronics technology, often in collaboration
with leading scientists in the U.S. and abroad.