* 0802444
* Student and early career support for ISSNLA, July 20-25, 2008, Castro Urdiales, Spain
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Daniel Szyld, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2009
* USD 13,000.00

This grant will support the participation of US-based Ph.D. students at the
International Summer School on Numerical Linear Algebra (ISSNLA). The ISSNLA
will take place at the International Center of Mathematical Meetings (CIEM) in
Castro Urdiales, Spain on 20-25 July 2008. The ISSNLA is organized by the SIAM
Activity Group on Linear Algebra (SIAG/LA). The local organization is assumed by
SIMUMAT (the Spanish initiative from the Comunidad de Madrid on ``Mathematical
Modeling and Numerical Simulation in Science and Technology"). The target
audience of the ISSNLA are doctoral students in any field that requires results
and methods from Numerical Linear Algebra. The courses will be self contained,
and taught at a level that is accessible to a wide audience. They will be of
interest to graduate students and recent Ph.D.'s in science and engineering. The
lecturers are leading experts who are also well known for their expository
skills. They were chosen by an Advisory Committee composed by leading
international scientists.

The purpose of the "International Summer School on Numerical Linear Algebra" is
to acquaint doctoral students with recent developments and novel applications in
a subfield of Applied Mathematics called "Numerical Linear Algebra". By design,
the summer school is forward-looking: the courses cover topics that are too
recent to have been included in textbooks or doctoral courses; these topics
include applications to information retrieval and mechanics. The target audience
are doctoral students in science and engineering. NSF support for US-based
participants will have a positive impact on the continued strong competitiveness
of the US in this crucial discipline, with its connections to virtually every
area of scientific computing.