* 0802436
* Florida's Regional Center for Manufaucturing Education (FLATE)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Marilyn Barger, Hillsborough Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/2013
* USD 2,975,983.00

The NSF Florida Advanced Technological Education (FLATE) Center is a state wide
ATE Regional Center for Manufacturing Education. Goals for the 3 year renewal
period are to (a) identify and secure state and/or other funds for operations;
(b) implement a statewide unified education system that positions manufacturing
education as a convergent curriculum to optimize technician preparation in
manufacturing and its enabling technologies; (c) provide an effective outreach
platform for Florida's high schools, community colleges, industry, and
legislature to access information related to the requirements for and impact of
manufacturing education; and, (d) present professional development opportunities
for technical faculty to develop, refine, or certify their knowledge base within
manufacturing and/or its related enabling technologies and educational
pedagogies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Outreach projects are
having a systemic impact on manufacturing and its enabling technology education
by merging educational content into the "Made in Florida" awareness campaign and
connecting classroom activities directly with instructional visits to actual
manufacturing facilities. Curriculum projects have a systemic impact on
manufacturing education by implementing an articulation pathway that allows high
school students to transfer 15 credit hours toward the A.S. Degree. They provide
clear statewide defined skill sets as a reference for prospective students of
the expectations of prospective employers. The curriculum aligns manufacturing
and engineering technology degrees to the changing needs of industry and
provides a viable statewide mechanism for industry feedback on the impact of
A.S. degrees. FLATE is also providing professional development opportunities for
faculty responsible for manufacturing education in secondary, post secondary,
and community college environments; integrating Manufacturing Skills Standards
Council (MSSC) skills into high school and community college curriculum; and
increasing the statewide impact of the Florida Technology Forum by providing
industry focused short courses for technology
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: FLATE is poised to demonstrate
transportable models that (1) help Florida's Department of Education filter its
total set of technical course, certificate, and degree program frameworks; (2)
encourage first time college and minority students to continue post secondary
education by streamlining student access to manufacturing and related degrees;
(3) institutionalize a platform for best practice curriculum dissemination; (4)
increase the number of teachers and students that are MSSC nationally certified;
(5) increase the awareness in all parts of the state that manufacturing careers
represent a critical need in Florida; (6) establish a statewide collaborative
"manufacturing community" that partners industry, government, and academic
entities; (7) provide the public with easy access to technical education
information to support new Florida mandated career exploration middle school
curriculum component; (8) increase the number of faculty that can integrate the
teaching of industry mandated soft skills into their current curriculum; (9)
align Florida's manufacturing related technical degrees to industries' changing
needs; (10) demonstrate an effective curriculum management plan for Florida's
other AS/AAS degrees; (11) support projects that multiple industry partners can
financially support because they are recognized as industry-focused mutually
beneficial activities; (12) partner industry directly with educational
institutions in their region; and (13) make manufacturers statewide aware of the
benefits of interacting with students during "Made in Florida" supported factory
tours.