* 0802589
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Engineering Effects of Scale Insects on Forest Dynamics in Fragmented Tropical Montane Oak Forests of Veracruz, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2008,09/30/2010
* Jon Stallins, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 09/30/2010
* USD 11,880.00

Landscape change caused by humans, including tropical deforestation, can set off
complex degradation processes. This research examines how the fragmentation of a
tropical forest can affect an insect, with significant consequences for the
plants and animals, in addition to the livelihoods of local people. Large areas
of evergreen montane oak forest in northeastern Mexico have been converted for
grazing. Present-day forests reside in a patchy matrix of pasture and more
intensive agricultural land uses. Observed increases in the densities of an
endemic scale insect in these forests are hypothesized to be a consequence of
this anthropogenic fragmentation. As fragmentation has proceeded over the past
decades, temperatures may have warmed, promoting greater fecundity in this
insect and higher infestation levels. This research examines whether greater
abundances of these insects has had large impacts on the growth and reproduction
of the trees upon which it feeds, and consequently, on the potential
regeneration of these forest fragments. Tree ring analyses will be used to
reconstruct the timing of forest fragmentation and insect infestation, given
that these events leave distinct patterns in the tree ring record. By comparing
the timing of tree ring growth and release events among trees with varying
densities of scale insects, the synergisms among initial fragmentation, insect
infestation, and the potential for forest regeneration can be examined. This
scale insect also produces honeydew, a rich source of carbohydrates for insects
and birds that might ordinarily feed directly on plant nectar. Greater
abundances of honeydew may initiate changes in bird diversity and in the types
and numbers of other insects attracted to this food resource. Avian and insect
surveys on trees with high and low levels of honeydew will convey how
fragmentation may also have an unanticipated engineering effect on trophic
organization and biodiversity. Field vegetation sampling and satellite remote
sensing will be used to map the distribution of scale insect infestation within
individual forest patches and across different elevations and slope aspects.
This will facilitate insight into how local forest patch microclimates and
larger scale climatic controls shape insect densities and future forest
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scale insect in this study can be
conceptualized as an ecosystem engineer, a species that creates, modifies or
maintains habitats. This study steers away from ecosystem engineering's emphasis
on balance and predictability toward a perspective that incorporates non-linear
dynamics and tradeoffs for the engineer. If fragmentation has catalyzed current
scale insect infestation levels, and if infestation is detrimental to forest
recovery, forest state can be characterized as a "lock-in" whereby decline is
canalized once fragmentation begins. Recent studies suggest that synergisms
among forest fragmentation, disturbance, and species interactions may magnify
the initial impacts of fragmentation. Thus this research seeks to inform the
sustainable use and conservation of these forests by developing more contextual,
field-based evidence of how forest fragmentation unfolds. Honeydew beekeeping
will also be introduced to a community neighboring the study area. Honeydew from
scale insects can be used as forage for honeybees. Some of the foremost honeys
in the world (New Zealand, Germany) come from scale insects. By setting up a
hive, this project also hopes to catalyze interest in a livelihood that could
lessen dependence upon livestock grazing, the primary contributor to forest
fragmentation.