* 0802898
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Neurological Studies in Tactile Map Use and Training by Persons Who Are Blind or Visually Impaired
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2008,11/30/2010
* Amy Lobben, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 11/30/2010
* USD 11,996.00

This project investigates the relationship between spatial abilities, map use
tasks, and training-based performance effects by persons who are blind or
visually impaired. Because the study is theoretically grounded in the areas of
spatial cognition, tactile mapping and use, and functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI), the results will identify both the behavioral-based and the
biological-based impacts resulting from systematic tactile map use and spatial
thinking training. In addition, previous research has identified the neural
patterns associated with spatial ability and map use task performance in sighted
population, which will allow analysis of the similarities and differences
between sighted and blind subject groups in the performance of similar tasks.
The experimental design, itself, reveals a novel methodological approach in
behavioral geography and cartographic research. Past research has focused on
tactile map use from psychophysical-based, cognition and performance-based,
training-based, and neural-based approaches. However, these diverse methods have
not yet been integrated. This research is based on the assertion that a mixed
methodological approach will provide a more holistic measure, not only of
spatial and map use tasks, but also on the effects of training.

The proposed research will have broader impacts by creating an infrastructure
for research on orientation and mobility training. The project will create and
provide a new training tool in the form of a tactile map reading protocol, which
will be evaluated by faculty at the Oregon School for the Blind, and be provided
to the public free of charge. The project brings together a research team of
teachers, orientation and mobility specialists, students and researchers to
develop a curriculum-enhancing tool through an empirical study. This model of a
collaborative team of researchers and educators will enhance the building of the
tactile map reading protocol proposed for the blind and visually impaired. From
an intellectual standpoint, the project integrates concepts, theories, and
experiment design approaches from three fields: behavioral geography,
cartography, and fMRI. Not only will the results enhance the literature in each
of these areas, but they will also provide one of the first integrations of
these fields. In doing so, the experimental design will provide a model to
integrate methods and illustrate a truly cross-disciplinary methodological
approach.