* 0802789
* Mechanism Design with Diversity of Opinion
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2007,06/30/2010
* Kfir Eliaz, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 165,772.00

It is self evident that people often hold different opinions about how the
future will unfold. Standard models assume that these differences are a result
of informational asymmetries. However, they could also be purely differences in
prior belief resulting from inherent biases such as over-optimism. While
differences in prior beliefs open up opportunities to make speculative gains,
these gains may be difficult to realize when individuals cannot observe each
other's beliefs. A natural question that arises is whether institutions or
mechanisms can be design to overcome this informational asymmetry and help
parties realize as much speculative gains as possible. The goal of this study is
to take first step towards answering this question.

This study connects between two recent lines of research, one that studies the
design of mechanisms that exploit behavioral biases of agents, and another that
incorporates heterogeneity of beliefs into economic modeling. The main
contribution is the development of a framework that allows for standard tools
from the mechanism-design literature (which have been developed to deal with
incomplete information regarding diversity in tastes) to be applied to
contracting problems with incomplete information regarding diversity in prior
beliefs.

This research focuses on two questions that are usually asked in the standard
mechanism-design literature. The first question is, how can parties, who each
may have some bargaining power, maximize the total speculative gains that they
can make? The researchers apply a mechanism design approach to this question, in
the context of a pair of models: a principal-agent model in which the two
parties bet on the agent's future action, and a market model in which traders
bet on the future price. They characterize interim-efficient bets in these
environments, and their implementability as a function of fundamentals. In
general, implementability of interim-efficient bets diminishes as the costs of
manipulating the bet's outcome become more uneven across states or agents.

The second question is, how can a monopolist facing agents with diverse, but
privately observed beliefs, maximize his speculative gains? The researchers
argue that menus of contingent contracts that arise in principal-agent
relationships can be interpreted as a consequence of the principal's attempt to
screen the agent's prior belief. They present a model of bilateral contracting
that captures these ideas, characterize the optimal menu and apply it to a
number of economic settings.

Broader Impact: The methodology developed in this study has the potential to
provide important policy implications in areas that concern scholars and
practitioners outside the field of economics. In particular, the study is
expected to provide important insights into the regulation of markets such as
gambling, narcotics, credit, elderly care and health insurance, where providers
may exploit the naivete of consumers who are overly optimistic or overly
pessimistic with regards to their future consumption. The study is also expect
to make a contribution in finance by providing a benchmark for the design of
futures and derivatives in imperfectly competitive markets.

