* 0802780
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Restructuring of the Agri-food System and Developing Countries
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* Jennifer Wiegel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2009
* USD 7,500.00

SES-0802780 Jane L. Collins Jennifer R. Wiegel University of Wisconsin-Madiosn

Over the past decade in Latin America supermarkets? share of food retail has
grown from 15% to 70% on average, and concentration of retail at the national
level has increased, leaving only a few lead firms. At the same time
supermarkets have shifted procurement from wholesale markets to semi-contractual
relationships with networks of preferred suppliers. These changes have increased
the power of supermarkets in developing countries to reshape food production and
distribution, with important implications for producers and consumers, and for
the rural and urban poor. This dissertation studies the changing structure of
food retail channels, for example from traditional markets to supermarkets,
matters for agriculture, farmers and the rural poor in developing countries. The
co-PI will spend twelve months conducting fieldwork in Nicaragua to study the
recent growth of supermarkets there and its effects on food retailing and
domestic food production. This work addresses three research questions: (1) how
does retail-led restructuring affect a developing country?s integration with
world food markets, (2) how is retail-led restructuring affecting existing food
retail channels, food provisioning, and food markets within developing
countries, and (3) how are farmers in developing countries experiencing and
responding to these changes? The study draws on recent research in the fields of
sociology, agricultural economics, and geography which identifies global food
retailers as the drivers in transforming agri-food systems in developed
countries. Yet it extends this research to focus on the growth of supermarkets
within developing countries, and its impact on farmers domestically, through its
effects on traditional food retail institutions and practices. It also extends
the focus on farmers directly supplying supermarkets, to include farmers
supplying traditional food retail channels. Data on production, consumption and
trade will be used to explore the changing integration of Nicaragua with world
food markets. Government statistics on household spending, prices, and food
retailers, combined with interviews and short surveys of wholesalers and
retailers will help understand changes in food retail channels. Agricultural
census data and interviews with buyers will help to map out procurement networks
for transnational supermarkets, national supermarkets, and traditional markets.
Communities within these different procurement networks for tomatoes
(perishable) and beans (not perishable) will be identified and qualitative
interviews with farmers to study how they are experiencing and responding to
these changes.

Broader Impacts: The research will be conducted as a collaborative endeavor
involving individuals from national universities, government agencies,
agricultural NGOs (non-governmental organizations) and farmers associations.
These collaborations will help foster local research, training, and teaching
networks around these issues, ensure local relevance and dissemination of
research findings, and their incorporation into policy. Findings will also be
disseminated in US and international academic and policy forums and
publications. Knowledge gained will enrich teaching and research in the
sociology of agriculture and development by bringing together work from the
disparate disciplines mentioned above.