* 0802722
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Changing the Amazon Landscape: Dynamics of Land Use and Ecological Change in Small Watersheds
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Emilio Moran, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 12/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

Land use changes have dramatically affected the water quality and biological
productivity of streams and associated watersheds, particularly within the
Brazilian Amazon Basin, where deforestation and extensive agriculture have led
to increased surface water flow and nutrient losses from watersheds, including
headwater catchments. It is thought that economic and socio-demographic factors
have played critical roles in structuring these changes; in particular,
household decisionmaking, driven by environmental factors, government policies,
and knowledge of land use and water quality are important components driving
land and water use choices in small watersheds. These uses have specific
outcomes for the water quality found in streams draining small watersheds,
particularly the quantity and type of nutrients that are important for the
biological productivity of stream ecosystems. As a result, this study evaluates
the role of household needs and activities, land and water use, and perception
of water quality in affecting the water quality of small watershed streams in an
agricultural settlement near Altamira, Brazil. The importance of two kinds of
watershed land cover gradients are assessed: amount of forest in a watershed and
amount of non-forest in a watershed, as pasture or cacao plantations, which are
the two most predominant land uses near Altamira. Examination of water quality
and stream water dissolved nutrient concentrations (carbon, nitrogen,
phosphorus) at watershed stream outflow points, using standard sampling
techniques, provides a summary of the impact of watershed land use on stream
water quality. In addition, interviews with small farmers provide information on
household structure and knowledge of the relationship between land use and water
quality. Remote sensing analyses and a geographic information system are being
used to generate information on larger spatial patterns of watershed land use
changes. The investigators hypothesize that external market factors, such as
prices for agricultural goods, and increasing water needs from agriculture are
the predominant factors driving land use and subsequent changes in water quality
and stream water dissolved nutrients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
study will provide valuable insights into household land use and environmental
change in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. In addition, as small streams are
widespread in the Amazon Basin and provide important resources for many
Amazonian inhabitants, including food and drinking water, the results of this
research will provide insights to minimize detrimental impacts on water quality,
particularly through understanding how household agricultural land and water use
affects the underlying water quality and health of streams. While focused on
land use changes in the Brazilian Amazon, this research also addresses land use
issues worldwide, as local Amazonian watershed changes ultimately scale-up to
affect worldwide ecology, such as global nutrient cycles, and economy, such as
agriculture and trade. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to foster independent research by a
doctoral student.