* 0802767
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Islamophobia and Civil Rights Advocacy Organizations
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* Erik Love, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2009
* USD 7,500.00

SES-0802767 Howard Winant Erik Love University of California Santa Barbara

This dissertation project is an in-depth study of Middle Eastern, Muslim, and
South Asian American civil rights advocacy work around the issue of Islamophobia
in the United States. The research seeks to address four hypotheses. First, the
impact of racialization will move organizational leadership to pursue coalition
building among a wide range of affected groups. Second, divisions will remain
apparent in the "rank-and-file" membership and constituency of advocacy
organizations. Third, the development of the organizational field under
investigation will largely reflect the development of other fields of ethnic and
racialized civil rights advocacy organizations in the United States. And,
finally, events, more than pressure from members and constituents, will be the
primary causal factors in large-scale changes in the organizational field. Data
are drawn from three locations--local-level organizations based in Los Angeles
and New York, and national-level advocacy organizations based in Washington, DC.
The project studies changes occurring over time, as well as shifts in
organizational forms and strategies through a multi-methods approach. This
includes a longitudinal, comprehensive database of founding dates, mission
statements, and membership statistics encapsulating temporal changes in the
field of local-level advocacy organizations in New York and Los Angeles; a
content analysis of press releases, newsletters, pamphlets, and other documents
produced by national-level advocacy organizations; and in-depth interviews of
people currently working with these organizations.

Broader Impacts: This project seeks to elucidate in social science scholarship
the connections between the diverse yet often collectively racialized Muslim,
Middle Eastern, and South Asian communities in the United States. In addition,
the data collection will produce digital archives that can be made available to
other scholars interested in the field of Muslim, Middle Eastern, and South
Asian American advocacy. The project will develop knowledge that has the
potential to impact contemporary policy debates. Finally, the results of the
research may provide useful, practical information for the civil rights advocacy
organizations in the study.