* 0802929
* 2008 Gordon Research Conference on Bioanalytical Sensors, to be held at Bryant University, Smithfield, RI June 29-July 4, 2008
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2008,02/28/2009
* Chris Taitt, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Nily R. Dan
* 02/28/2009
* USD 15,000.00

Bioanalytical sensors are detection/measurement devices that transform a
biological recognition event into a measurable signal. Over the last 20-30
years, bioanalytical sensors have led to both economic and intellectual
breakthroughs in medicine, environmental monitoring, industry, and
biotechnology. In more recent years, the importance of sensors in national
defense and security has also been recognized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2008 GRC
on Bioanalytical Sensors will bring together the experts in the fields of
biochemistry, biology, chemistry, engineering, materials science, medicine,
molecular biology, and physics to discuss the latest developments in
bioanalytical sensing. The overall goal and long term objective of this
conference is to generate new ideas and collaborations leading to improved
instrumentation and materials for future detection platforms. Specific themes of
the 2008 conference will include: molecular recognition; signal
transduction/platform development (SPR, fiber optic, cantilever, magnetic-based,
and electrochemical sensors); supporting/enabling technologies (microfluidics,
nanoparticles, MEMS); and real-world detection. At least one oral session will
be devoted to each general thematic area, with a total of 28 oral presentations
and 2 poster sessions. In addition, we will convene a Gordon-Kenan Graduate
Research Seminar (GRS) immediately preceding the GRC; the GRS is organized and
conducted by graduate students and postdocs, with limited guidance from the GRC
chairs. &lt;br/&gt;