* 0802200
* MO: Diversity and Ecology of Archael Viruses from Yellowstone Thermal Environments
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Mark Young, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2014
* USD 752,642.00

The overall goal of this project is to discover novel viruses in Yellowstone hot
springs, and learn what role they play in determining composition and function
of the microbial communities in which they exist. The specific objective of the
research is to significantly contribute to our understanding of virus diversity,
ecology, and evolution. The specific aims are to (i) significantly expand
knowledge of virus diversity and (ii) elucidate the mechanism(s) and impacts of
virus movement on virus and microbial community structure and dynamics. These
aims will be accomplished by temporal sampling and analysis of total virus
communities associated with high temperature (&gt;80Â°C) acidic (pH&lt;4.0) hot
springs found in Yellowstone National Park. The effects of virus movement and
the mechanism of movement will be investigated experimentally by blocking
migration within a hot spring and by directly sampling the air column for
viruses, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and
scientific importance of this project is to understand how and to what extent
viruses influence Earth's ecosystems. This research is aimed at beginning to
overcome our ignorance of virus diversity and function in nature due to the
limited attention that they have received as compared to their cellular hosts.
The broader impacts of this research include, but extend well beyond the
training of postdocs and graduate, undergraduate and high school students. These
broader impacts encompass development of a dynamic outreach program promoting
Yellowstone's thermal environments, including but not limited to, (i) an
outreach program that targets K-12 learners and teachers nationally through the
development of science curriculum; (ii) a field-based teacher training class;
(iii) participation in a variety of community outreach programs including a
community lecture series; (iv) participation in field experiences for adults;
(v) participation in ParKids, a 3-day thermal biology based learning experience
for kids in Yellowstone Gateway communities; and (vi) distribution of national
and international film documentaries, radio and popular press articles
concerning Yellowstone's thermal biology and our research.