* 0802062
* Computer Security and Investigations: An Integrative Approach to Curriculum Development in Digital Forensics
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2011
* Shambhu Upadhyaya, Erie Community College
* Standard Grant
* Scott Grissom
* 04/30/2011
* USD 449,662.00

This project involves a strong education-industry-government group whose primary
concern is industry's critical information infrastructure. Given that there is a
lack of national framework for curricula and training development in digital
forensics education, this project cuts across disciplines to generate a new
knowledge set including security management and law enforcement perspectives.
The project has three main objectives: (1) collaboration between faculty in
computing and faculty in the Criminal Justice Department to develop new
curricula in digital forensics for a certificate and/or A.S. degree in Computer
Security and Investigations; (2) development of laboratory modules, which
facilitates community college students' education for technician jobs in digital
forensics, including the creation of CDs for training and tutorials; and (3)
running of community-wide symposia to disseminate information to the general
population about computer security and digital forensics. Unique features
include (1) linkage with government agencies, companies, and other academic
institutions through the Advisory Council; (2) cutting across disciplines to
teach a hybrid mix of skills; (3) courses designed as modular courses to be
offered as short courses or workshops for professional development for
educators; and (4) website and web-based facilities that support the project,
academic program, courses, and distance learning.