* 0802184
* CHEPREO: An Inter-Regional Grid Enabled Center for High Energy Physics at FIU
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Paul Avery, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2014
* USD 5,030,000.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER: 0802184&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Florida International
University&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: PHY ? ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL
USER&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Markowitz, Pete
E..&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: CHEPREO: An Inter-Regional Grid Enabled Center
for High Energy Physics at
FIU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This renewal
proposal presents a request for five years of funding to support CHEPREO: An
Inter-Regional Grid Enabled Center for High Energy Physics Research, Education
and Outreach at Florida International University. This Center is a research,
education, and outreach program that has, in its first five years, established a
durable and vibrant learning community of high school teachers, high school
students, university students, scientists, faculty, and associated stake-holders
that continues to attract science and math students, using the project?s
cutting-edge science and advanced cyberinfrastructure as compelling elements of
study. An education and research partnership derived from basic research in
particle physics (based on the CMS experiment at CERN), grid computing, and
advanced networking- transforming the undergraduate experience through modeling-
based, guided-inquiry introductory physics classes, a fellowship program, and
the establishment of the Physics Learning Center (PLC), CHEPREO is proposed to
continue and expand its research, education and outreach for another five years
through NSF support, thereby extending the impact of this national resource even
further.&lt;br/&gt;