* 0802801
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: International Migration from Ecuador's Southern Andes: The Embeddedness of Migration Process in Daily Life
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Alison Mountz, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/28/2010
* USD 11,970.00

Ecuador's economic crisis of the late 1990s led to rapid expansion of
transnational migration networks in the southern Andean provinces of Azuay and
Canar. While previous scholarship studied the effects of migrant remittances in
Ecuador, this project examines ways in which the processes related to migration
have themselves become an important component of daily life for people in this
region of high emigration. The research will investigate the relationship
between U.S. and Ecuadorian policies attempting to thwart illicit migration, and
local experiences linked to initiating international migration. The project asks
the following questions: 1) What is the relationship between U.S. and Ecuadorian
government policy and the industries and processes of migration from Ecuador to
the U.S.? and 2) In what ways are these industries and processes embedded in
daily political, economic, and social life in Azuay and Canar? A mixed-methods
analysis will provide data on the strategies behind and effects of migration
policy, and the role of out-migration in local life. Research will involve in-
depth interviews with Ecuadorian policy makers; U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement officers in Ecuador; non-state organizations, local level officials,
and households with U.S. migrants. Methods will also include participant
observation and household surveys. Fieldwork will take place over nine months in
Quito (Ecuador's capital) and in three cities of the Azuay and Cañar provinces.
The findings will address disjunctures between national and international
approaches toward illicit migration, and individuals' perceptions, decisions,
and actions. The investigators will ask what kind of results are yielded by
migration control policies designed in settings removed from migrants' and
potential migrants' daily lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
research will contribute to policy making in countries of migrant origin and
destination. In source countries of the global South, international migration
has become central to the economy and is of increasing political, economic, and
cultural concern. Meanwhile, as the United States pursues more restrictive
immigration policies and encourages other countries to do the same, this project
evaluates the wide-ranging impacts of such an approach. By conducting research
in a site of migrant origin, the study aims for greater understanding of the
many ways in which migration infiltrates daily life in sending areas. The
project will therefore contribute to debates concerning the relationship between
immigration policy and individual decisions regarding emigration. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.