* 0802540
* Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (Mid-Level Alliance)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Dennis Gendron, Tennessee State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2013
* USD 3,462,322.00

TLSAMP Phase II ? Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;In 2002,
Tennessee State University, LeMoyne-Owen College, Middle Tennessee State
University, University of Memphis, University of Tennessee at Knoxville, and
Vanderbilt University partnered to form the Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (TLSAMP). The partners share a strong commitment to
increasing access and opportunities for underrepresented minority students in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). The Alliance was formed
to substantially increase the number of underrepresented minorities (e.g.,
African Americans, Hispanic Americans, and Native Americans) earning STEM
degrees, beginning with the bachelors degree and continuing to the masters and
the doctorate degrees. Sharing a long-term commitment to work together, TLSAMP
will play a significant role in increasing the production of underrepresented
STEM professionals to meet the needs of government, industry, and
academia.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of Phase I was to double the number of
underrepresented minorities receiving STEM degrees by the end of the five-year
grant period. The Alliance produced 63 additional graduates above the baseline.
Our goal to double the number is a challenge, but a recognizably achievable goal
requiring continuity and extension of current efforts as well as application of
lessons learned regarding the recruitment of Hispanic Americans and Native
Americans, the retention of African Americans, and the need to intensify
retention as recruitment increases.&lt;br/&gt;Applying the lessons learned from
Phase I, our Phase II proposal will focus on three key objectives: 1) aggressive
continuation of Phase I goal and initiatives with special emphasis on recruiting
more African American, Hispanic American, and Native American students; 2)
significant improvement in retention with special emphasis on enhancing the
development of African Americans to increase their retention in STEM; and 3)
preparation for progression to graduate school. In other words, TLSAMP Phase II
will apply the lessons learned, continue the best practices, and build upon the
results of Phase I.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of
TLSAMP is its efforts to strategically and tactically address the under
representation of African Americans, Hispanic Americans, and Native Americans in
STEM disciplines. The TLSAMP basic principles include personal attention, peer
and faculty mentoring, hands-on experiences, bridges to the next level, and
continuous evaluation. TLSAMP is prepared to implement and further study these
principles for African Americans, Hispanics and Native Americans from the high
school to the undergraduate level through completion of the
doctorate.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The TLSAMP institutions enroll about 3,000
underrepresented minorities annually in STEM and our objective is to increase
the production and quality of students entering STEM careers. This will
positively impact the pool of underrepresented professionals in STEM and
ultimately enhance the STEM workforce of this nation. More minority students
will graduate with influential STEM degrees and there will be an
increased/improved pool of minority STEM graduates to fill the nation?s
workforce needs.