* 0802842
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Holocene Chronology of Alpine Glaciation for the Western United States
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Peter Clark, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 05/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Because the small alpine glaciers found in the mountains of the world have short
response times (10's years) to climate change, records of their fluctuations
provide outstanding proxies of past climate changes. This research will develop
a Holocene glacial chronology based on surface exposure dating of boulders from
moraine crests at several sites across the western United States. The chronology
will address spatial and temporal glacier variability in response to postulated
Holocene climate forcings. A number of studies have interpreted several Holocene
glacial advances in the western U.S., but age control is based largely on
relative dating techniques, which have been shown to be in error by up to 10,000
yrs. The dating of surface exposures using cosmogenic nuclides, as used in this
study, provides a robust method to reevaluate poorly dated glacial chronologies
and to develop a high-precision glacial record across the western U.S. for the
Holocene epoch. Development of this chronology will provide new constraints on
the extent of major Holocene climate forcings and their effects on the mass
balance of western North America alpine glaciers as well as providing a better
framework for understanding climate forcing during the Holocene. This kind of
information is directly applicable for helping to understand the nature and
consequences of future climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
specifically answer four geological and climatological questions: 1.) What are
the ages of the moraines that occur immediately down slope of the high, alpine
cirques and glaciers and does the so-called Little Ice Age represent the
culmination of the glacial advances during the Holocene? 2.) Using a regional
climate model (RegCM) and the GENESIS atmospheric general circulation model
simulations, do the climate scenarios agree with known glacial chronology and if
so, what were the most likely climatic scenarios that allowed the glaciers to be
in equilibrium at these past positions? 3.) How does this refined glacial
chronology compare with other paleoclimate proxies during the Holocene epoch?
4.) Utilizing the modeling outputs and new glacial chronology, what can be
expected in terms of western North American glacier mass balances in respond to
global warming based on past climate forcings and future projections? This
project will provide information to the greater public about why and how
glaciers change, the mechanisms that induce those changes, and how current
changes could affect future alpine ecosystems, mountain hydrology, forest
wildfires, and natural recreation areas. Such findings will be disseminated in
part through guides and informational brochures developed with national park and
forestry officials (e.g. Great Basin and Yosemite National Park interpretive
rangers).