* 0802652
* Collaborative Research: Field and Modeling-Based Tests of the Role of Water in Nominally Anhydrous Minerals in Controlling the Strength/Stability of Continental Lithospheric Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2007,12/31/2011
* Anne Peslier, Universities Space Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2011
* USD 112,785.00

Earth may be somewhat unique among the rocky planets in our solar system in that
it has an abundance of water. Although the actual concentration of water in the
Earth's interior is small, the total amount of water inside Earth may be
comparable to or greater than that in our ocean. Understanding how water is
distributed in our planet is important because the presence or absence of even
small amounts of water can significantly affect how the mantle deforms and
melts. Thus, the nature of plate tectonics, continental deformation, and
volcanism on Earth, in theory, may be intimately linked to small variations in
water content. If the role of water is so fundamental, the implication is that
the dynamic state of other planets may also be linked to the presence/absence of
water. This hypothetical role of water, however, has so far not been fully
tested in the field. This study is focused on characterizing lateral variations
in water content in the deep parts of continents. These data will be input into
models that predict the deformation of continents, allowing a direct comparison
to the observed deformation histories of continents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will measure water contents in olivines and pyroxenes from mantle
xenoliths representing the lithospheric mantle underlying adjacent regions that
are demonstrably weak and strong (Colorado Plateau and the adjacent Basin and
Range; Tanzania craton and the flanks of the East African Rift). The effects of
diffusive loss of H in olivine during eruption of the mantle xenoliths is dealt
with in two independent ways. First, core-to-rim diffusion profiles on olivine
grains are backward modeled to obtain a rough estimate of their pre-eruptive H
content. Second, pre-eruptive water contents of olivine are quantitatively
inferred using the H contents in co-existing pyroxenes (H diffusivity in
pyroxene is slower than in olivine) and knowledge of equilibrium partitioning of
H between olivine and pyroxene. Along with constraints on the thermal state of
the lithosphere (xenolith thermobarometry), measured H contents in olivines are
incorporated into a constitutive law for viscous creep of olivine as a function
of H concentration. This is in turn incorporated into simple dynamic models to
quantify the effects of wet and dry lithospheric mantle on the nature and extent
of deformation. Given appropriate boundary conditions and constitutive laws,
these simple dynamic models are themselves used to provide independent
predictions of the spatial distribution of bound water needed to match observed
deformation patterns (more complicated dynamic models will also be considered).
The combination of H measurements and model predictions are compared to geologic
observations to determine whether bound H content of the lithospheric mantle is
indeed a principal control on laterally varying deformation in continental
lithosphere (e.g., undeformed plugs within broad deformational zones).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study provides a synergy between
petrology/geochemistry and geodynamics/geophysics. The PIs are developing an
advanced undergraduate/graduate course that transcends field-specific
terminology and bridge these two fields. The course will develop physical
intuition on fluid dynamic and petrologic processes, using simple equations,
analog experiments, thought experiments and an appreciation of physical and
geochemical data. Additional emphasis is placed on setting up scientific
problems, identifying important variables, building intuition-based hypotheses,
and designing experiments (natural, laboratory, or numerical). &lt;br/&gt;