* 0802249
* Innovations in Engineering Technology Education
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Jon Lambert, Black Hawk College District Office
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 08/31/2010
* USD 143,172.00

This project provides educational technology innovations that strengthen the
engineering technology program and increases the number and diversity of
students entering the field. The project promotes a dual focus. First, the
project provides active learning tools for students. Second, the learning tools
are utilized to help middle and high school students become aware of and
interested in career opportunities offered by the field. The project includes a
strong focus on attracting underrepresented students to the engineering and
engineering technology fields. The technology innovations include: creation of a
sustainable energy 3D simulator and calculator incorporating four energy sources
(wind, solar, biomass, and geothermal), incorporation of 3D Rapid Prototyping,
and development of a feature rich interactive website entitled, "Are You Ready?"

The close linkage of this project with local middle schools, high schools, and
other youth serving organizations improves student interest in careers in
engineering and engineering technology fields and encourages and documents
greater participation of underrepresented groups. The project networks to local
engineering technology industries and to a cutting edge 3D software development
company. All project outcomes are broadly shared with colleagues statewide and
nationally.