* 0802536
* Great Lakes Fuel Cell Education Partnership
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Daniel Lewis, Stark State College of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,599,874.00

Stark State College of Technology leads a regional partnership dedicated to fuel
cell technology education. The mission of the Great Lakes Fuel Cell Education
Partnership is to provide leadership in creating innovative fuel cell-related
education and training programs through curriculum development and enhancement;
professional development; and partnerships with high schools, institutions of
higher education, businesses and government entities.

The main objective is to meet the future workforce needs of the fuel cell
industry in the region, including (but not limited to) Ohio, Pennsylvania, New
York, Michigan and Indiana. The Partnership's goals are to: 1) aggregate and
evaluate innovative solutions for advancing fuel cell education and training in
collaboration with high schools and undergraduate education entities, top
research universities, business and industry, government agencies and
professional societies; 2) research and define essential technical skills to
advance workforce development in fuel cell-related technologies and promote the
creation of additional jobs; and 3) serve as a clearinghouse to share proven
curriculum materials and foster public understanding of fuel cell technologies,
the hydrogen-related economy and the importance of developing alternative energy
sources.

Stark State College is joined in this effort by education institutions in Ohio,
New York, Michigan, Indiana and Pennsylvania. Partners include the Ohio
Department of Education, Hocking College, Case Western Reserve University, Kent
State University, University of Akron and University of Toledo (Ohio);
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (New York); Lansing Community College and
Kettering University (Michigan); Vincennes University (a two-year college) and
Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology (Indiana); and Penn State University
(Pennsylvania). Fuel cell industry, business and government organizations
include Plug Power Inc. and ENrG Inc. (New York); and GM-Powertrain, Lockheed
Martin, Rolls-Royce Fuel Cell Systems (US) and Graftech (Ohio).