* 0802799
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Understanding the Formation of an International Carbon Market:  An Examination of Three Financial Service Centers
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Amy Glasmeier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2010
* USD 11,960.00

Mitigating climate change calls for earth system governance -- the collaborative
and international management of a range of socio-economic processes that produce
greenhouse gas emissions. To date, the construction of earth system governance
through supranational political channels has proven difficult. The growing
momentum, particularly on the part of the global financial service industry,
behind carbon markets suggests that carbon emissions trading schemes can instead
be used to construct earth system governance. Using an interdisciplinary
theoretical framework combining concepts from three fields -- environmental
policy, economic geography and the sociology of finance -- the project seeks to:
1) investigate the nature of markets and their construction within an
environmental context; 2) understand the relationship between market
construction, design and path dependency; and 3) explain the role markets --
operating ahead of policymakers -- play in the construction of regulation. To
accommodate the complex dynamic of the carbon markets, the research design
includes an interdisciplinary mix of qualitative and quantitative elements. The
primary method -- case studies of institutions in London, New York and Chicago
as well as interviews with policymakers in Brussels at the European Commission,
Washington D.C. and San Francisco -- will provide an in-depth understanding of a
complicated and ongoing process. The role of financial service firms in
constructing the market and the relationship between market processes and
environmental policy are of particular interest. Quantitatively, Q-analysis
applied to the interviews and close dialogue will reveal potential bias. The
study will provide detailed analysis of the development of carbon markets
through the lens of regulatory entities and the financial service industry (the
market makers), and a transatlantic map of the demand-side of the carbon market
network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will make a unique contribution by
providing important information about the nature of the demand-side operation of
carbon markets. The research further presents the opportunity to capture the
creation of a market at its inception, providing an invaluable baseline of
comparison for future studies of the carbon market and markets in general. The
results of the research will answer questions about the nature of environmental
markets, the processes that drive their construction and the relationship
between markets and environmental policy. In particular the study will provide
valuable insight on the relationship between the finance or economics of these
markets and their potential for achieving real environmental gains. This
information will aid policy and market makers in efforts to enhance the
efficiency and performance of the markets, which will strengthen the ability of
the markets to contribute to society's goals of addressing climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;