* 0802286
* CAREER:  Modular Assemblies for Controlling The Cell-Material Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2007,03/31/2013
* Joel Collier, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 03/31/2013
* USD 570,870.00

With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the
Chemistry Division, Professor Joel H. Collier of the University of Cincinnati
will design, synthesize, and characterize a family of peptide-based molecules
that can be self-assembled, easily manipulated, and chemoselectively stabilized
to form synthetic extracellular matrices. Factorial experimental design will be
utilized to tune these materials in a systematic fashion to produce synthetic
gels and surfaces that maximize a specific desirable biological outcome, in this
case epithelialization to form a functional barrier tissue. The development of
synthetic materials that can predictably interface with living cells in a manner
that is biospecific, multi-functional, and tunable has become one of the more
fundamental and difficult issues in the field of biomaterials chemistry. This
research represents a strategy towards designing synthetic materials that are
both complexly bioactive and tunable, a combination of properties that is
facilitated by the materials' modularity and self-assembling nature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of this CAREER award from the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Collier will promote two
complementary outreach programs designed to take advantage of the
multidisciplinary nature and personal relevance of biomaterials chemistry. To
enhance the retention of minority undergraduates in the sciences, a research co-
op program will be established in collaboration with the extensive co-op program
of the University of Cincinnati. To enhance the interest of young people in
pursuing technical careers, an intermediate-level outreach program will bring
the hands-on excitement of the research lab to local public middle schools. The
broader impacts of this work include training undergraduate and graduate
students in multidisciplinary science with a focus in macromolecular chemistry,
working towards the goal of enhancing minority retention in the sciences, and
inspiring young minds to consider exciting multidisciplinary scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;