* 0802363
* A Multi-Wavelength Study of Polarized Foregrounds and Anomalous Emission in the ISM
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Stephen Muchovej, Muchovej                Stephen        J
* Fellowship Award
* Edward Ajhar
* 09/30/2011
* USD 231,000.00

Dr. Stephen Muchovej is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the California
Institute of Technology. Dr. Muchovej will perform a multi-wavelength study of
the interstellar medium (ISM) incorporating the C-Band All Sky Survey (CBASS),
with emphasis on characterizing polarized foregrounds and the nature of the
"anomalous emission" component of current ISM models. CBASS is an NSF-funded,
5-GHz radio survey sensitive to total intensity and linear polarization that
will produce the first all-sky map of polarized emission that can be reliably
extrapolated to frequencies of interest to cosmic microwave background (CMB)
polarization experiments. In conjunction with the CBASS map, Dr. Muchovej will
combine public H-alpha (a tracer of free-free emission), Wilkinson Microwave
Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) (CMB radio frequencies), and Infrared Astronomical
Satellite (IRAS) (dust) data to identify and study regions exhibiting dust-
correlated anomalous emission at ~30 GHz. Infrared and microwave observations
will be used to study the mechanisms producing the anomalous emission and its
role in the ISM as a whole.

Dr. Muchovej will also develop a prototype for a millimeter-wave monolith
integrated (MMIC) Array Spectrograph (MAS), the precursor to focal-plane arrays
of detectors capable of wide-field imaging and spectroscopy from 30-100 GHz.

In addition, Dr. Muchovej will conduct an outreach program targeted at teaching
astronomy to children ages 4-12 through the development and implementation of
hands-on activities that promote physical understanding on a wide range of
topics in astronomy. Dr. Muchovej will translate his materials into Spanish and
Portuguese and will implement them both near Caltech and in Latino community
centers in the greater Los Angeles area.