* 0802023
* Collaborative Research: BRAM: Balanced RAnk Modulation for data storage in next generation flash memories
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2013
* Christopher Twigg, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 04/30/2013
* USD 191,582.00

Integrative, Hybrid and Complex Systems Anxiao Jiang, Texas Engineering
Experiment Station Jehoshua Bruck, California Institute of Technology Paul E.
Hasler, GA Tech Research Corporation - GA Institute of Technology Christopher M.
Twigg, SUNY at Binghamton Collaborative Research: BRAM: Balanced RAnk Modulation
for Data Storage in Next Generation Flash Memories

The objective of this research is to develop a new data storage technology for
next-generation flash memories with substantially improved longevity,
reliability and efficiency. The approach is to use the ranks of flash-cell
levels to represent data, instead of using the absolute values of the cell
levels. Novel techniques are studied, including elimination of cell over-
programming, reduction or even elimination of block erasures, data modification,
load balancing, and error correction. The research closely combines new
information-theoretical methods and hardware design.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of this research includes laying the
theoretical foundation for a new data-storage technology and designing a new
hardware architecture for flash memories. The rank-modulation scheme eliminates
the risk of charge over-injection and reduces block erasures, which are two
major barriers to advances in flash memories. The theoretical analysis and the
code designs have the potential to advance information theory. The study of
hardware, including novel circuit components and testing techniques, has the
potential to advance memory design.

Broader Impacts: Electronic memories are a widely used storage media, along with
magnetic and optical media. Flash memories account for 90 percent of the non-
volatile electronic memory market. Techniques that enable next-generation flash
memory have the potential to make significant societal and economic impacts,
with the possibility of benefiting industrial production, scientific research,
and the large population of flash-memory users. This research integrates
research and education by developing new courses, engaging students in advanced
research, including students from under-represented groups, and disseminating
new knowledge.

