* 0802265
* Laser Engineered Multilayer Bioactive Coatings with Hydroxyapatite Nano-Powders
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2007,05/31/2011
* Gary Cheng, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2011
* USD 300,000.00

The aim of this grant is to investigate a novel multiple-layer laser coating
process to form functionally gradient bioceramic coatings on Ti6Al4V metal
substrates. Most of the current commercial bioactive ceramic coatings present a
sharp coating/substrate interface, which is always a potential source of
weakness because severe stresses can build up due to the mismatch of mechanical
properties and thermal expansion coefficients between the implant and coating
material. This project seeks to overcome these problems with a laser engineered
multilayer bioactive coating with HAp nano-powders in which a progressive change
in both microstructure and properties over the interface will be attained. The
intellectual merits of the project are: (a) The fundamental mechanism of
multilayer functional coatings of bioceramic materials will be investigated for
the first time; (b) Advancing laser materials processing technique: An unique
way to form low temperature HAp coating will be realized through laser surface
engineering. (c) This coating technique offers uniqueness over the existing
coating techniques: Strong HAp/Ti/Metal substrate interface can be obtained
through gradient porosity and HAp density.

The successful completion of this grant will significantly improve the lifetime
of bioceramic coatings. This project will also increase the presence of
nontraditional manufacturing (NTM) techniques in manufacturing education through
the following ways: 1) creating an interdisciplinary environment that integrates
nontraditional manufacturing research and teaching, (2) providing
multidisciplinary research opportunity for students, and (3) recruiting good
students and retain them in science and engineering through outreach activities
for undergraduate students.