* 0802483
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Comparative Study of Home Health Care in the United States and the Netherlands
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* Phyllis Moen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2009
* USD 7,500.00

SES-0802483&lt;br/&gt;Phyllis Moen&lt;br/&gt;Rachel Kulick&lt;br/&gt;University
of Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research
completes an ethnographic field study of contemporary home health care ?
specifically home birth ? in the United States and the Netherlands. In
comparison to similarly developed countries, the U.S. and the Netherlands are
both outliers with respect to the organization of maternity care. In most
developed countries, birth takes place in hospitals, hospital-based midwives
provide primary care, and physicians manage complicated cases. In the U.S.,
however, midwives are relatively underutilized and physicians attend more than
90 percent of all births. Home birth in the U.S. is extremely controversial and
eleven states ban the practice entirely. In the Netherlands, on the other hand,
home birth and independent midwifery are essential components of mainstream
maternity care. Physicians and midwives have formal arrangements for
collaboration and, in recent years, 30 percent of births have taken place at
home. Given these distinct cultural and institutional arrangements, this
investigation asks: What does it mean to give birth at home in the U.S. and the
Netherlands? How do birth practices and social institutions (e.g., professional
organizations, insurance systems, government health agencies, and the law) shape
home birth and influence its meaning? How does the location of home birth with
respect to the broader health care system (e.g., incorporated or marginalized)
affect the autonomy, power, and agency of women? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This cross-national study will advance theoretical understanding of the
medicalization, a process especially relevant to women?s life experiences. It
will also examine and provide knowledge about medicine and health care as
cultural products, developed in gendered ways. Moreover, it brings a systematic
and rigorous analysis of the Dutch maternity care system to U.S. scholars,
policymakers, and birthing women that can inform debate on the future of U.S.
health care. In a health care system necessarily concerned with cost
containment, safety, and patient satisfaction, much can be learned from the
Dutch system of home health care.&lt;br/&gt;