* 0802159
* GOALI : Collaborative Proposal: Advanced Coding and Signal Processing for Magnetic Recording: From Theory to Implementation
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2014
* Fatih Erden, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 04/30/2014
* USD 215,352.00

Integrative, Hybrid and Complex Systems Xinmiao Zhang, Case Western Reserve
University Krishna Narayanan, Texas A&M University GOALI: Collaborative
Proposal: Advanced Coding and Signal Processing for Magnetic Recording: From
Theory to Implementation

The objective of this research is to develop practical soft-decision Reed-
Solomon decoding algorithms, signal processing algorithms and corresponding
efficient hardware implementations to demonstrate a novel read-channel
architecture that can support recording densities of a terabyte per square-inch.
The approach is to integrate theoretical development with the design of a
hardware architecture such that practical high-performance systems can be
developed.

Intellectual Merit: In this research, algorithms and hardware are jointly
designed to allow the implementation and evaluation of novel soft-decision
decoding algorithms for Reed-Solomon codes. Equalization designed to work in
tandem with the soft-decision decoding algorithm is another focus. The work
falls into three areas: (1) design of a soft-decision Reed-Solomon decoding
algorithm that combines algebraic soft-decision decoding with generalized
minimum distance decoding; (2) integrated hardware architecture and algorithm
design for high-performance and hardware-friendly soft-decision decoding and
equalization; and (3) design of efficient algorithms tailored to magnetic
recording channels rather than to simplified channel models for more general
applications.

Broader Impacts: The research has the potential to help the recording industry
make the critical choice of whether to retain the use of Reed-Solomon codes for
read channels or to use other codes. The collaboration with a disk drive
manufacturer provides opportunities for technology transfer to industry. The
project also creates opportunities for students to interact with industry
collaborators through internships and regular meetings. The research has the
potential for impact other applications where Reed-Solomon codes are used, such
as optical recording, compact disk and DVD players, deep-space communications,
and high-speed modems.