* 0802682
* NMNH - NEON Workshop: Curation of Biological Specimens, Physical Samples and Associated Data
* BIO,EF
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* Carol Butler, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 04/30/2009
* USD 47,376.00

Funds are provided to The Smithsonian Institution National Museum of Natural
History to conduct a workshop with the National Ecological Observatory Network
(NEON) Board of Directors in May 2008 on collections-related issues. The
workshop will strengthen the focus on the importance of systematics as a
component of NEON, and foster discussion and planning on research uses of NEON
data. Additionally, the workshop will foster interchange among ecologists and
systematists regarding the best possible collections to develop from NEON
domains. This interchange should maximize the intellectual benefit of NEON,
reinforcing the important connections within the research community and enable
it to use NEON resources to advance ecological knowledge.

Specifically, the workshop will address the kinds of collections to be made from
NEON?s 20 domains that will best serve NEON?s aims, and the standards, methods,
protocols, and responsibilities for partnering institutions that will serve as
repositories for associated specimens and data. The workshop participants will
conduct sessions to resolve issues including the need to develop and test
inventory methods; details of standards for specimens, vouchers, and data;
details regarding collections facility needs; need for taxonomic support and
training of parataxonomists; and, development of an electronic virtual type
collection. Long-term issues needing consideration included issues of ownership,
long-term care, and permitting. The proposed workshop will address all of these
considerations through brief lectures and related breakout discussions,
resulting in written recommendations and a final report to the NEON Board of
Directors.