* 0802056
* Development and Application of Alternative Learning Methodologies for Predictive Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2013
* Vladimir Cherkassky, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 04/30/2013
* USD 323,796.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: ECCS-0802056&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Development
and Application of Alternative Learning Methodologies for Predictive
Learning&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Cherkassky, Vladimir S. &lt;br/&gt;PI Institution:
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
investigation of emerging technologies for estimating predictive models from
sparse heterogeneous data. Such problems are common in biomedical applications,
such as micro-array data analysis, and structural &amp; functional brain
imaging. In medical applications, diagnostic (predictive) models are usually
estimated from heterogeneous data. For example, for cancer diagnosis, patients?
data may include clinical, demographic and genomic inputs. The proposed approach
emphasizes direct formulation of the learning problem that takes full advantage
of application-domain requirements and known characteristics of application
data. Proposed work will investigate several novel learning formulations
including Learning with Structured Data and closely related Multi-Task Learning,
and a new method for incorporating a priori knowledge into the learning process
called Learning through Contradictions. These non-standard learning approaches
can potentially improve classification (diagnostic) accuracy for many biomedical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit is the development and
improved understanding of several alternative learning settings, which show
great promise for predictive modeling with sparse heterogeneous data. Relative
advantages and limitations of these new approaches (vs. standard inductive
learning) will be investigated for several biomedical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact include:&lt;br/&gt;-Improved
diagnosis for biomedical applications that utilize heterogeneous data (i.e.,
clinical, genetic and demographic information).&lt;br/&gt;-Methodological impact
of the growing importance of alternative learning formulations on data mining
applications.&lt;br/&gt;-Incorporating new (non-standard) learning methodologies
into graduate and undergraduate curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;