* 0802551
* Linux Integration Networking Connections (LINCS)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* William Armitage, Polk State College
* Continuing Grant
* Suzanne Westbrook
* 08/31/2012
* USD 812,726.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Linux Integration Networking
Connections (LINCS) project is helping to meet the need for Linux technicians by
preparing students to have a strong practical and theoretical knowledge base, to
adapt to technological advances, and to participate in creating new information
technology solutions using Linux and other open source technologies. The project
has four key elements: (1) a 2+2+2 articulation plan beginning in high school,
transitioning to a community college, and completing a bachelor's degree in IT;
(2) a distance education option with curricula based in part on workplace
competencies identified by business partners; (3) active learning opportunities
using Linux clustering and virtualization that provide students access to
remotely served networks on demand from almost any location and platform; and
(4) a cross-institutional open source course management system to provide
students with consistent distance learning experiences and greater opportunities
for interactions among and between students and teachers at participating
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LINCS project improves student learning
in computer science and engineering education programs by increasing student
access to hands-on application experiences through remote access virtual labs.
It also increases access to a geographically diverse population of potential
students, many of whom would not otherwise be able to participate. The project
leverages already established strengths of the participating institutions with a
long history of collaborations with the business
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting prototype being developed serves
as a national model for technology education because it creates an educational
pathway into the IT field and supports life long learning opportunities. A
community advisory board comprised of IT business partners plays an integral
role in the project, including: identifying necessary skill sets; field-testing
of course content; and providing field experience opportunities for students.
All products (learning units, curricula, infrastructure design, and best
practices) are being made available on the LINCS wiki site to facilitate
replication by other institutions.