* 0802014
* International Research Fellowship Program:  The Influence of Sulfur Cycling on Mercury Methylation in Rice Paddies in the Mining Areas Guizhou Province, China
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2008,04/30/2010
* Sarah Rothenberg, Rothenberg              Sarah
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 04/30/2010
* USD 45,788.00

0802014 Rothenberg

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Sarah
Rothenberg to work with Dr. Xinbin Feng at State Key Laboratory of Environmental
Geochemistry in Guiyang, China.

Guizhou Province, located in southwestern China, is highly contaminated with
mercury (Hg) due to historical mining of cinnabar, industrial runoff, artisinal
zinc smelting, incineration of municipal wastes, and reliance on coal-burning
power plants to fuel economic growth and heat residential homes. Hg runoff and
residues have contaminated the air, water, soil, as well as agricultural
products, including rice. Even though most human exposure to Hg occurs through
the consumption of fish, Hg exposure may also occur through the ingestion of
rice, and this exposure pathway may be important in countries where rice is a
staple. Like wetlands, rice paddies are potential hot spots for the conversion
of inorganic Hg to toxic mono-methylmercury (MMHg). The PI is conducting a study
to determine under which hydrologic and biogeochemical regimes highest MMHg
concentrations occur in rice paddies, which may be used to develop mitigation
strategies. There are two research components. (1) The PI is characterizing
sulfur cycling and Hg methylation within irrigation water, anoxic pore water and
sediments within at least four rice paddies, half using traditional methods of
irrigation and half using water saving methods. (2) The PI is also deploying a
series of embedded sensor networks within the same four rice paddies in the
early spring and in the late summer to coincide with the start and end of the
rice growing season. Time series sensor measurements of oxygen redox potential
and pH will be correlated with pore water MMHG levels to determine under which
conditions MMHg production is highest. This study will answer the following
questions: Are rice paddies hot spots for Hg methylation? How does sulfur
cycling in the surface soil, anoxic bulk soil, and rhizosphere affect Hg
methylation? Are there differences between flooded rice paddies and rice paddies
that employ water-saving methods? How do temporal/seasonal changes in pore water
oxidation-reduction potential (ORP) and pH affect Hg speciation?

This project serves as a bridge between US and Chinese researchers, and is also
collaborative, bringing together environmental scientists, engineers and
computer scientists to focus on an critical environmental problem.