* 0802452
* Functional Polymer Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Kenneth Wynne, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2012
* USD 484,000.00

This research is aimed at generating functional polymer surfaces with
compositional economy, new or improved properties, and facile, conventional
processing. One research thrust focuses on P[AB] (co-polyoxetane) soft block
polyurethanes as minor constituents (2 wt% or less) in blends such that the co-
polyoxetane soft block defines surface properties while the base polymer defines
bulk properties. A unique feature is synergistic interactions of A and B co-
repeats that produce new surface phenomena. Prior research points to
opportunities via increasing the mole fraction charged (quaternary) B co-repeat
units in P[AB]-soft block polyurethanes. This strategy is aimed at facilitating
physical studies of surface concentration and accelerating kinetics of
antimicrobial action. Newly discovered "seeding" of layer by layer (LbL)
processing via polycationic modifiers will be explored as a method to quickly
and radically change surface properties. Other P[AB]-soft block polyurethanes
that confer "contraphilic" wetting will be studied as these surfaces may have
unique biocompatibility. The structure and surface dynamics of new
semicrystalline fluorous polyoxetanes will be evaluated as promising candidates
for environmentally responsible hydrophobic/oleophobic coatings. Finally,
modifying condensation cured polydimethylsiloxane networks by a recently
discovered approach is aimed at introducing oleophobicity and surface
concentration of quaternary charge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Polymer surfaces are encountered in a myriad of
everyday things such as painted or coated surfaces and molded objects. This
research is aimed at economically introducing special functions into such
surfaces. One subject is generation of durable, intrinsically sterile surfaces
in an economical way. The special function of sterility (with economy) is needed
for healthcare facilities to thwart the spread of disease. To achieve these and
other desirable surface characteristics, special additives are designed for
conventional coatings such that a very small amount spontaneously concentrates
at the surface during conventional application. Another surface function being
developed is a novel wetting characteristic that is counterintuitive: a surface
that is initially "water loving" but becomes resistant to wetting after the
surface is initially wetted. Such a wetting property looks promising for medical
device coatings that require compatibility with body tissue or fluids. Broader
impacts of this research include interdisciplinary training in chemistry,
surface science and microbiology, which results in high demand for students and
postdoctoral scientists by companies such as contact lens producers and
companies employing biotechnology for drug manufacture. This research is aimed
at effecting broader impacts locally, through undergraduate and graduate course
development (e.g., the course "Introduction to Polymers in Medicine") and
through underrepresented minority participation in research. On a national
level, support for this research facilitates leadership activities such as co-
organization of the biennial American Chemical Society K-12 workshops / symposia
"Polymer Science of Everyday Things". International collaborative work and
student exchange with groups in Japan, Italy, and Sweden play a vital role in
understanding how the targeted surfaces are modified.&lt;br/&gt;