* 0802718
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Awareness of  Vulnerability to Terrorism in Urban Areas: Social Network and Mobility Effects in Worcester, MA and New York, NY
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Susan Hanson, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 08/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

U.S. cities are predicted to remain likely targets of terrorism, yet little is
known about how urban residents prepare for and respond to terrorist events. As
a result, there is inadequate theory concerning people's resilience to terrorist
attacks in contemporary U.S. society. This doctoral dissertation research
examines how individuals' social contacts and mobility shape the way they
perceive their vulnerability and the vulnerability of their households to
terrorism, and how people act upon these perceptions. Since gender affects both
social interactions and mobility, the affect of gender on vulnerability
awareness will also be explored. The project asks the following questions: (1)
How do an individual's personal contacts and daily mobility affect the type of
information acquired about the probability of experiencing terrorism; the
exposure to a range of choices for responding to the threat of terrorism or
actual terrorist events; the actual response to terrorism; and the perception of
risk and awareness of vulnerability? 2) How does the gendered nature of personal
contacts and mobility affect a person's awareness of vulnerability to terrorism?
In-depth interviews with low- and middle-income households in the Worceser, MA
and New York, NY metro areas will provide data on how people become aware of
their vulnerability to terrorism through their personal contacts and daily
mobility. The findings will show how personal contacts and affiliations, as well
as mobility and locations visited, affect information flows to individuals
regarding terrorism and potential mitigation activities, as well as awareness of
household vulnerabilty. A grounded theory, qualitative approach is used to
generate analyse the data, while several statistical techniques are used to
establish generalizability.

Research on New York City after 9/11 shows that social destruction spread beyond
the site of physical destruction, highlighting the need to reconceptualize the
existence and creation of urban vulnerabilities and how municipalities might
best prepare their populations for terrorism. This research will generate theory
relevant for policy makers, especially emergency managers, who seek to reduce
urban vulnerability and build resiliency in a time of terrorism. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish an independent research career.

