* 0802756
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Governing Sediment: An Institutional Geography of Land Use and the Environment in the North Coastal Basin of California
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2008,10/31/2009
* Richard Norgaard, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2009
* USD 11,936.00

Over the last three decades, the migration of urban and suburban dwellers into
rural areas of the United States has dramatically transformed the rural
landscape. This migration places development pressure on forested, agricultural,
and wildlands and has led to the subdivision of large tracts of land into
smaller parcels, which complicates environmental management. The challenge of
controlling non-point source (NPS) pollution from rural private lands is of
particular importance, because regulators and watershed managers face the task
of developing new governance strategies that are effective for influencing the
land-management practices of a large number of diverse landowners and land
users. This doctoral dissertation research project will address this governance
challenge by investigating if and how regulations and non-regulatory programs
directly and indirectly promote the prevention and control of sediment (a common
NPS pollutant) from private roads on residential, ranch, and timberlands in the
North Coastal basin of California. The doctoral candidate will use an
institutional analysis approach that explicitly acknowledges that the legal
regulations ("rules in form") often differ from what happens on the ground
("rules in use"). One source of information will be in-depth interviews with key
landowners, people associated with non-governmental organizations, and staff at
government agencies. That information will be complemented by, a large mail
survey of landowners, site visits, and archival research in order to provide
data on the structural, environmental, and sociopolitical factors that reinforce
differences in the ways people manage their land and that may influence the
potential for transferring successful programs to different regions. The
investigators expect to demonstrate that the logistical challenges of enforcing
existing NPS regulations limit the potential for regulatory solutions, making it
important to identify and invest in other social and cultural factors that
influence the actual land-management practices on private lands.

This research project will investigate the multiple factors that influence the
effectiveness of regulatory and non-regulatory programs reducing NPS pollution
and addressing other complex socioecological problems on private lands. It will
provide agencies and environmental non-profit organizations with much needed
information about on-the-ground-management practices of various groups of
landowners and the efficacy of existing outreach programs. More broadly, the
research will help regulators and land managers throughout the United States
build effective strategies for influencing land-management practices on rural
private lands where ownership and use is becoming increasingly diverse. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.