* 0802518
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Transnational Policy Articulations: India, Agriculture, and the WTO
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2008,10/31/2011
* Susan Roberts, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2011
* USD 9,000.00

The recent shift of political authority over economic policy from territorial
states to multilateral bodies like the World Trade Organization (WTO) or Central
American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) challenges political geographers to
examine hegemonic politics that overflow traditional state boundaries. This
doctoral dissertation research project will examine the relationship between
Indian agricultural trade policy and the WTO through an analysis of
transnational hegemonic politics. Hegemony is a concept that emphasizes the
informal and de facto arrangements of power that underlie formal juridical
structures. It especially highlights how political actors are brought to accept
and participate in particular power structures. Hegemony usually is studied on a
national level, taking the state as a container of politics, or on an
international level, taking states as actors. In this project, the objects of
analysis are policy outcomes in India and the WTO as well as the actors and
discourses that contributed to them. Three key arenas are identified: (1) the
WTO forums where Indian delegations represent their country and its interests;
(2) official statements of policy where the Indian state explains and justifies
its membership in the WTO and its positions towards the WTO; and (3) policy
debates regarding the WTO within the discursive community of agricultural trade
policy expertise in India. Archival analysis of key documents from the WTO and
the Indian government will be used to establish the WTO regulatory mechanisms
that affect Indian agricultural policy and what concrete effects have these had
on Indian agriculture to date. Semi-structured interviews will be conducted with
policy experts and government officials during three months of fieldwork in
Delhi. Data obtained from these interviews and from key documents will be
analyzed using policy epistemics as a conceptual framework.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the Doha Round, agricultural trade emerged as the
most decisive issue in ongoing WTO talks. India plays a decisive role in these
negotiations. This project will focus on the hegemonic articulations between
national politics and a multilateral organization. It will not take the
framework of the nation-state as a given and will explore networks of power that
cross international boundaries, exist in overlapping fields of sovereignty, and
blur traditional distinctions between states and international organizations.
India is not seen here as merely an actor with a certain set of interests in the
WTO; nor are political struggles within India that help to produce state
strategies examined in isolation. Rather, it is the articulation between
national and transnational hegemonic politics and the discourses that contribute
to it that are examined. In addition to contributing to the development of
critical state theory in political geography, this research will also contribute
to current understandings of the relationships between developed and developing
countries in the WTO system. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;