* 0802021
* Ionosphere-Magnetosphere Energetics and Dynamics at Jupiter and Saturn: a Multi-Wavelength, Multi-Faceted Approach
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Makenzie Lystrup, Lystrup, Makenzie B
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2011
* USD 226,167.00

Dr. Makenzie Lystrup is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the Laboratory
for Atmospheric and Space Physics (LASP) at the University of Colorado-Boulder.
Dr. Lystrup will investigate the connection between the upper atmospheres and
magnetospheres of Jupiter and Saturn with a multi-wavelength and multi-faceted
approach. She will use data from ground-based near infrared observations and
Cassini ultraviolet spacecraft data to probe the auroral/polar regions of the
planets in order to answer outstanding questions regarding the energy balance of
the planets and the atmosphere/magnetosphere coupling. This will include the
first comprehensive comparative study of the ultraviolet and infrared auroral
emissions at Jupiter and Saturn. Dr. Lystrup will augment the observational
component of her work with modeling and theoretical work being done at the host
institution.

Dr. Lystrup will also implement a program of research and mentoring for
undergraduates in astronomy and astrophysics with the aim of retaining talented
young women in astronomy. Undergraduates will participate in the data analysis
of the project using skills they have learned in data analysis coursework at the
host institution. Additionally, Dr. Lystrup will create the Astronomy Beyond
(ABB) program to provide mentoring for the next stage of students' careers, to
provide a network mentors and role models for undergraduate students, and to
create the infrastructure (workshop materials and website) for continuing the
ABB program beyond Dr. Lystrup's fellowship tenure.