* 0802657
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Floodplain Sedimentation and Nutrient Sequestration, Upper Mississippi River
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2008,11/30/2009
* James Knox, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 11/30/2009
* USD 11,995.00

The overloading of freshwater and marine ecosystems with sediment and nutrients
causes numerous ecological and health problems. While studies have researched
the role of rivers in transporting and cycling nutrients, relatively little
research has been conducted on the role large river floodplains play in reducing
downstream conveyance of these aquatic contaminants. Recent studies have shown
floodplains can store significant quantities of nitrogen, phosphorus and carbon
during individual floods or years, but few have looked at the effectiveness of
aggrading floodplains to retain these nutrients over decadal to century
timescales. Through sediment coring of multiple areas of the Mississippi River
floodplain between La Crosse and Cassville, Wisconsin and through high temporal
resolution sediment analyses this study will 1) quantify how sedimentation and
nutrient concentrations associated with sediments have changed on the
Mississippi River floodplain from pre-European-American settlement to present;
2) characterize how hydrologic connectivity and geomorphology of the Mississippi
River floodplain affect nutrient retention and fluxes; and 3) identify the
dominant forms of phosphorus retained on the floodplain. Magnetic susceptibility
and grain size characteristics will be used in conjunction with phosphorus,
nitrogen and carbon analyses to address the research objectives. Depositional
chronology will be established using a combination of accelerator mass
spectrometry radiocarbon dating, cesium radionuclide activity, and ambrosia
pollen associated with European-American settlement. It is expected that the
floodplain of the Mississippi River retains significant quantities of sediment
and nitrogen, phosphorus, and carbon unaccounted for in existing nutrient
budgets that would otherwise be flushed downstream.

This research is a necessary step toward determining the significance of
floodplain environments in sequestering nutrients over timescales ranging from
singular floods to century scale. Nitrogen and phosphorus contribute to large
algal blooms in rivers, lakes and marine ecosystems that can lead to a reduction
in water quality and degradation of aquatic habitat. Through a greater
understanding of how floodplains retain sediment and nutrients and through
improved knowledge of where they are retained spatially on the floodplain,
resource managers will be able to manage these areas more effectively to reduce
downstream nutrient transport and its adverse impacts. Knowledge concerning how
floodplain nutrient storage is affected by drainage basin land use and increased
flooding is needed, especially as increased corn production for ethanol will
likely lead to increased nutrient and sediment transport by rivers. As climate
researchers continue to search for ways to reduce atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentrations, the expected results of this research which documents how carbon
storage in river sediment varies with floodplain hydrology will be important.