* 0802481
* An Enhanced Science and Technology Educator Training Institute:  Helping Teachers and Faculty Motivate, Recruit and Train the 21st Century Science and Technology Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* William Brownlowe, Montgomery County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2012
* USD 643,023.00

In response to three interrelated and priority regional needs, Montgomery County
Community College is creating an "Enhanced Science &amp; Technology Educator
Training Institute". This project is supporting regional efforts to increase
interest in, and breadth and quality of, science and technology education for
students in high schools and community colleges, and complements other ongoing
projects/programs. The Educator Training Institute (ETI) is increasing the
number, diversity, and preparedness of students pursuing science and technology
careers to meet regional workforce demands. The disciplinary focus of the
Institute is biotechnology and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute
is providing science and technology educators hands-on laboratory experiences,
fostering connections and sharing of resources between educators, industry
professionals, and college-level education majors early in their career path,
enhancing the impact of high school and college laboratory activities by
providing laboratory supplies and equipment, and assisting in integrating
laboratory technology into classrooms. By impacting educators, the project is
increasing the number of students that are engaged in, and well versed in
science and technology to fill the current and future technical workforce
pipeline for the region, and is increasing diversity in both the workforce, and
in teaching/faculty positions.