* 0802721
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Citizenship at the Margins:&gt;Negotiating National Boundaries
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* Hae Yeon Choo, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2009
* USD 7,500.00

SES-0802721 Myra Ferree Hae Yeon Choo University of Wisconsin Madison

This dissertation research studies the interactive process of boundary-making
between citizens and non-citizen migrant women in South Korea. Conceptualizing
citizenship as a relational process, the study uses ethnographic data to look at
how the boundary of citizenship is negotiated and contested through discourse
and everyday interaction among locally grounded actors. The research focuses on
variations in citizenship claims as framed by three different groups of Filipina
migrant women: labor migrants, working in a factory town in the female-dominated
light manufacturing industry; marriage migrants, living in rural communities
with their South Korean husbands; and entertainers, working at clubs on an
American military base. This project asks (1) what discursive frames are being
utilized by Korean nation-state and social actors in the practice of their
integration efforts for migrant women; (2) how migrant women themselves
reproduce, challenge and/or resist these frames; and (3) how boundaries of
citizens and non-citizens are negotiated in the interactions between them.

The findings of this study will contribute to understanding citizenship not only
as a formal status but as an interactional process that creates boundaries
between citizens and non-citizens. The study adds to the understanding of
international migration by bringing in gender as an integral part of
incorporation of migrants in the local communities, and considers boundaries and
marginality as simultaneously social, political and geographic. Examining
citizenship practices at the margins in South Korea can also shed light on
similar processes at work in other nation-states. It may help policy makers in
national and local governments, migrant women?s advocates, service organizations
for migrant women to create more informed policies based varying statuses and
experiences of migrant women.