* 0802323
* Midwest Regional Center for Nanotechnology Education (Nano-Link)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Thomas Deits, Dakota County Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2013
* USD 3,240,000.00

This project establishes the Midwest Regional Center for Nanotechnology
Education (NANO-LINK), building upon the success of Dakota County Technical
College's ATE MnNANO project in partnership with the University of Minnesota.
That project developed a pioneering multidisciplinary AAS degree program
designed to prepare graduates for markets where the broader field of nanoscience
is emerging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NANO-LINK is designed to provide resources
and support to colleges along the Midwest corridor from North Dakota to Michigan
as they develop similar programs to grow a skilled nanoscience technician
workforce that will foster economic growth in nanoscale science and technology
in the region. Six two-year colleges in North Dakota, Minnesota, Wisconsin,
Illinois and Michigan have partnered to develop NANO-LINK along with two
research universities in the region--the University of Minnesota and
Northwestern University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NANO-LINK focuses on seven key
goals: establish a Midwest Regional Industry Advisory Board; develop
multidisciplinary nanoscience programs; partner with the University of Minnesota
to provide remote access delivery for nanoscience experiences in pre-capstone
and capstone courses; partner with the NSF National Center for Learning and
Teaching Technology in Nanoscale Science and Engineering (NCLT) at Northwestern
University to provide professional development for secondary educators and
college faculty; establish a clearinghouse infrastructure for undergraduate
instructional materials; develop outreach activities to enhance recruitment of
students into nanoscience programs, with an emphasis on underrepresented
students; and provide venues for dissemination including an annual nanoscience
conference for faculty, students, alumni, and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this project is based on the
wide availability of a multidisciplinary nanoscience technician education
curriculum in an emerging field of science and engineering, which greatly
impacts our nation's competitiveness and future job growth in many industries,
such as biotechnology, medical devices, agriculture, materials, and electronics.
It is also building coordinated partnerships among regional educational
institutions and industries that enable them to offer quality nanoscience
educational programs as well as training for incumbent
workers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact of this project is that it
supports coordinated adaptation of a multidisciplinary Nanoscience Technology
program for technician education at community and technical colleges throughout
the region. It is partnering with NCLT to provide professional development
opportunities for educators and preparing them to infuse modules into
nanoscience and STEM curricula. It is partnering with the University of
Minnesota to deliver a high level capstone experience as well as unique remote
access educational experiences with a focus on instrumentation in capstone and
pre-capstone courses. The clearinghouse offers best practice nanoscience lecture
and laboratory curricula materials for use by faculty teaching courses in
undergraduate programs. Materials and activities are being developed to enhance
the recruitment of students into the nanoscience programs. The benefit to
society is that high quality educational programs prepare nanoscience
technicians to meet the emerging needs of industry.