* 0802729
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Factors Determining Geographical Range Limits of Boreal and Temperate Tree Species
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2008,03/31/2011
* Eric Kruger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

Forecasts regarding influences of anticipated climate change on geographical
distributions of trees and other plant species have been criticized for lacking
a sufficiently mechanistic basis. To help address this shortcoming, this
doctoral dissertation research project will compare influences of climate on the
growth and physiology of boreal versus temperate tree species. This comparison
will be accomplished by exposing trees to climates they may face in the future
(owing to forecasted warming) through use of a latitudinal gradient extending
from northern Wisconsin to central Mississippi. Based on preliminary data
gathered along a roughly 1,800-km-long transect, the doctoral candidate will
test two major hypotheses: (1) South of their current ranges, boreal species
grow more slowly in terms of height and biomass than temperate endemics. (2)
Comparatively slow net growth of boreal species is attributable primarily to
negative influences of temperature on carbon-use efficiency (the efficiency with
which plants use assimilated carbon to produce biomass) mediated by the
pronounced temperature sensitivity of respiratory metabolism. In each of four
common gardens along the established transect over a two-year period, the
doctoral candidate will monitor saplings of target boreal and temperate tree
species, trembling aspen (Populus tremuloides) and tulip-poplar (Liriodendron
tulipifera). The following variables will be compared across gardens and species
(and among geographic provenances within species): growth and its physiological
determinants (i.e. photosynthetic traits, biomass allocation, leaf morphology,
dark respiration and carbon-use efficiency); and dormant season dynamics in
tissue carbohydrate reserves. This research project will address long-standing
questions regarding intrinsic and extrinsic constraints on current and future
species distributions and will culminate in the calibration of physiological
subroutines in a landscape model simulating forest responses to climate change.

The geographical range limits of terrestrial plant species are expected to shift
considerably in response to climate warming. In eastern North America, for
example, boreal tree species are predicted to retreat northward, while temperate
species are expected to fill in behind them. The factors governing a particular
species' southern range boundary likely will dictate the extent of its northward
retreat. To date, however, the specific factors shaping southern range limits
remain unclear. This project will directly address this issue, thereby providing
input for models forecasting the responses of tree species distributions to
global climate change. The data gathered during the conduct of this project also
will provide insight into the competitive interactions occurring within new
species assemblages that may result from tree migrations. The project will help
the scientific community improve its ability to generate credible forecasts
concerning the impacts of global change for the structure and function of
terrestrial ecosystems in North America and elsewhere. These predictions are
important products used by policymakers at the state, regional, national and
international levels, addressing global change impacts as well as potential
mitigation strategies. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.

