* 0802454
* Development of Robotics Technician Curriculum at BCCC
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Michael Kaye, Baltimore City Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Maura Borrego
* 08/31/2012
* USD 870,521.00

The goals of the project are to create and implement a model robotics technician
curriculum and to increase the technical proficiency of underrepresented
minorities with skills in robotics, electronics, engineering technology,
computer and information technology, and manufacturing through robotics
instruction. The project involves partnerships with Morgan State University,
Pace University, Carnegie Mellon University, Juxtopia, LLC, Lockheed Martin
Corporation, the Advanced Robot for Societal Impact (ARTSI), and the Community
Colleges of Baltimore County's NSF-funded ATE TIME Center. The project is : (1)
developing a robotics technician curriculum model at the institution; (2)
increasing the success rate of Electronics/Computer Information System
(CIS)/CADD technician education programs through novel robotics instruction; (3)
introducing robotic concepts to underserved and disadvantaged 11th and 12th
graders in the Baltimore City Public School System and improving their math
skills through robotics hands-on exercises; (4) creating an articulated pathway
from Baltimore City Community College's robotics technician program to Morgan
State University's School of Engineering for an engineering-related Bachelor's
Degree; and (5) providing internship and job opportunities to Baltimore City
Community College's robotics technician students. The evaluation effort, under
the direction of an outside evaluator, is monitoring student learning outcomes;
enrollment, graduation, and transfer rates of robotics technician students,
transition rates from Baltimore City Public School System to the robotics
program; transfer rates from the robotics program to Morgan State University's
Department of Industrial, Manufacturing, and Information Engineering; internship
rate and employment rate of the program's students and graduates; and academic
improvement of program's students. Project materials and results are being
disseminated through the program's website, through presentations at national
technology education and robotics conferences, through a regional workshop for
HBCUs, and through the NSF-funded ARTSI and TIME Center. Broader impacts include
the dissemination of the curriculum, the strong focus on African American
students, and the outreach to high school students.