* 0802487
* Achieving Technological Literacy in Arizona for Students and Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Gerry Corcoran, Maricopa County Community College District
* Continuing Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 04/30/2012
* USD 883,755.00

Achieving Technological Literacy in Arizona for Students and Teachers (AT LAST)
focuses on increasing technological literacy in secondary education through a
partnership involving the National Center for Teacher Education (NCTE) of the
Maricopa County Community Colleges District in Arizona, the Maricopa Center for
Learning and Instruction and the Educations Professions program, a statewide
program that prepares high school students for careers in education. The project
is providing professional development workshops for future and current teachers
to enable them to better prepare their students for an increasingly technology-
driven society. AT LAST is also collaborating with the Arizona Technology
Council and several ATE centers and projects to ensure alignment with regional
industry and adapt existing technology instruction for the workshops. Arizona
high school teachers, community college teacher education faculty and future
teachers (students in the Education Professions Program) are the primary
recipients of the training. Learning objectives include knowledge about the
regional technology industries and skills for using instructional technology to
teach technological literacy and to align instruction with the current pace of
technology advancement. The project is guided by ITEA standards and focuses on
key technologies associated with rapid-growth industry in Arizona, including
Microsystems, semiconductors, electronic instruments, biomedical devices, and
nanotechnology. Teacher participants implement technological literacy curriculum
and develop Web-published learning objects and e-portfolios with a focus on
technological literacy. The project is conducting research in concert with
training and evaluation to explore variables that affect technological literacy,
guide future teacher training, and prepare an adoptable model.