* 0802933
* nanoECO Workshop on Nanoparticles in the Environment: Implications and Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2008,02/28/2009
* Mark Wiesner, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 02/28/2009
* USD 10,000.00

CBET-0802933, Wiesner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is proposed to
facilitate the interaction of U.S. and European researchers to:&lt;br/&gt;1)
Review current data on nanoparticle reactivity, exposure and transformations in
the environment,&lt;br/&gt;2) Review scope of efforts underway to evaluate the
effects of these exposures on ecosystems,&lt;br/&gt;3) Identify critical data
needs and the coverage of on-going studies with the goal of
maximizing&lt;br/&gt;the impact of current and future studies and,&lt;br/&gt;4)
Lay the foundations for continued, collaborative interactions that will take
advantage&lt;br/&gt;of the resources available in Europe and the US while
reducing a duplication of effort and enhancing opportunities for research and
international experience for U.S. students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the interactions between engineered nanomaterials,
the relative occurrence of these materials in comparison with natural and
incidental nano-scale materials as well as the interactions of these materials
with organisms is important to ensure that nanotechnology improves material and
social conditions without exceeding the ecological capabilities that support
them. While the need for research in this area has been recognized in both the
US and Europe, coordination between US and European efforts has been limited.
Indeed, recent calls for proposals on the part of the NSF, the EPA and the EU
have stressed the need for collaboration on this topic. Successful collaboration
in this area will require the participation of more junior researchers who may
have not yet had the opportunity to build trans-Atlantic collaborations. This
workshop will offer both established and junior researchers the opportunity to
build international collaborations. The proposed workshop will bring some of the
most active researchers on this topic from the US in contact with European
counterparts to share information and methods related to nanoparticle behavior
in the environment. Co-organized by the EMPA, EAWAG, and the Swiss Nanoscience
Institute, the current keynote invitees represent six European countries (UK,
France, Switzerland, Austria, Germany, and the Netherlands) and six US
universities.&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;Impacts beyond the scientific
merits of the workshop will include the establishment of personal contacts
between researchers, an accelerated internationalization of US efforts in this
area and the dissemination of information on environmental impacts of
nanomaterials. Selection of US participants for the workshop will include a
strong consideration of participant diversity and the potential for accelerating
collaborations ties that might not otherwise develop.&lt;br/&gt;