* 0802583
* InternationalResearch Fellowship Program:   Social Inequality and Resilience among Youth Heads of Household in Rwanda
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2008,10/31/2010
* Maggie Zraly, Zraly                   Maggie
* Fellowship
* John Snyder
* 10/31/2010
* USD 163,968.00

0802583 Zraly

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Maggie
Zraly to work with Dr. Joseph Ntaganira at National University of Rawanda.

Over the last two decades, youth headed households have emerged and proliferated
in Africa south of the Sahara, signaling a reconfiguration of long-standing
family patterns. During this same time, Rwanda has undergone civil war and
genocide, followed by an era of reconstruction involving free-market reforms,
privatization, and a huge influx of foreign aid, contributing to the intense
concentration wealth in a minority of the population. The burgeoning of youth
headed households in post-genocide Rwandan society presents a valuable
opportunity to examine the cultural process of resilience among a generation of
youth who are growing up amidst widespread social transformations never before
seen in the world. This collaboration will investigate the interplay between
social inequality and resilience in peer networks among youth heads of household
(YHH) in Kigali, the capital city of Rwanda. The purpose of the study is to
understand patterns of variability in vulnerability to sexual coercion, HIV
risk, and emotional experience and expression among YHH, especially with respect
to gender. Where YHH connect with peers who share similar experiences and
problems, it is expected that resilience in peer networks will be a cultural
source of hope and courage to overcome threats encountered in everyday life.
However, it is also expected that where YHH are socially excluded from, or must
compete for, access to the support of peer networks, they will be more likely to
be driven into coercive sexual relationships offering economic benefits and
carrying considerable risk for HIV infection. This research strengthens
anthropology?s engagement with human phenomena typically approached through
epidemiology and psychology (i.e. resilience, emotion, risk, and vulnerability),
and extends theorizing on how social inequality is actually experienced,
negotiated, and shaped by youth in cultural context, as well as how it patterns
vulnerability to disease. This project will build the capacity of a female
postdoctoral researcher from the United States to forge long-term collaborative
relationships with scientists in Rwanda. It will also promote the participation
of YHH in science education, and enhance the basic social science training of
graduate level Rwandan public health researchers.