* 0802634
* Doctoral Dissertaion Research:  The Dynamics of Eviction in the Inner-City Housing Market.
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Matthew Desmond, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2009
* USD 7,500.00

SES- 0802634 Mustafa Emirbayer Matthew Desmond University of Wisconsin?Madison

The process of eviction has virtually been ignored by urban poverty scholars but
holds strategic value for advancing social-scientific knowledge of the
reproduction of inner-city poverty. By studying eviction, one can obtain a
unique perspective into (1) the ways in which the dynamics of the low-income
housing market exacerbate conditions of chronic poverty, (2) the degree to which
poor people experiencing a crisis rely on their social networks, and (3) how
cultural dynamics of the inner city reinforce conditions of poverty. To analyze
some of the causes, dynamics, and consequences of eviction, this study will
pursue the following research questions. First, how do landlords decide whom to
evict and to whom to show leniency? Second, how do different actors in the
eviction process understand and interact with one another? Third, how does the
density, structure, and amount of resources found within a tenant?s social
network affect her or his likelihood of being evicted? Fourth, how do tenants
respond to an eviction? Finally, what are the major consequences of forced
removal? Set in inner-city Milwaukee, this study will employ both quantitative
and qualitative methods. After conducting twenty interviews, ten with landlords
and ten with tenants who have been evicted, to understand the inner-city housing
market and the dynamics of eviction, the co-PI will begin an ethnographic study
of the process of eviction as well as a survey of Milwaukee?s poorest renters.
The researcher will conduct a ten-month ethnographic study of five landlords and
five tenants facing eviction, researching, additionally, the array of actors
involved in the eviction process (e.g., evicted tenants, non-evicted tenants,
landlords, lawyers). Additionally, the researcher, in collaboration with the
University of Wisconsin Survey Center, will collect 1,000 surveys (with
approximately 100 items) of tenants living in Milwaukee?s low-cost housing
sector. The survey will gather data on tenants? demographic attributes and
opinions, experiences with eviction, housing conditions, residential mobility,
social networks, income, and material hardship.

Broader Impact: This study?s findings will be disseminated to multiple audiences
(e.g., social scientists, policy makers, community organizers, tenants and
landlords) and through various avenues (e.g., article and book publications,
policy briefs, academic conferences, public forums). Importantly, this study
will generate scientific findings that will interest policy makers attempting to
draft effective and fair housing initiatives. First, because one consequence of
eviction is homelessness, this study will help us better understand a mechanism
by which people become homeless. Second, by exploring how landlords and managers
evict and generally treat tenants, it will help policy makers better understand
how they can improve management accountability in low-cost apartment complexes.
Third, by investigating the extent to which tenants know and apply their rights,
as well as the extent to which landlords abide by their legal responsibilities,
this study will help policy makers identify ways they might increase public
awareness of rights pertaining to eviction. Fourth, because this study will
determine the extent to which discrimination influences the eviction decision,
it will inform programs and policies designed to ensure equal opportunity in
housing. Finally, this study will inform policy makers drafting laws
specifically pertaining to eviction.

