* 0802645
* Dissertation Research:  Admissions and Success in Education and the Labor Market.
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* Frank Samson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2009
* USD 7,500.00

SES-0802645&lt;br/&gt;David Grusky&lt;br/&gt;Frank Samson&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Do whites' views about the importance of
traditional meritocratic criteria become malleable when they are confronted with
circumstances in which Asians appear to be surpassing whites under the current
rules of the game? The relative success of Asians compared to whites in the
United States on various socioeconomic status indicators (college degrees,
median earnings, and professional-managerial occupational concentration) as well
as the over-representation of Asians at elite higher educational institutions
present an emerging social context in which to study commitment to the idea of
meritocracy, as indicated by university admissions criteria. Using a survey-
based experiment of a random sample of 1000 California adults, lab-based
experiments of college students in various university settings, and in-depth
interviews, this project tests sociological and political psychology-based
theories about the relationship between race, public opinion, and public policy:
here, public university admissions criteria. In a hyper-competitive
undergraduate admissions context where standardized test prep courses and
college application private tutors have become both big money and globalized
businesses, and intense college preparatory instruction and planning can
commence as early as pre-Kindergarten, this study sheds light on the ideational
components (e.g. individualism and group attitudes) that constitute support for
current academic university admissions criteria. If support for current
admissions criteria, as indicators of meritocracy, have a basis in not only
value commitments to individualism and fairness (e.g. rewards for hard work) but
also serve as gate-keeping mechanisms amidst racialized groups vying in high-
stakes competition for the scarce and valued resource of higher education,
traditionally underrepresented groups should be compelled to participate in
discussions that re-conceive of university admissions criteria that can reward
hard work yet not be used to reproduce group disadvantages and inequalities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research can provide a more certain
footing for discussion and further research around group-based attitudes and
inequalities, political values, and higher education policy.