* 0802517
* Turtle Mountain Field Station
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Wannetta Bennett, Turtle Mountain Community College
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 07/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

Faculty at Turtle Mountain Community College (TMCC) and the University of North
Dakota (UND) are collaborating to develop the Turtle Mountain Field Station
(TMFS), a center for research, education, and outreach in geospatial
technologies. The TMFS brings together Native American college students, tribal
community educators, rural secondary school teachers, rural secondary school
computer technicians, and faculty, staff, and graduate students at UND. The TMFS
provides a strong foundation for a geospatial technology program that will
enhance science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines at
TMCC and within secondary schools throughout north central North Dakota. This is
being accomplished through the development of Geographic Information System
(GIS), Global Positioning System (GPS) and remote sensing curricula for
integration into TMCC's STEM discipline and other courses, including
agriculture, forestry, life sciences, environmental public health, and Native
American studies. TMFS is also providing summer internship opportunities for
TMCC students to work with UND faculty and graduate students on research
projects involving geospatial technology. In addition, a GIS certificate and an
associate of science degree in geography are being developed for implementation
at TMCC. Finally, the project is offering hands-on workshops for secondary
school educators and computer technicians. Over two years, the TMFS project will
directly impact 60 university and college faculty, staff, and students, as well
as secondary school educators, in North Dakota. The TMFS is serving tribal and
rural communities and providing an opportunity for TMCC students to learn about
and to experience geospatial technology research methodology and applications in
STEM disciplines. These students are better prepared to apply knowledge and
technical skills gained to the challenges of economic development, land
management, natural resource management, rural health services, and agriculture
in tribal and rural areas. The tribal and other rural secondary teachers and
computer technicians are developing professionally and have access to TMFS-
developed curriculum that enhances STEM discipline experiences for tribal and
other rural secondary school students.