* 0802478
* Strongly Correlated Electron Phenomena in Rare Earth and Actinide Intermetallics
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2012
* M. Brian Maple, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 03/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

Technical: &lt;br/&gt;In rare earth and actinide materials, hybridization
between localized f-electron and conduction-electron states yields novel
phenomena such as heavy fermion behavior, non-Fermi liquid behavior, Kondo
insulating behavior and superconductivity. The objectives of this research
program are to characterize unconventional electronic ordered phases found in
f-electron materials, determine the conditions under which they are formed,
identify underlying microscopic mechanisms, and test relevant theories. These
goals are sought experimentally through the measurement of the transport,
thermodynamic, and magnetic properties of single crystals and thin films of
novel rare earth and actinide compounds at low temperatures (down to the mK
range), high magnetic fields, and high pressures. This investigation features
three main thrusts: non-Fermi liquid behavior, unconventional superconductivity
and other ground states, and the search for new correlated electron materials.
Materials currently at the core of these studies include the CeMIn5 compounds,
the Pr-based filled skutterudites, and U-based intermetallics such as URu2Si2.
The study of strongly correlated electron phenomena in this laboratory serves to
train the next generation of condensed matter and materials physicists who will
contribute to academic, industrial, and governmental arenas throughout their
careers. In addition to improving basic understanding of correlated electron
behavior, these studies may also directly lead to technological advances such as
thermoelectric refrigeration and magnetic information
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research program is to experimentally characterize the class of unusual strong
interactions between electrons referred to as "correlated electron" behavior.
Correlated electrons lead to a variety of interesting effects, such as
superconductivity and unconventional magnetism. These phenomena are often
observed in "f-electron" materials, those composed of rare earth or actinide
elements, which include cerium and uranium. This investigation encompasses the
synthesis of these f-electron materials and the subsequent experimental
measurement of their electrical and magnetic properties. Via this approach, the
different types of behavior attributed to correlated electron effects will be
analyzed with the goal of better describing these effects and ultimately
understanding the various conditions under which they occur. This investigation
further involves a search for new materials exhibiting correlated electron
behavior. This program serves to train the next generation of condensed matter
and materials physicists who will contribute to academic, industrial, and
governmental arenas throughout their careers. In addition to forming a deeper
understanding of correlated electronic behavior, the knowledge developed from
these studies may also lead to new advanced sensors, devices, and technologies
for use in the energy, information, environmental, medical, and defense
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;