* 0802851
* Combinatorial Commutative Algebra of Cox Rings and the Hilbert Scheme of Points
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2010
* David Eisenbud, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2010
* USD 65,961.00

This project studies two objects in the common ground between commutative
algebra, combinatorics and algebraic geometry: the Cox rings of algebraic
varieties and the Hilbert schemes of points. The Cox ring of an algebraic
variety $X$ is a multigraded ring whose GIT quotients are the coordinate rings
of images of $X$ via rational maps. For many interesting varieties, the so
called Mori Dream spaces, the Cox ring is a finitely generated k-algebra. The
project aims to develop tools to realize Cox rings of some Mori Dream spaces
effectively, in terms of explicit coordinates and defining equations. Such
descriptions are obtained via Koszul filtrations, via the combinatorics of
Groebner bases or via new methods proposed. &lt;br/&gt;Specific conjectures
about the structure of the Cox rings of certain classes of varieties are
proposed. The project also studies the Hilbert scheme of points in affine space,
in particular the problem of describing the radical component (the closure of
the set of radical ideals) and the singularities near monomial
ideals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An algebraic variety is a space defined by the
simultaneous vanishing of a collection of polynomial functions in several
variables. A very fertile classical technique for studying the geometry of an
algebraic variety is to consider the various natural coordinate systems that
this variety admits. The Cox ring of an algebraic variety is a way to study all
these coordinate systems simultaneously. The first objective of this project is
to provide descriptions of the Cox rings of some algebraic varieties. The second
objective of this proposal is to study the Hilbert scheme of&lt;br/&gt;points:
the space of all possible configurations of n points in d-dimensional space. The
geometry of this set is rather intricate and the aim of the project is to
describe all possible ways in which the n-points can collide into one another
and the geometry of the Hilbert scheme near these
collisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;