* 0802135
* Planning a Center for Advanced Automotive Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2008,12/31/2009
* Chih-Ping Yeh, Macomb Community College
* Standard Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 12/31/2009
* USD 149,661.00

The automotive industry contributes significantly to the national economy, and
it is currently experiencing a revolutionary technological transformation.
Automakers, in response to economic, political, and environmental pressures, are
expanding their development and production of more fuel efficient and
environmentally friendly automobiles through advanced automotive technologies
that fall into three main categories: hybrid electric vehicles (HEV),
alternative fuel vehicles (AFV) including new generation diesel and biofuels,
and fuel cell vehicles (FCV). These categories are both descriptive of the
technologies and inclusive of new generations of alternative propulsion systems
yet to be developed that require service and development technicians and
technologists to acquire new skills sets and knowledge. Projections show that
HEV, AFV, and FCV will grow considerably in the next 20 years, and there is an
unmet demand for a future generation of technicians. With more than 26,000
automotive technicians in Michigan, a planning grant for a regional center for
advanced automotive technologies is strategic in that the state is home to the
American auto industry and international epicenter for research and development
of new technologies.

The Center for Advanced Automotive Technology (CAAT) is being planned to meet
the growing and evolving advanced technical education needs of automotive
technicians by providing modern training modules and programs for advanced
automotive technologies that will enter the market in the near future.
Activities to reform current automotive technician education curriculum at the
secondary and postsecondary school levels include synthesis of existing
materials; creation of curriculum; adaptation and offering of degree programs
and professional development for educators; curriculum alignment to new state
high school content standards in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and
Technology (STEM) subjects; and utilization of educational research and industry
partners to infuse research into the curriculum. The core project team for the
planning process includes (a) postsecondary education institutions (Macomb
Community College, Kalamazoo Valley Community College, Henry Ford Community
College,and Wayne State University); (b) secondary education partners; and (c)
industry and government partners.

The intellectual merit of CAAT is based on the partners' abilities and
capacities to improve student learning in advanced automotive technology (HEV,
AFV, and FCV) by collecting the most advanced technological expertise from
industry and education partners, integrating existing and evolving curricula
into a comprehensive educational package, and adapting that curriculum to
targeted audiences among students and educators across the array of educational
partners and the community.

Broader Impact: The auto industry is critical to the entire nation. If the
United States is to minimize reliance on foreign oil, use of evolving propulsion
technologies must be expanded and include training of the service and
development sectors. Documents produced are being made available to educational
and industry partners across the United States.