* 0802120
* Studies in Statistical Mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Joel Lebowitz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2011
* USD 497,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education in a variety of subfields of statistical mechanics. This work is
jointly supported by the Division of Materials Research and the Division of
Mathematical Sciences. The central theme of the effort is a better understanding
of the properties of macroscopic systems originating in the collective behavior
of their microscopic constituents. The methods used range from exact
mathematical analysis to computer simulations. These approaches bridge the gap
between rigorous results and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research topics
employed by PI and collaborators are varied. Using mesoscopic free energy
functionals allows investigation of periodic states, wetting in mixtures and
droplet formation in supersaturated vapor. An ongoing effort continues on
fluctuations and large deviations in nonequilibrium stationary states and
partial currents. This includes cases where the hydrodynamic scaling is
inadequate. Significant advance continue in fundamental studies such as
establishing Fourier?s law of heat conduction in open systems with anharmonic
interactions. In quantum statistical physics, the study of subsystems of large
quantum systems leads to understanding of when these systems have density
matrices given by canonical Gibbs measures. In some cases, such as the study of
ionization of model quantum systems in time periodic fields, there are
applications to laser induced transitions in atoms and molecules. Beyond
physics, researchers also apply statistical mechanical methods to the
mathematical study of epidemics taking into account correlations as well as
saturation effects on networks. Extension of these techniques to models of
population dynamics and ecology involves derivation of reaction-diffusion
equations via scaling limits and these are planned
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities are highly
interdisciplinary, bringing together physicists, mathematicians, chemists and
those working in theoretical areas of the biological and social sciences. The
expected applications are in material science, complex fluids and in biological
systems. The project also includes the organization of two conferences every
year in which both core subjects and new developments in statistical mechanics
are discussed in a collegial atmosphere. Graduate students, postdocs and
minority scientists are involved and present talks on their work and interact
with established researchers in the field. The conferences also serve as an
opportunity for professional networking and can lead to new collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research and education in a variety of subfields of statistical
mechanics. This work is jointly supported by the Division of Materials Research
and the Division of Mathematical Sciences. The central theme of the effort is a
better understanding of the properties of material systems originating in the
collective behavior of their elementary atomic constituents. The methods used
range from exact mathematical analysis to computer simulations. These approaches
bridge the gap between rigorous results and applications. Topics range from
classical physics to quantum physics and highly formal to applications of
technological relevance and even dynamics of disease
propagation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities are highly
interdisciplinary, bringing together physicists, mathematicians, chemists and
those working in theoretical areas of the biological and social sciences. The
expected applications are in material science, complex fluids and in biological
systems. The project also includes the organization of two conferences every
year in which both core subjects and new developments in statistical mechanics
are discussed in a collegial atmosphere. Graduate students, postdocs and
minority scientists are involved and present talks on their work and interact
with established researchers in the field. The conferences also serve as an
opportunity for professional networking and can lead to new collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;