* 0802876
* The Sloan Digital Sky Survey --Phase III
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Steven Majewski, Astrophysical Research Consortium
* Cooperative Agreement
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2014
* USD 9,000,000.00

This project builds on the legacy of the two previous Sloan Digital Sky Survey
programs (SDSS and SDSS-II). This project consists of four surveys.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF funding is primarily for the Baryon Oscillation
Spectroscopic Survey (BOSS). This survey will measure redshifts of 1.5 million
luminous red galaxies and Lyman-alpha absorption towards 160,000 high redshift
quasars. These measurements will permit the absolute cosmic distance scale to be
determined to a higher precision (1.0-1.5%) than previously achieved and will
provide constraints on the equation of state of dark energy. Some of the NSF
funds will also be used to support the Apache Point Observatory Galactic
Evolution Experiment (APOGEE). This survey will use high-resolution and high
signal-to-noise infrared spectroscopy to penetrate the dust that obscures the
inner Galaxy from our view, measuring radial velocities, spectral types, and
detailed elemental abundances of 100,000 red giant stars to an H magnitude limit
of approximately 13.5 across the full range of the Galactic bulge, bar, and
disk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first of the non-NSF funded surveys is SEGUE-2
which will measure radial velocities, spectral types, and elemental abundances
of 350,000 stars in numerous target categories to a g magnitude limit of
approximately 19, which will probe the kinematics and chemical evolution of the
outer Milky Way. The final survey, also non-NSF funded, is the Multi-Object APO
Radial Velocity Exoplanet Large-area Survey (MARVELS). This will monitor the
radial velocities of 11,000 bright stars, with the precision and cadence needed
to detect gas giant planets with orbital periods ranging from several hours to
two years. These observations will provide a critical statistical data set for
testing theories of the formation and dynamical evolution of planetary
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These surveys will produce large, well calibrated,
easily accessible public databases supporting astronomical research and
educational activities at many levels. The project also includes an active
program of education and outreach promoting the data and tools to K-12 and
university educators and to the broader public. &lt;br/&gt;