* 0802888
* VORTEX2: A Study of Tornado and Tornadic Thunderstorm Dynamics through High-Resolution Simulation, Advanced Data Assimilation and Prediction
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2013
* Jidong Gao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 11/30/2013
* USD 779,791.00

The Verification of Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment #2 (VORTEX 2) is
a multi-scale investigation of factors that lead to tornadogenesis. VORTEX 2 is
a follow on to VORTEX 1 whose field phase was conducted during the Spring of
1994 and 1995. The VORTEX 1 advanced knowledge of the kinematic structures of
tornadic and nontornadic storms and provided some hints as to the sensitivity of
the evolution of supercell storms and tornadogenesis to very fine spatial scale
heterogeneity. The VORTEX 2 community intends to extend and build upon the
results of VORTEX 1. One of the obstacles in furthering understanding of
tornadoes is the lack of complete observations of the atmospheric state at a
sufficiently high resolution. The field phase of VORTEX 2 will collect
unprecedented observations at the scales of convective storms and tornadoes and
of their environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team from the Center for Analysis
and Prediction of Storms (CAPS) will participation in the VORTEX 2 field
experiment and conduct research in four principal areas: 1) Generate real-time
high resolution (1-2 km) storm-scale ensemble and deterministic forecasts; 2)
Conduct ultra-high (down to few meters) resolution numerical simulation
experiments for tornado cases for dynamic understanding and validation of
conceptual models; 3) Study the impact of microphysical processes and their
parameterizations on thunderstorm downdraft, cold pool, and gust front dynamics
and their roles in tornadogenesis; 4) Assimilate routine and special
observations into very-high resolution four dimensional data sets to advance
understanding of dynamics as well as predictability at the thunderstorm through
tornado scales and for studying the impact of special field data on NWP and
initial condition sensitivities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The
project is expected to contribute significantly to addressing many of the
scientific questions concerning tornadogenesis and decay, tornadic thunderstorm
dynamics and their interaction with storm environment, the role of microphysical
processes within tornadic thunderstorms, and the predictability of tornadoes and
tornadic thunderstorms. The knowledge gained will allow better assessment of the
probability of tornadoes occurring in supercell thunderstorms and thus will lead
to advances in forecasting tornado intensity and longevity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research will directly address one of
the most important goals of weather research -- to improve the ability to
accurately predict intense hazardous weather. This project will expose graduate
students and young post-doctoral scientists to a major scientific field
experiment and give them hands-on experiences working with experimental data
sets. It will provide much needed education and training for them in the
increasingly important areas of advanced data assimilation and high-resolution
simulation and NWP. The research findings will have a direct path to operations
through the group's work with operational data assimilation systems and
prediction models and through their participation in the NOAA Hazardous Weather
Testbed (HWT) Spring Forecast Experiments. The latter exposes operational
weather forecasters, as well as university scientists, to cutting-edge
forecasting capabilities and products.