* 0802433
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: MODELING HUMAN DRIVING BEHAVIOR AND RESPONSE WITH APPLICATIONS TO INTELLIGENT AGENT-BASED TRAFFIC FLOW SIMULATION
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2007,12/31/2009
* Hani Mahmassani, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 12/31/2009
* USD 249,709.00

Human decision-making in everyday vehicular traffic situations determines in
large measure the properties of the traffic stream and the resulting quality of
traffic service, which affect the reliability, safety and efficiency of
transportation systems and the quality of urban life. This project puts forward
a comprehensive, multidisciplinary research approach to characterize and model
human cognitive driving behavior and subsequent response in traffic flow
systems. Specifically, the dynamics of driver behavior, taken at the individual
level and as part of a group, evolving over time and space will be
systematically studied as a complex system. By developing behavior-based models
of human decision-making in traffic situations and integrating the behavior
models in computer simulation systems, the study addresses fundamental questions
in traffic science and promises to improve prevailing understanding of traffic
flow phenomena as well as the fidelity and reliability of the current state of
the art of traffic flow simulation. The outcome of the project will reveal the
interrelationship between microscopic elements of driver behavior (e.g. reaction
times and other time lags, over-reaction, risk averse and risk seeking behaviors
in car following and lane changing) and macroscopic traffic flow phenomena
through analytical investigation and simulation, validated by field observation.
The subject of the investigation entails considerable economic and social
significance, with wide application in human cognitive science, as well as in
traffic operations and management. The project also provides an excellent and
unique opportunity for student exposure to cross-disciplinary research and helps
build a diverse scientific workforce.