* 0802498
* National Center for Nanotechnology Applications and Career Knowledge
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Karen Halvorson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2013
* USD 5,000,000.00

This project for a National ATE Center for Nanotechnology Applications and
Career Knowledge (NACK) builds upon the current Regional Center for
Nanofabrication Manufacturing Education. The Regional Center was established in
2001 and is dedicated to meeting Pennsylvania industry needs for skilled
technician level workers across the full range of micro- and nanofabrication
applications. The Pennsylvania Regional Center has pioneered methods for
delivering nanotechnology educational experiences to community and technical
college students anywhere in the nation. In 2006 the Regional Center established
a teaching cleanroom in order to analyze the costs and capabilities of such a
facility. As a result, the costs are well understood, and curriculum for use in
such a facility has been developed. The teaching cleanroom site model is
available for transfer to other regions of the country.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is clear evidence of strong and growing demand for
workers with micro- and nanofabrication skills. Virtually all of the graduates
of existing associate degree micro- and nanofabrication programs who are not
pursuing further education are employed by micro- and nanotechnology companies.
Numerous recent U.S. regional and international studies document strong demand
for these workers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Penn State Regional Center has
assisted 30 Pennsylvania institutions to develop nanotechnology education
programs and has also been a source of assistance to community and technical
colleges, universities, and other partners across the nation seeking to
establish nanotechnology education programs. Since 2005, the Regional Center has
assisted more than 100 community colleges in other states with program
development efforts. Micro- and nanotechnology education programs are now
beginning to proliferate at community and technical colleges across the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In late 2006, leaders of the Pennsylvania Regional Center
began consulting with counterpart leaders of micro- and nanofabrication
education efforts taking place across the country with regard to the planned
NACK Center proposal. Based on these discussions, the core mission of the
proposed NACK Center is to provide national coordination and dissemination of
micro- and nanofabrication workforce development programs and activities. Ten
complementary and essential activities have been identified to be undertaken by
the NACK Center to achieve this mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the NACK Center is imbedded in the hands-on experience with advanced
nanofabrication and characterization equipment that community and technical
college students receive, and in the curriculum which incorporates advanced
nanoscale science and engineering research underway at partner research
intensive universities. Profound broad impacts are expected from NACK Center on
the quality and diversity of the nation's science and engineering workforce, and
on the global competitiveness of U.S. industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
management plan for the NACK Center is modeled on the structure of the
successful Pennsylvania Regional Center. The NACK Center is managed by the
Principal Investigator and the Co-Principal Investigators with guidance from
eight oversight committees addressing all major activities of the Center. Each
oversight committee is chaired by a representative of a community or technical
college, giving these institutions clear roles in the management of the Center.