* 0802499
* Collaborative Research:  Eclipse Observations of Heavy Ions, Neutrals and Dust Grains in the Solar Corona
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2013
* Munir Nayfeh, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 04/30/2013
* USD 29,881.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) and her collaborators will take multi-spectral
observations during several upcoming solar eclipses in order to map the ion
abundance, electron temperature, and direction of the coronal magnetic field in
the inner corona. The team plans to study the distribution of neutral hydrogen
and helium in the solar corona, as well as to investigate the properties of dust
grains in the near-Sun environment. Data will be obtained in the spectral lines
of ionized iron, sulfur, and silicon, as well as in neutral helium and hydrogen.
Coupled with laboratory experiments, these observations will enable detection of
fluorescence signatures of interplanetary dust grains present in the solar
corona.

This project will exploit the complementary diagnostic techniques of resonant
scattering and polarization to follow the evolution of ions and neutrals in the
solar corona. Heavy ions and traces of lighter neutral atoms (such as hydrogen
and helium) in the inner corona serve as local probes of the physical processes
that heat the solar atmosphere to over one million degrees and accelerate the
solar wind. While ions are tied to coronal magnetic fields, neutrals reflect the
fate of cooler material from solar as well as interstellar origin. As ions and
neutrals expand away from the Sun, they interact and evolve under the influence
of the local magnetic field, the local electron temperature, and through
collisions. This research will enhance our understanding of these phenomena.

In previous eclipse expeditions, members of the research team have been
successful in raising public awareness of scientific research in general and of
solar physics in particular. Their prior efforts have proved to be engaging for
the imagination and intellect of younger students specifically. The research
team represents a fruitful collaboration involving small and large universities
led by a senior female scientist. The eclipse expeditions will involve graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows, and a K-12 teacher, with an emphasis on
education.