* 0802428
* Dayton Urban STEM Academy
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Lalitha Locker, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 12/31/2013
* USD 642,863.00

Sinclair Community College (Dayton, Ohio) is creating an urban STEM Teacher
Academy with Dayton area partners, which include the Dayton Public Schools, the
University of Dayton, Wright State University, Miami University, and EDvention,
the Dayton area's P-20 council. This new K-12 science and mathematics teacher
education paradigm utilizes national and state Tech Prep program standards and
best practices in STEM education to provide future teachers with a solid,
content-rich foundation in STEM disciplines and the pedagogical framework to
effectively teach STEM subjects. The objectives include: (1) establishing a new
Tech Prep STEM Teacher Education Pathway at the high school, community college,
and university levels; (2) developing new STEM courses for the Ohio College Tech
Prep Teacher Education Pathway; (3) creating a series of transitional activities
for future STEM teachers (STEM Teacher Cadets) that foster success in
matriculating to the associate degree level; (4) facilitating the matriculation
of STEM Teacher Cadets to the baccalaureate level through articulation
agreements; and (5) integrating innovative uses of technology in teaching and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new STEM teacher education program emphasizes
interdisciplinary approaches for learning science and mathematics and integrates
project-based learning, relevance, personalization, STEM content rigor,
technology integration, and problem solving, exemplifying the strategies the
prospective teachers are expected to employ in future STEM classrooms. The
pedagogy that current STEM teachers are learning and modeling for STEM Teacher
Cadets helps both groups better understand the interrelations between science,
mathematics, technology, and the real world of business and industry. Teachers
have the opportunity to participate in industry externships to learn how STEM is
used in area manufacturing, IT, biotechnology, and aerospace industries. A web-
based learning community called "iDiscovery" provides ongoing peer support for
teachers during the academic year, following summer professional development
institutes. Current teachers as well as the STEM Teacher Cadets are being
prepared to teach science and mathematics embedded in real-life contexts using
best practice problem-solving and inquiry-based approaches.