* 0802628
* California State University Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (CSU-LSAMP) Senior Alliance - Senior Level Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2014
* Juanita Barrena, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 06/30/2014
* USD 4,852,481.00

PROJECT SUMMARY: This project, which responds to NSF Program Solicitation 07-566
(Alliances for Broadening Participation in STEM?LSAMP program element 9133), is
a five-year continuation of the California State University-Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (CSU-LSAMP) as a Senior-level Alliance.
Initiated in 1994, CSU-LSAMP is a statewide program dedicated to broadening
participation in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. The current Senior-level CSU-LSAMP includes 22 of the 23 campuses
of the California State University (CSU). The only CSU campus that is not
included is The California Maritime Academy, which is a unique and specialized
campus of the CSU. Hence, this project is truly a comprehensive effort of the
CSU, the largest system of public higher education in the world, located in the
largest and most diverse State in the Nation.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: As a
Senior-level LSAMP project, CSU-LSAMP aims to: (1) continue to enhance student
performance, success, and retention in STEM disciplines; as well as maintain or
increase baccalaureate degree production, (2) facilitate the transition of
community college students in their first year of transfer to a CSU campus
through activities that improve the retention rates of transfer students; (3)
continue to enhance student interest in research and careers in STEM, as well as
enhance the global awareness of CSU-LSAMP students. (4) increase the number of
students who are admitted to graduate programs and obtain doctoral degrees in
STEM, and (5) document, disseminate, and replicate undergraduate intervention
models that increase access to, and success in, STEM baccalaureate degree
programs and facilitate undergraduate admissions to STEM graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;The types of activities that are offered to support each
objective have consistently been shown to facilitate retention and progression
of URM students in STEM, and represent a set of well-established ?best
practices?. Notably, the project continues to include the top five LSAMP
hallmark activities, which were identified in the Urban Institute?s national
study of LSAMP (i.e., research experiences, mentoring, internships,
scholarships/ stipends and academic support/tutoring). In addition, in light of
the Urban Institute?s finding that LSAMP participants who participated in
research were more likely to pursue and complete graduate degrees, this project
includes a substantial emphasis on engaging students in research activities. The
project also includes a variety of activities designed to opportunities to
enhance student qualifications for graduate programs (e.g., GRE preparation,
teaching experiences; research presentations, and internships), and collaborates
with other student support programs on participating campuses (e.g., McNair and
NIH-NIGMS Bridges to the Future programs) and with programs at Ph.D. granting
institutions (e.g., AGEP) that share the goal of broadening participation in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: CSU-LSAMP has contributed substantially to
broadening participation of underrepresented minority (URM) groups in STEM
disciplines. Over the 14 year history of past CSU-LSAMP projects, the campuses
participating in those projects awarded a total of 109,115 STEM baccalaureate
degrees. Of these degrees, 18,513 STEM degrees were awarded to students who self
declared as members of URM groups, 77,105 STEM degrees were awarded to students
who self-declared as not being members of URM groups, and 13,497 STEM degrees
were awarded to students who declined to provide race/ethnicity data. Although
CSU-LSAMP does not limit participation to URM students or provide URM students
preference in admission, the project anticipates that 85-90% of the 1600-2000
STEM students admitted to the project each year will be URM students. CSU-LSAMP
also anticipates that, over the course of the project period, URM STEM
baccalaureate degree production by the 22 CSU campuses in the Senior-level
Alliance will increase from the current year base-line of 1,654 to at least
2,000/year and that the number of URM CSU-LSAMP participants who progress to
graduate programs will increase from an estimated base-line of 95/year to
200/year by the end of the project period.