* 0802672
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding and Mapping Past and Future Land-Use and Land-Cover Change in Bolivia's Corredor Bioceanico
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2008,09/30/2010
* Andrew Millington, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 09/30/2010
* USD 10,850.00

The nature of change in the Earth's ground cover is often tied to how human land
use modifies it. There are now means to combine remote sensing of the land cover
types with knowledge of human agency in making changes. This land use/land cover
change (LULLC) study will use those methods to better understand and predict
these shifts in a poorly known part of the world. The Corredor Bioceánico is a
major transportation project connecting the agricultural heartlands of South
America to the Atlantic and the Pacific. The final link is in southeastern
Bolivia in an undeveloped area that is home to indigenous groups and globally-
significant ecosystems. Infrastructure improvements that include highway paving,
revitalized railway services and increased flows along gas pipelines to Brazil
are currently underway and pose major threats to livelihoods and the region's
ecological integrity. Economic opportunities have emerged, land speculators have
arrived, and undocumented land uses are replacing forests and wetlands. It is
acknowledged that sub-tropical semi-arid wooded ecosystems are especially poorly
understood in terms of LULCC. Three critical knowledge gaps exist specifically
along the Corredor Bioceánico in Bolivia: 1) LULCC has not been mapped and
quantified in the region over an extended time period; 2) drivers and proximate
causes of land-use change have only been vaguely specified in South American dry
forests and savannas; and 3) predictions of future land-use change, as an
environmental impact of the Corredor Bioceánico, are outdated. This project will
fill these gaps by 1) mapping and quantifying the spatial patterns of LULCC from
1964 to 2007 along eastern Bolivia's Corredor Bioceánico using a time-series of
Corona, Landsat MSS/TM/ETM+, and CBERS imagery; 2) linking social science
methodologies to image processing techniques by developing a conceptual model of
socio-economic and political drivers of LULCC for the region based on interviews
and document analysis; and 3) spatially modeling future LULCC over a 5-50 year
period under various political and economic scenarios.

This project will advance land change science agendas by integrating remote
sensing, social science, and simulation modeling. The broader significance
partly lies in the fact that the research will addresses nationally and
internationally relevant land change science questions in the context of
southern Bolivia such as 1) How has land-cover been changed by human use? 2)
What are the major human causes of land-cover change in different geographical
and historical contexts? and 3) How will land use changes affect land-cover in
the future? It will also address globally important gaps in the drylands and
land use change literatures concerning southern hemisphere sub-tropical
woodlands that have been recognized by the land use change science community. As
some of the largest stretches of intact dry forest left in the world, and the
largest Neotropical wetland that are threatened by the development of the
Corredor Bioceánico, the project's the results will be of critical importance to
regional conservation managers and land planners who are currently making
conservation decisions based on out-dated models. Failure to foresee the future
of infrastructure development in this region could lead to the destruction of
key regional ecosystems such as the Chaco and Chiquitano woodlands, and the
Pantanal wetlands; may therefore compromise the livelihoods of indigenous Ayoreo
and Chiquitano peoples; and would thwart conservation efforts in Kaa-Iya del
Gran Chaco National Park where innovative conservation efforts integrating the
needs of nature conservation and local peoples are underway. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.
This project is jointly supported by the Geography and Regional Science Program
and the Americas Program of the Office of International Science and Engineering.

