* 0802315
* Multidimensional Radiation-Hydrodynamic Simulations of Core-Collapse Supernovae, Winds from Oblate Hot Stars, and Explosions of Rapidly-Rotating Stars
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Jeremiah Murphy, Murphy                  Jeremiah       W
* Fellowship Award
* Edward Ajhar
* 08/31/2011
* USD 231,000.00

Dr. Jeremiah Murphy is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
Washington. Dr. Murphy will complete development of BETHE, a multi-angle, multi-
energy-group, multidimensional, time-dependent radiation-hydrodynamics code.
Radiation hydrodynamics is a core subject in astrophysics, and for many
phenomena asphericities either accompany or are fundamental to the underlying
theory. BETHE uses novel mixed-frame radiation transport that is straightforward
to implement, generalizable to multiple dimensions, accurate and relatively
fast. The hydrodynamics solver is an Arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian (ALE) method
and uses arbitrary grids providing flexibility to tailor the grid to the
computational challenge. Together, these characteristics allow for unique
multidimensional simulations of astrophysical phenomena. In particular, Dr.
Murphy will (1) address the viability of the neutrino and acoustic mechanisms
for core-collapse supernovae, (2) simulate winds from oblate hot stars, and (3)
investigate whether proposed mechanisms for luminous-blue-variable outbursts can
reproduce, in the context of rapidly rotating stars, the observations of Eta
Carinae's Homunculus.

Dr. Murphy will also be actively involved with the Pre-Major in Astronomy
Program (Pre-MAP), which seeks to retain a diverse student body in the
University of Washington Astronomy Department. Pre-MAP targets first-year
students from traditionally underrepresented groups in the sciences (women,
first-generation and low-income college students, African Americans, Latinos,
Native Americans, Southeast Asians and Pacific Islanders) with two primary
goals: to engage students' interest and enthusiasm through research and to
provide a supportive community, enabling their success. Dr. Murphy's roles will
be to mentor Pre-MAP students, to offer simulation results to analyze, to
support field trips and research, and, most importantly, to evaluate and improve
the program.