* 0802216
* QMHP: Quasiparticle Self-consistent GW Approximation as a Framework for ab initio Device Simulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Takao Kotani, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 09/30/2011
* USD 315,243.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to extend a recently developed
Quasiparticle self-consistent GW&lt;br/&gt;method (QSGW) to study quantum
transport in molecular and nanoscale devices. Because QSGW&lt;br/&gt;is very
accurate, it is uniquely situated as a framework around which a reliable ab
initio theory&lt;br/&gt;can be constructed. The full QSGW theory, however, is
too expensive to be a practical engine&lt;br/&gt;for device design?at least as
originally implemented. The major focus of this work will
threefold&lt;br/&gt;first, to redesign a real-space version of QSGW theory, that
should execute far more efficiently&lt;br/&gt;than the standard implementation
with essentially the same reliability; second to design
physically&lt;br/&gt;sound approximations to QSGW that are suitable for larger-
scale applications, such as transport&lt;br/&gt;graphene, and new
metal/insulator/metal spintronic designs.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: It is a
significant accomplishment to develop an accurate, universal
method&lt;br/&gt;which can predict many properties for a wide variety of systems
in a unified way. This proposal&lt;br/&gt;extends QSGW in two directions: to
calculate quantities of importance to quantum transport,&lt;br/&gt;e.g. phonons,
the electron-phonon interaction, Auger recombination, and to find
simplifications to&lt;br/&gt;enable practical study of many interesting
materials problems.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This work can significantly extend
both the type of materials properties, the&lt;br/&gt;precision to which they can
be calculated, and the complexity of the materials systems accessible.
It&lt;br/&gt;lays the groundwork to enable realistic prediction of the
performance of several future generations&lt;br/&gt;of electron
devices.&lt;br/&gt;1