* 0802100
* An Anti-Ffouling Smart Surface With Controllable Nanostructures For IC-Cooling and MEMS Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Kwok-Siong Teh, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2012
* USD 249,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop a reliable
nanofabrication method and to study the related interfacial science and fluid
behavior that can reliably prevent a common, but seldom addressed, problem at
the microscale ? fouling. The research approach is to (1) synthesize and
characterize an active nanostructuring polymeric film, (2) understand its
nanostructuring mechanism and reversibility, (3) evaluate the anti-fouling
performance, and (4) apply it onto a micro device for fluid manipulation.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This polymeric surface, possessing
unique features such as the ease of processing, low actuation voltage and
reversible nanostructuring, can be applied towards minimizing fouling and fluid
manipulation at the microscale. The research outcomes can be applied to actively
control surface morphology, flow condition, and limit fouling.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;National Science Foundation?s support for
this research on smart nanostructured surfaces will have significant impact on
promoting national nanotechnology education. Through this collaborative work at
Rochester Institute of Technology and San Francisco State University,
nanotechnology demonstrations and hands-on experiences developed from the
research activities will introduce K-12 students to the science and fabrication
of micro/nanotechnology for practical applications in upstate New York and the
San Francisco Area. To promote further opportunities, underrepresented students
from Women in Engineering and North Star Program at R.I.T. as well as MESA
Engineering Program at SFSU will be incorporated in the outreach activities.
Additionally, the anti-fouling applications in IC cooling and biomedical
microdevice aspects are far-reaching within social, scientific and industrial
aspects and will reinforce our existing research and teaching strengths.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;