* 0802359
* SGER:  Improving Supply and Demand Data for the Preparation of Secondary Science and Math Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2008,02/28/2010
* Howard Gobstein, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 02/28/2010
* USD 199,700.00

The project proposed here seeks (1) to undertake a rigorous and thorough
analysis of the issues invlved in delevolping an adequate supply and demand
profile for middle and high school mathematics and science teaching; (2)
identify the estent to which the currewnt research base is adequate or
inadequate to inform that profile; and (3) develop a protocol, grounded in the
research to the extentpossible, to help states and post-secondary institutions
gauge the true curretn and projet need for mathematics and scienceteachers and
the ability to the state's institutions and teacher supply practis to meet those
needs. This work needs to be delveloped as soon as possiblein order to help
states and institutions derive maximum benefit from their stepped up efforts to
address the shrotage of science and mathematics teachers, as well as from new
federal funding that will flow from the america COMPETES act that has nowbeen
signed into law. In addition, the proposed project is seen as a core element of
a more comprehensive National Association of State Universities and Land Grant
colleges (NASULGC) initiative on science and mathematics teacher education, and
the timely commencement and omptletion of the work envisioned in the project is
critical to the progress and ultimate success of that initiative. The larger
initiative also provied important leverage, asnotedbelow, for the dissemination
and application of the tools and analysis the project aims to develop.