* 0802667
* Collaborative Research:    Fire Risk and Ecological Intergrity in the Wildland Urban Interface of Colorado Front Range
* SBE,BCS
* 09/20/2007,04/30/2009
* Rosemary Sherriff, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2009
* USD 9,695.00

In the western U.S. resource managers are increasingly concerned with the
objectives of restoring ecosystems to their pre-settlement conditions while also
mitigating the risks of fires to property and resource values. The dual
management goals of ecological restoration and fire-risk mitigation are not
always compatible, especially where natural fire regimes consisted of large,
severe fires. This collaborative research project will explore relationships
among forest management, land-use change, fire risk, and ecological integrity in
the wildland-urban interface (WUI) spanning four counties of the Colorado Front
Range. The investigators will develop spatially explicit baseline studies that
evaluate how fire exclusion and land-use patterns have affected wildfire
behavior and the spatial extent of fire risk to people and property across the
WUI landscape. Building upon these baseline assessments, the study will consider
which spatial combination of land-use and forest-management scenarios would
significantly reduce fire risk while also protecting ecological integrity across
a heterogeneous wildland-urban interface. This work integrates natural and human
dimensions of resilience and landscape change in the WUI of the Colorado Front
Range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific and communication products will be
generated through this project, with many having application to societal
questions of how resilient human and natural communities can be sustained in a
fire-prone, ever-expanding WUI. Products are expected to include (1) baseline
studies of historical fire regimes and forest-stand structures across the
Colorado Front Range WUI, (2) studies of historical exurban development patterns
and their effect on the degree and distribution of wildfire risk across the WUI,
(3) analysis of departure from historical ecological conditions and an improved
wildfire risk map, and (4) spatially explicit evaluation of key fire-mitigation
and forest restoration options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;