* 0802627
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Knowledge-Discourse-Practice Nexus of Ecological Restoration: Integrating Diversities
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2008,10/31/2009
* Matthew Turner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 10/31/2009
* USD 11,982.00

BCS-0802627 Matthew Turner Yen-Chu Weng University of Wisconsin-Madison

Doctoral Dissertation Research: The knowledge-discourse-practice nexus of
ecological restoration: integrating diversities

On both philosophical and practical grounds, ecological restoration serves as a
subject for interrogating and evaluating people's ideas of nature and the
expected role of humans in managing the natural world. What is particular about
ecological restoration is that people's intentions are explicitly expressed
through its practices. By tracing the reciprocity among knowledge, discourse,
and practice, ecological restoration provides a unique opportunity to examine
the connections between ideas of nature and the practices of reconstructing an
aspect of nature. This research will investigate the ways in which people's
positionality influence how ecological restoration is interpreted and practiced.
Three types of actors are the foci of the research: ecological scientists,
professional practitioners, and the general public. The research aims to
investigate the interconnections between people's knowledge background, their
discursive construction of nature, and their concrete practices in conducting
restoration activities. With the recent trend in involving the general public in
restoration projects, ecological restoration provides an opportunity to examine
the various knowledge claims about ecological restoration and the power dynamics
among social actors possessing different kinds of knowledge. The research will
take a comparative case-study approach to study a range of restoration projects
in two Midwestern cities: Madison, Wisconsin and Ann Arbor, Michigan. It will
integrate results from both qualitative and quantitative research methods,
including participant observation, semi-structured interviews, focus group
discussions, publication analyses, and questionnaire surveys. This research will
also identify potential conflicts and spaces for integration among the various
actor groups.

In this era of rising environmental awareness, public participation has become a
crucial component of natural resource management. Although through volunteer
programs local people have the chance to participate in environmental
management, little research has addressed the power dynamics between the experts
and lay volunteers. The research aims to provide a channel for the often
underrepresented general public to get involved in the dialogue processes as
well as to better inform the project managers of how to integrate the diverse
viewpoints into restoration projects. The overall objective of the research is
to foster mutual communications between experts and lay volunteers so that they
can both contribute to restoration projects and cultivate long-term reciprocal
interactions. Given that ecological restoration is at the forefront of the
practice of constructing nature, findings from this research can help promote
reflexive actions in environmental management in general.