* 0802380
* GEM: Anti-Parallel and Component Merging Scenarios in Collisionless Reconnection
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Homayoun Karimabadi, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Rachel Walker-Kulzick
* 05/31/2012
* USD 304,089.00

Recent work has led to a number of surprising results that challenge many of the
conventional viewpoints regarding the essential physics of magnetic
reconnection. This project will re-examine the physics of reconnection utilizing
a Particle-In-Cell plasma simulation code. An important aspect of the
simulations is that they will be run using an open boundary model rather than
the traditional periodic boundary condition. The initial results from this
approach appear quite promising since the artificial recirculation that is
inherent with periodic boundary conditions is completely eliminated. Plasma and
magnetic flux is allowed to enter and exit the system as needed. The resulting
simulations effectively mimic a much larger system than is possible with
periodic boundary conditions. These simulations have led to a new understanding
of the structure of the electron diffusion region and its effect on fast
reconnection. An innovative aspect of the code is that it has been adapted for
cell-based computers which are likely to be the future of large-scale
computations with expected speed gains of a factor of 40 over existing
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine several important
questions related to magnetic reconnection that are relevant to the Geospace
Environment Modeling program's focus groups. The specific topics to be
investigated include: (1) the relative roles of anti-parallel reconnection
versus component merging, (2) the role of plasma turbulence on the rate of
reconnection, (3) the dependence of the onset of reconnection and its subsequent
nonlinear development on the plasma beta parameter (the ratio of the plasma
pressure to the magnetic pressure), and (4) the evolution of asymmetric current
sheets in the reconnection region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational aspects
of the project includes support for several undergraduate students at UCSD to
participate in the research. Two graduate students at the University of Iowa
will also be involved.