* 0802295
* Advances in Experimental Particle Physics through Statistical Methodology and Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2007,05/31/2008
* Karen Kafadar, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 05/31/2008
* USD 99,998.00

Classical statistical methods were developed during much of the 20th century to
analyze small-to-moderate&lt;br/&gt;sized data sets. The ubiquity of computing
devices with vastly increased capabilities has led to the collection and storage
of massive data sets. In many fields, such as telecommunications and particle
physics, the data sets are essentially infinite: new data arise continuously as
connections are established, financial transactions are conducted, and particles
interact over time. Moreover, the data are likely to involve
many&lt;br/&gt;highly correlated variables; e.g., data on a transaction may
include demographic variables on both the purchaser and the supplier, in
addition to the amount of the transaction, and data on particles in a physics
experiment involve characteristics such as velocity, momentum, and mass, all of
which can affect the characteristics on other
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such massive data sets require the development
of new statistical methods. One important area where such&lt;br/&gt;methods are
needed is high-energy particle physics. The goal for the proposed research is to
develop &lt;br/&gt;statistical methods and algorithms for viewing, and
identifying patterns in, massive amounts of data,&lt;br/&gt;with the specific
goal of applying these methods to data from particle physics experiments, and
hence&lt;br/&gt;lead to: (1) advances in the theory of particle physics through
novel uses of experimental databases, (2) new &lt;br/&gt;statistical methods for
analyzing massive data sets, and (3) enhanced educational experiences for
students who plan to pursue interdisciplinary research in the physical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will enhance her undergraduate education
in particle physics and work experience in the Statistical Engineering Division
at the National Bureau of Standards (now NIST) and in the microwave test
products and research division at Hewlett Packard Company (now Agilent), under
the supervision of Professor Robert G. Jacobsen, a lead researcher at Stanford
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC) BaBar collaboration&lt;br/&gt;and in
Berkeley (Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory and Department of Physics). Upon
returning to Denver, she will introduce students in both statistics and physics
to problems in high-energy physics and statistical methodology for the analysis
of massive data sets, and apply this experience to the problem of assessment of
uncertainty in the calibration models for the primary and secondary frequency
standards (cesium fountain; five hydrogen masers, four commercial cesium
standards) at NIST-Boulder's Time and Frequency
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Specific outcomes
of the proposed research include advances in both physics and statistics. In
physics,&lt;br/&gt;this research should lead to greater precision and
quantification of uncertainties associated with specific particle decay
reactions associated with the B meson (SLAC). This knowledge will be useful in
the&lt;br/&gt;PI's collaborations with physicists at NIST-Boulder on the
uncertainty in the cesium fountain frequency standard. In statistics, this
research should lead to new methods for analyzing massive data from such
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The PI expects
that this collaboration will benefit not only physicists' understanding of decay
reactions involving the B meson but also will lead the way for physicists' use
of data from particle physics experiments, advance the state of knowledge about
the Standard Model, lead to new methods of analyzing massive data sets/streams,
and enhance the educational experience for students in computational statistics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences
(DMS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;