* 0802329
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  A Cross-National Study of Entrepreneurship, Institutions and Cognitive Bias
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2010
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2010
* USD 7,488.00

SES-0802329 Shelley Correll Sarah Thebaud Kim Weeden Cornell University

This research examines the extent to which social policies at the national
level and cultural biases in social interactions generate and sustain the
persistent pattern of gender inequality in entrepreneurship that has been
observed across industrialized countries. For example, welfare state and labor
market institutions may provide different opportunities and incentives for
business ownership to men and women; culturally informed assumptions about
gender may generate biased evaluations of female entrepreneurs? competence and
commitment, and the perceived viability and innovativeness of their business
ideas. Thus, the theoretical claim this research advances and evaluates is that
institutional arrangements structure the overall context in which men and women
perceive business ownership as a viable labor market option, whereas cognitive
biases structure the social interactions through which they seek advice,
legitimacy and financial support for a business endeavor. The research tests the
effect of policies on gender inequality in business ownership across 25
industrialized countries by matching data on national institutions from the
World Bank and the United Nations with Global Entrepreneurship Monitor survey
data on entrepreneurs. The influence of cognitive bias on the evaluation of
businesses will be examined with experimental vignette studies conducted at
research universities in the United States and the United Kingdom. Conducting
the experiments in two cultural contexts sheds light on the extent to which such
biases may vary or be stable across these different cultural contexts.

This research offers new insight into the social interactional mechanisms that
support aggregate patterns of gender inequality in entrepreneurship, thereby
integrating the sociological concept of a multilevel gender structure with the
study of entrepreneurship. If confirmed, the predictions will pioneer a new
theoretical perspective on gender inequality in entrepreneurship that extends
beyond personality-based arguments and builds upon human capital and network
explanations. Next, this project will be the first to apply sociological theory
about cognitive bias to the topic of entrepreneurship and to evaluate it in
multiple cultural contexts. Lastly, the research speaks to the debate over the
concept of entrepreneurship by ?gendering? the way in which innovation is
analyzed.

Broader Impacts. First, this project has the potential to inform policies aimed
at increasing the number of women among business owners and leaders in business
innovation. For example, if the research suggests that cognitive bias influences
entrepreneurship, strategies such as increasing awareness of bias on the part of
financial investors and increasing publicly available information about
financing sources may help accomplish this goal. Second, by conducting the
research in a foreign scientific community, the project will contribute to an
international dialogue about research on unconscious bias. Results will be
disseminated at conferences in the US and Europe and in sociology publications.
Third, hundreds of undergraduates from diverse backgrounds at universities in
two countries will participate. Through the participation and debriefing
process, students increase their awareness about the social issues being
studied. Such exposure may also increase the likelihood that these students will
consider scientific careers.