* 0802365
* Enhancing Soft and Entrepreneurial Skills Training for Two-Year College Technicians Using a Contextualized Business Simulation Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Stuart Schulman, CUNY Kingsborough Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 07/31/2012
* USD 749,217.00

The Virtual Enterprise system is an international technology-driven business
simulation program in which students in face-to-face settings and coordinated
online activities start and run a virtual business. Based on previous work in
building a virtual technology firm that fills a societal or business need
through innovative services or products it created, this project develops,
implements, and evaluates two courses for an information technology curriculum
-a capstone course and an awareness course. With the Virtual Enterprise system,
technicians learn the technical content with activities that also require the
use of entrepreneurial and "essential" skills sought after by industry. Past
experience has shown that minority students can become engaged in the use of
technology and learn concepts and skills in an awareness course. The capstone
course also emphasizes the essential workplace competencies prized by industry.
A capstone virtual enterprise course in biotechnology is developed in
collaboration with faculty in the biotechnology department. Faculty in
information technology and biotechnology at other two year colleges are provided
direct training in the Virtual Enterprise system and personnel from three ATE
centers in other disciplines are provided professional development in the use of
the Virtual Enterprise system so that they can train other faculty from two year
colleges to use it. Course syllabi, professional development materials are
developed evaluated and disseminated.