* 0802505
* Building an Engineering Technology Workforce: A Plan for Reaching Young People, Adults and Women
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2008,03/31/2012
* Dorene Perez, Illinois Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Zhanjing Yu
* 03/31/2012
* USD 520,952.00

The project is a comprehensive recruiting effort designed to increase the number
of students in engineering and engineering technology, particularly in the
Illinois Valley Community College district. At the local level, the objectives
of the project are to increase awareness of and interest in engineering and
engineering technician careers, to assist in preparing students to enter
engineering and engineering technology programs by integrating science,
technology and math into activities, and to increase enrollment in engineering
technology programs at Illinois Valley Community College. Major project
activities include: (1) offering project-based short-term events to interest a
broad base of high school and middle school students, (2) offering project-based
camps for middle school students, especially young women, (3) organizing high
school engineering technology clubs, (4) offering a Taste of Engineering Careers
course to high school juniors and seniors with college credit, (5) creating a
leadership team for high school students, (6) providing exciting special
projects for high school students, such as building a musical instrument, a
project from the e-CREATE program at Purdue University, (7) developing and
disseminating promotional materials targeting young people, parents, adults, and
women, and (8) publicizing successes of participants in area media . The
investigators are collaborating with two other ATE programs, MatEd Center at
Edmonds Community College and the RCNGM Center at Connecticut Community College,
to share approaches and to broaden their audience. The evaluation effort,
involving both internal and external evaluators, is using surveys of students,
teachers, counselors, parents, and industry representative along with data on
participation, enrollment, and career choices to monitor awareness, interest,
and enrollment, particularly among women. Dissemination is being accomplished
through postings on the project's website and through presentation and workshops
at state and national conferences, particularly the ASEE and NAWI conferences.
Broader impacts include the dissemination of their materials and results, the
middle and high school outreach efforts, and the focus on women, an
underrepresented population in engineering and engineering technology.