* 0802214
* Synthesis and characterization of half-metallic ferromagnetic oxides for organic semiconductor spintronic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Jing Shi, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 06/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;ECCS-0802214&lt;br/&gt;J. Shi, U of Cal
Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to synthesize,
characterize, and engineer high spin polarization ferromagnetic/organic
interfaces for high-efficiency spin injection, and to fabricate lateral spin
valve devices using organic semiconductors as spacer. The approach is to
synthesize and fabricate devices with manganite-based half-metallic
ferromagnetic electrodes which possess nearly 100% spin polarization. To
characterize the half-metallic property of the spin injecting electrodes, two
unique methods will be employed: second harmonic generation and tunneling
magnetoresistance, both probing the electronic and magnetic properties of the
ferromagnetic/organic interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Ideal
half-metallic ferromagnets should have 100% spin polarization, which can serve
as the most efficient spin injector in spintronic devices. In real devices, the
interface can significantly differ from the bulk. In particular, the interfacial
magnetism has not yet been adequately addressed. In addition, spin diffusion and
decoherence in organic materials have not been systematically studied for
lacking effective experimental tools. These topics are the focus of this
proposed research. Advances in synthesis and characterization of the half-
metallic ferromagnetic materials and in fundamental understanding of the spin-
dependent process in organic materials will not only undoubtedly enrich our
knowledge of materials, but also benefit other disciplines of condensed matter
physics and materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The proposed
research is related to high-efficiency spin injection in spintronic devices such
as recording heads, non-volatile memories, and light-emitting devices. If the
spin injection efficiency is dramatically increased by using half-metallic
ferromagnetic injectors, the resulting devices will perform superior to the
existing devices. High-efficiency devices can lead to a significant saving in
energy and a lower production cost, which will positively impact the high-
technology industry and the society as a whole. The proposed education plan will
involve more women and under-represented minorities in research, continue the
outreach activities to local middle and high schools and the surrounding
communities, and enhance information exchange between the research community and
the general public. These proposed activities will also raise public?s interest
level in science and encourage the college-bound students to choose science as
their careers. &lt;br/&gt;