* 0802178
* Simulation, Design and Fabrication of Interconnect Programmable Microwave Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Dan Jiao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 05/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Objective

The objective of this research is to address challenges in predictably
implementing high performance RF and microwave integrated circuits through a
low-cost integration process. The approach is based on self-assembly of
prefabricated active chips containing identical microwave transistors and a
substrate that contains passive components and interconnect metallization. The
design benefits from rigorous EM simulations combined with non-linear circuit
simulation of a complex system containing many RF transistors, 3D interconnect
lines and passive components.

Intellectual Merit The research will investigate self-assembled wafer-level
integration, high capacity computational electromagnetic methods for complicated
on-chip electromagnetic analysis, and efficient co-simulation of linear
electromagnetic structures and non-linear devices. An integration process with
better than 200nm accuracy with transistor contact pad area of 5?Êm?~5?Êm will
be developed. Electromagnetic modeling and simulation aspects are addressed
through an accelerated time-domain layered finite element reduction recovery
algorithm. Various high performance blocks of microwave transceivers with
operating frequencies ranging from 3 to 40 GHz will be designed, fabricated and
tested.

Broader Impact The broader impact of this project is to enhance our capability
in designing and manufacturing state of the art RF and microwave products using
a simple and low-cost manufacturing process. Additionally two graduate level
courses taught by the PIs will be enhanced by defining common projects that
require students to work together to define a research problem and follow it
through until the RF system is fabricated and tested.

