* 0802373
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Insight into the Evolutionary History of Bacilus Subtilis Through Whole Genome Sequencing
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2007,09/30/2008
* Jacques Ravel, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2008
* USD 413,156.00

This is a comparative genome sequencing project of bacteria in the Bacillus
subtilis group. B. subtilis can be divided into two major subgroups:168 and W23.
The only genome sequence available to date is a representative of the 168 group
that has been extensively adapted to laboratory conditions. This adaptive
process, which includes serial passaging and X-ray irradiation, has resulted in
the loss of a number of ecologically-relevant social behaviors exhibited by
newly isolated environmental members of this species. To fully appreciate the
diversity within this important model organism a whole genome shotgun sequencing
approach will be used to sequence the genome of an additional four B. subtilis
isolates: B. subtilis TU-B-10 (type strain of the W23 group), Bacillus
mojavensis RO-H-1 (close relative associated with wheat blight, hydrocarbon
recovery and novel antifungal properties), B. subtilis NCIB3610 (the ancestor to
B. subtilis 168) and B. subtilis RO-NN-1 (a recent environmental isolate within
the 168 group that has a larger genome than other B. subtilis
strains).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Bacillus subtilis is the second most studied
microbe after Escherichia coli. It is the subject of more that 20,000 scientific
publications and a model organism for many biological processes. Currently there
are more than 20 genome sequences available or in progress for E. coli and only
one genome sequence for B. subtilis. The comparative analysis of these genome
sequences will generate a better insight into the evolution of this important
model organism. More significantly, the large and international scientific
community (academic,industrial and biodefense) will be better served by having
access to these sequences. The project will also involve significant training at
the postdoctoral and undergraduate levels, and the development of a website of
B. subtilis comparative genomics.&lt;br/&gt;