* 0802556
* Travel Assistance Awards for Symposium Undergraduate Research in Polymer Science at 2008 Spring National ACS Meeting in New Orleans, LA, April 6-10, 2008
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2007,11/30/2008
* SARAH MORGAN, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 11/30/2008
* USD 4,900.00

Intellectual merit.&lt;br/&gt;By providing the opportunity for participating
undergraduate students to display the&lt;br/&gt;results of their creative
academic activities at the national level, the Symposium, which
is&lt;br/&gt;specifically dedicated to recognize and celebrate the students'
exceptional work, is one of the&lt;br/&gt;most effective means to motivate these
students and intellectually stimulate their further interest&lt;br/&gt;in
graduate education. The symposium will give participating students a chance to
discuss their&lt;br/&gt;research projects and exchange ideas with other
students, graduate researchers, faculty and&lt;br/&gt;professional scientists.
In addition students will practice presentation skills and gain
invaluable&lt;br/&gt;experience presenting research at a premiere, national
level, professional scientific conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact.&lt;br/&gt;The symposium will serve to provide recognition to outstanding
undergraduate students&lt;br/&gt;in polymer science and engineering, to foster
networking and exposure, to introduce&lt;br/&gt;opportunities in graduate
research and education and to help develop the careers of future
leaders&lt;br/&gt;in both academia and industry. The symposium will also offer
an occasion for students and&lt;br/&gt;supervising faculty to witness how
student projects enhance faculty research and also serve the&lt;br/&gt;greater
community. Additionally, it will provide motivation for future generations
of&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students. Those who are not engaged in these pursuits
as yet can learn how their&lt;br/&gt;fellow students developed their research
interests.&lt;br/&gt;"When does a scientist become a scientist? It is not when a
person knows many facts and&lt;br/&gt;even understands in depth some aspect of
the natural world. I would suggest the transition&lt;br/&gt;occurs when
curiosity about a phenomenon leads to an inquiry for new knowledge. This
can&lt;br/&gt;occur in a person with little or lots of knowledge about a
subject. It is an attitude of inquiry".