* 0802727
* GEM: Can Global Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) Codes Model Magnetic Reconnection in the High Lundquist Number Limit?
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Amitava Bhattacharjee, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 05/31/2011
* USD 300,000.00

One of the long term goals of NSF's Geospace Environment Modeling (GEM) program
is the construction of a Geospace General Circulation Model (GGCM), a
comprehensive and predictively powerful numerical model of geospace. One popular
approach to GGCM design consists of using a global magnetohydrodynamics (MHD)
code as the computational "spine" of the model, including additional physics
where needed (e.g., by coupling the global MHD code to a kinetic model of the
ring current). Despite its successes, however, the MHD spine approach suffers
from a number of well known deficiencies, the most serious of which is the
inability of MHD to model the kinetic processes which are thought to play an
essential role in magnetic reconnection. In order to achieve fast reconnection
in global MHD codes, modelers usually resort to ad hoc localized, numerical or
current dependent resistivities, and it is not clear how the reconnection
dynamics depends on the resistivity or whether the results even converge as the
numerical resistivity decreases with increasing grid resolution. Despite the
fundamental role reconnection plays in driving magnetospheric dynamics, the
reconnection time scale problem hasn't received much attention by global MHD
modelers. The issue is often dismissed with appeals to the "Axford Conjecture"
which states that the reconnection rate is determined by external boundary
conditions, with the diffusion region adjusting to accommodate these conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is now compelling evidence that the Axford
Conjecture does not apply at the dayside magnetopause and it has never been
systematically tested in global MHD simulations of magnetotail reconnection.
This research program will attack the problem of how the generation and dynamics
of global MHD storms and substorms depend on the resistivity. It will address
the following issues: 1) How does the physics of magnetopause reconnection in
global MHD simulations depend on the resistivity model during strong, sustained
southward IMF solar wind driving (i.e., conditions which typically produce
strong storms)? 2) Can global MHD simulations produce storms and substorms in
the high Lundquist number limit? 3) How does the storm-substorm relationship
depend on the resistivity model? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will combine
a straightforward parameter study with event study model/data comparisons: we
will run the OpenGGCM global MHD code with coronal mass ejection solar wind
boundary conditions, varying both the solar wind parameters as well as the
resistivity model. The primary new result will be a definitive test of the
Axford Conjecture in the context of magnetic storm and substorm
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of the storm/substorm relationship
will require the development of a Vlasov test-particle code (which will solve
the Vlasov equation in prescribed electric and magnetic fields output from
OpenGGCM). This code will be developed primarily by a graduate student at the
University of New Hampshire (UNH).