* 0802646
* Borexino Solar Neutrino Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Frank Calaprice, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 02/29/2012
* USD 3,298,179.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER: 0802646&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Princeton
University&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: PHY - PARTICLE
ASTROPHYSICS&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Calaprice, Frank
P.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Borexino Solar Neutrino Experiment&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Borexino is a large underground liquid
scintillation detector designed to observe low-energy neutrinos, subatomic
particles produced by the sun, to elucidate how the sun produces energy and to
better understand the fundamental properties of neutrinos. The detector, in
operation since May 2007, contains 300 tons of ultra-pure liquid scintillator
and is located in the underground Gran Sasso laboratory in Italy. The proton-
proton (pp) cycle, by far the dominant set of nuclear fusion reactions in the
sun?s dense, hot core, converts four hydrogen atoms into a helium atom and
produces 26.7 MeV of energy per cycle. The energy is released to charged
particles, gamma rays, and neutrinos. The charged particles and gamma rays
transfer energy by collision processes to other atoms. Energy slowly diffuses to
the solar surface, where it is radiated into space mainly as visible light.
Neutrinos, on the other hand, interact only weakly with matter. They travel
almost unperturbed out of the sun, providing a direct view into its core. Ninety
percent (the so-called pp neutrinos) are generated in the first step of the pp
cycle; most of the rest are produced in a later step of the cycle involving the
isotope 7Be. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neutrinos have a small mass that allows the
electron-type neutrinos to oscillate, between sun and Earth, into states that
are more difficult to detect. Neutrino oscillations explain all the data,
provided one also considers their weak interactions with the matter in the sun ?
the matter-enhanced oscillations described by Mikheyev, Smirnov, and Wolfenstein
(MSW). The Borexino detector has already acquired a first set of data that so
far agrees with MSW predictions for 7Be neutrinos. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will provide funding for Princeton University to continue to participate
in the Borexino project. The scintillator system and the purification plants,
both Princeton responsibilities, require ongoing maintenance and they intend to
re-purify the scintillator to achieve still lower backgrounds in the detector,
further enhancing clarity of the neutrino signals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Borexino project will continue to provide an excellent opportunity for training
graduate and undergraduate students in applications of electronics, chemistry,
radiology, materials science, software development, and of course fundamental
physics. For the past four years the Borexino project at Princeton has been
active in an outreach program that brings high school students from a relatively
poor region of Italy to Princeton for a summer program in physics. Technology
developed in the process of detector construction and installation includes new
low-background techniques and development of a system for the reduction of radon
in air. Both have potential commercial or governmental use, e.g., in security
applications. &lt;br/&gt;