* 0802655
* Defect Structures and Properties of Liquid Crystalline Polymer Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* David Martin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2011
* USD 345,000.00

ABSTRACT: Defect Structures and Properties of Liquid Crystalline Polymer
Semiconductors, DMR-0802655, Prof. David C. Martin, The University of Michigan,
Department of Materials Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Polymer and organic molecular semiconductors are
of considerable interest for creating inexpensive electronic devices. Previous
studies of polycrystalline organic molecular films have shown evidence that
grain boundary defects play an important role in limiting the performance of
these materials. However the detailed relationship between the microstructure
and macroscopic properties of these materials remains obscure and controversial.
Liquid crystalline polymer and organic molecular semiconductors are of
particular current interest, because it is expected that the more modest
distortions near grain boundaries and other defects in the solid-state may not
lead to the large reductions in properties seen in polycrystalline films. The
microstructure of liquid crystalline polymer and organic molecular
semiconductors will be investigated using an array of instruments and techniques
including optical microscopy, wide angle X-ray diffraction, small angle X-ray
diffraction, scanned probe microscopy, scanning electron microscopy,
transmission electron microscopy, low voltage electron microscopy, and high
resolution electron microscopy. These microstructural details will be correlated
with information about sample performance on thin-film transistor devices, and
with impedance spectroscopy of the carrier transport. The fundamental scientific
challenge is to determine if and how the increased order provided by liquid
crystalline order makes it possible to create films that have better performance
than either the amorphous or polycrystalline structures seen in other organic
molecular solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; There is considerable interest and future
potential in developing new materials for all-organic "plastic" electronics.
Examples of such devices include soft, flexible computers and displays printed
on flexible substrates, and biomedical components that can be directly implanted
into the body. However there are many important questions about these materials
that are not yet known, such as the detailed relationship between their local
structure and the properties that they exhibit when used in devices. This
research project will make it possible to develop improved materials that can be
easily and inexpensively processed and manufactured into components. This
project will provide for financial support for graduate students from Materials
Science, Macromolecular Science, and Biomedical Engineering. Research
opportunities for undergraduate students will be provided through the University
Research Opportunity Program, the Sarah Marian Parker Women in Engineering and
the Minority Engineering Programs. We also have summer students from high
schools in the Ann Arbor area. Established collaborations and interactions will
be continued with colleagues at the University of Michigan, the University of
Kentucky, Georgia Tech, the Fraunhofer Institute in Bremen, Germany, the
National Institute of Science and Technology, Chulalongkorn University in
Bangkok, Thailand, the University of Wollongong, Australia, and Suwan University
in Seoul, South Korea. Industrial interactions will be extended with companies
including Ford Motor Company (Dearborn, MI), Cochlear (Australia), BioControl
(Israel), Plexon (Dallas, TX), Biotectix (Quincy, MA) and NeuroNexus (Ann Arbor,
MI).&lt;br/&gt;