* 0802720
* Time Changes of Markov Processes: Applications in Financial Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Vadim Linetsky, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 209,996.00

This project is concerned with stochastic modeling of financial variables, such
as equity prices, foreign exchange rates, interest rates, and commodity and
energy prices, and the pricing of financial derivatives, financial instruments
that serve as tools to mitigate financial market and credit risk. The goal is to
develop empirically realistic and analytically tractable models describing
stochastic dynamics of financial variables and analytical and computational
methods to implement these models. The project focuses in the following areas.
(i) Develop a rich toolbox of financial models with state-dependent jumps,
stochastic volatility, and default. This will be based on the methodology of
time changes of Markov processes. The proposed model architecture is to pair
Markov processes with analytically tractable semigroups with time changes with
analytically tractable Laplace transforms to design analytically tractable
processes with desired properties. (ii) Develop efficient pricing tools for
derivative securities in these models based on Laplace transform inversion and,
for symmetric Markov processes, on the spectral expansion method. (iii) Develop
the next generation of unified credit-equity models with jumps, stochastic
volatility, and default that provide a unified treatment for all financial
obligations related to a given firm, including stock, debt, stock options, and
credit derivatives in the framework of time changes of Markov processes with
killing. Study options pricing and corporate debt valuation in this unified
framework. (iv) Develop a novel class of models with mean-reverting jumps for
interest rates, commodities, and energy markets by subjecting mean-reverting
diffusions to time changes with jumps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this
project is to develop sophisticated mathematical tools for financial practice.
This research is expected to have significant practical impact. According to the
Bank for International Settlements (2006), the size of the global derivatives
markets is $343 trillion in notional amounts. Major market segments include
interest rate, currency, equity, commodity, energy, and credit derivatives used
to manage financial risks. The proposed research is expected to find
applications in all of these financial market sectors. Empirically realistic
and, at the same time, analytically and computationally tractable models
developed in this project will facilitate consistent, fast, and accurate
modeling and pricing of financial instruments used to manage market and credit
risk. This will help improve efficiency and stability of financial markets. The
project is also expected to have a broader mathematical impact on stochastic
analysis and applied probability. Analytically tractable time changes of Markov
processes developed in this project will provide a useful laboratory for
theoretical developments in stochastic analysis, as well as find applications in
a variety of areas that employ Markov processes for the modeling of physical,
biological, engineering, and economic phenomena. The project will have an impact
on education and human resources development. It is part of the long-term
development effort at Northwestern University in financial engineering,
including the recently established Ph.D. concentration. It will train highly
qualified researchers for academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;