* 0802913
* The Center for Chemistry at the Space-Time Limit (CaSTL)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Vartkess Apkarian, University of California-Irvine
* Cooperative Agreement
* Katharine Covert
* 07/31/2014
* USD 20,489,514.00

The UC Irvine Center for Chemical Innovation - Chemistry at the Space-Time Limit
(CaSTL) aims to observe and record chemistry in the act, one event at a time,
one molecule at a time. By watching single molecules undergo chemical
transformation and creating movies of a molecule's atomic and electronic
rearrangements, the Center will uncover the inner workings of important chemical
reactions. The vibronic dynamics of a molecule upon reduction, the rearrangement
of electron density in a molecule as it adsorbs onto a catalytic site, the
transfer of electrons through a molecular wire, and the breaking or making of a
bond are among the immediate targets of investigation. The Center achieves its
goals by pushing the experimental limits of space and time resolution, using a
combination of scanning tunneling microscopy and ultrafast nonlinear
spectroscopy to attain simultaneous Ångstrom-femtosecond resolution. On the
scale of relevance to macro-molecular chemistry (e.g., nanometer-microsecond),
scanning probe microscopies combined with time-resolved nonlinear spectroscopy
are used to obtain chemically speciated, time-lapse microscopy. The requisite
theory, in particular of plasmon-enhanced spectroscopy and time-dependent
density functional methods, are developed in parallel to accurately model these
processes, to interpret and to design experiments. The enabling science and
tools have a common intellectual base and a toolset that can be tuned in
sharpness to provide the precision needed to study a wide range of chemical
processes with precise joint space-time resolution, from Ångstrom-femtosecond to
micrometer-microsecond. The accessibility of time-lapse images of elementary
chemical processes will fundamentally change our modes of inquiry, and
manipulation of, molecular science and engineering, and could underlie
fundamental breakthroughs in a range of fields relying on sub-molecular
understanding and manipulation of our world. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;CaSTL is
committed to education at all levels, directly through graduate research and
postdoctoral training in these challenging fields of science, and research
opportunities to many California high school and community college students,
particularly those from under-represented groups. The development of new
scientific instruments and computational chemistry packages will be widely
disseminated in partnership with the private sector. The Center will also offer
an outreach program to students of all ages through a partnership with the
Discovery Science Museum in Santa Ana. The very visual nature of the Center's
transformative science makes it particularly accessible to the public at large.
CaSTL video clips of fundamental chemical processes will be used in classrooms,
podcasts and other web-based formats, and broad public science outreach will be
enabled through television broadcasts.